
Itasca, IL Code of Ordinances


VILLAGE OF ITASCA, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2017 S-14 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 1846-17, passed 6-20-17
State legislation current through 2016 ALS #6



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         11.   VILLAGE STANDARDS




CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Section headings



   10.04   Rules of construction



   10.05   Official time



   10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Conflicting provisions



   10.09   Amendments to code



   10.10   Severability



   10.11   Reference to public office or officer



   10.12   Errors and omissions



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Ordinances saved



   10.16   Technical codes



   10.17   Historical and statutory references



   10.18   Copies of code; distribution and presentation



 



   10.98   Prosecution of violations



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification by and for the Village of Itasca, Illinois, shall be
designated as the code of Itasca and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANOTHER.   When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.



   BOARD OF TRUSTEES or VILLAGE BOARD.  The Board of Trustees of the
village.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.   The President and Board of Trustees.



(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2)



   COUNTY.  DuPage County, Illinois.



   COUNTY BOARD.  The County Board of DuPage County, Illinois.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07)



   COURT.  Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.



   DECREE.  Synonymous with JUDGMENT.  



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24)



   ELECTORS.  Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at
municipal elections.



(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2)



   EXECUTIVE OFFICER.  Words used for an executive or ministerial officer
may include any deputy or other person performing the duties of such officer,
either generally or in special cases.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08)



   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the
day on which the ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER
means at any time after that date.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17)



   HIGHWAY, ROAD, or STREET.  May include any road laid out by authority
of the United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this
state, and all bridges thereupon.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16)



   ILCS.   Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter
amended.



   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR.  Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves, or as a servant, agent, or employee.



   LAND or REAL ESTATE.  Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal
nature.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MAYOR.   The President of the village.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)



   MUNICIPAL or MUNICIPALITY.    The Village of Itasca.



   MUNICIPAL CODE.   The Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5.



   MUNICIPALITIES.   The meaning established in Section 1 of Article VII
of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.27)



   OATH.  Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12)



   OWNER.  When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner, purchaser and seller under a contract for deed, or tenant in common of
the whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land
trust which owns property.



   PERSON.  Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships,
corporations, joint ventures, and bodies politic and corporate as well as
individuals.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05)



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes all property except real.



   POLICE OFFICERS.  Police officers employed and in the service of the
village.  POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include such persons in the
employ of a village as members of the Department of Police, who are or shall
hereafter be appointed and sworn as police officers.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20)



   PREMISES.  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Includes school districts; units of local
government; the village, county, state, or federal governments, officers and
agencies thereof, or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   REGISTERED MAIL.  Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188)



   SPECIAL DISTRICTS.  The meaning established in Article VII of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29)



   STATE.  The State of Illinois.



   STREET.   Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares, and other public thoroughfares.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any
part of the premises, alone or with others.



   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  The village code hereby
adopted, and as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the
adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.



   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT.  The meaning established in Section 1 of
Article VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28)



   VILLAGE.   The Village of Itasca.



   WEEK.  Seven consecutive days.



   WHOEVER.  Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.



   WRITTEN or IN WRITING.  Includes printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person
is required by law to any official or public writing or bond, required by
law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of that person, or in case he is
unable to write, his proper mark, except as otherwise provided by law.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15)



   YEAR.  A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR
alone is equivalent to the expression "Year of Our Lord."



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)



§ 10.03  SECTION HEADINGS.



   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference
purposes only, and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.04  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed
according to the rules of grammar and common usage.  Words and phrases that
have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or
judicial definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.



   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires,
the following rules will be followed.



      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural
shall include the singular.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03)



      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04)



      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02)



      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the
context admits.



   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless
the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any
statute now or hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be
excluded.  If the day succeeding Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday is also a
holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be
excluded.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11)



   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.



   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more
municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to
a majority of the officers or persons.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09)



   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision
of this code which shall contain any express provision excluding that
construction, or when the subject matter or context of this code may be
repugnant thereto.



   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall
be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the
President and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01)



   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, so far as they are the same
as those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the
prior provisions, and not as a new enactment.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2)



§ 10.05  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time for the village shall be as set by federal law.



§ 10.06  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.



   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the
ordinance originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause
therein.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 3)



   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not
do any of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section.



      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior
action taken thereunder.



      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege,
obligation, or liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred
thereunder.



      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal.



      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in
respect of any privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment.  The investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted,
continued, or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed,
as if the ordinance had not been repealed or amended.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 85, § 2)



   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is
reduced by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according
to the ordinance as amended.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 4)



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.



   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the
context clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or
revised was not intended.



§ 10.08  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail.  If the conflicting
provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as
to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the
subject matter taken as a whole.



§ 10.09  AMENDMENTS TO CODE.



   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of
repealed chapters, sections, and subsections, or any part thereof, by
subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by
the omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent
ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall
be prima facie evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of
ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a
new code of ordinances by the Board of Trustees.



§ 10.10  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section
or related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision
or application, and to this end the provisions are severable.



§ 10.11  REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the village exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.  Such
references shall also include the designee or agent of any such officer or
office, unless the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.



§ 10.12  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be
corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code of ordinances.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature including, but not
limited to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating
to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances
granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and
ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of
warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating
streets, alleys, or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond
ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the
transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the village; and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.15  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
Board of Trustees or a certain village officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are
saved.



§ 10.16  TECHNICAL CODES.



   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to such technical codes shall
automatically become a part of this code and shall be made available for
public inspection by the village.  Further, to the extent of any conflict
between the technical provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted
by reference, the most restrictive provision shall prevail.



§ 10.17  HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, 1952 Code of the Village
of Itasca, the specific number and passage date of the original ordinance,
and the most recent three amending ordinances, if any, are listed following
the text of the code section.  Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord.
15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   An "ILCS" cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the
statute.  Example:  (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3-2-2)  (Ord. 10, passed
1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85).  An "ILCS" cite set forth as a
"statutory reference" following the text of the section indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



      § 38.04  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



         The village shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom
of Information Act.



      Statutory reference:



         Freedom of Information Act, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
3.1-10-1



§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE; DISTRIBUTION AND PRESENTATION.



   (A)   All of the printed copies of this code belonging to the
village shall be deposited with the Village Clerk.  The Clerk shall deliver
one copy thereof to the President and each member of the Board of Trustees,
and copies to such other persons as the President and Board of Trustees may
direct.



('52 Code, Ch. 22, § 777)



   (B)   The President and Board of Trustees shall have the power to
extend or reciprocate courtesies of other municipalities by presenting them
with a copy of this code, bound at the expense of the village, as to them
seem suitable, and they shall also have the power to present two copies of
this code to the Illinois Municipal League.



('52 Code, Ch. 22, § 778)



§ 10.98  PROSECUTION OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Actions, suits and prosecutions for the violation of any
village ordinance may be commenced and prosecuted in the appropriate circuit
court of the county and state.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 100)



   (B)   In all actions for the violation of any ordinance, the first
process shall be a summons; provided, however, a warrant for the arrest of
the offender may issue in the first instance upon the affidavit of any person
making the complaint that has reasonable grounds to believe the party charged
is guilty thereof; and any person arrested upon such warrant shall, without
unnecessary delay, be taken before the proper circuit court to be tried for
the alleged offense.  Any person upon whom any fine or penalty shall be
imposed may, upon the order of the court before whom the conviction is had,
be committed to the county jail, village lock-up, or other place provided by
the village for the incarceration of offenders, until such fine, penalty and
costs shall be fully paid; provided, that no such imprisonment shall exceed
six months for one offense.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 101)



   (C)   The manner of conducting trials for violations of village
ordinances shall be the same as that provided in the statutes of the state.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 106)



   (D)   All officers making arrests shall attend as witnesses before
the court when the trial may be had, and shall procure all necessary evidence
in their power, and furnish at the request of the court a list of witnesses
in said cause.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 107)



   (E)   No costs of any kind shall be taxed against or collected of
said Village of Itasca in any case (brought for the violation of any
ordinance), in which said village is plaintiff; but the court in its
discretion may tax and give judgment for all costs against the prosecuting
witness.



('52 Code,



Ch. 8, § 108)



   (F)   In all cases when any person convicted of violating any
ordinance of the village, or where any person who has been accepted as
special bail as aforesaid, shall fail, neglect or refuse forthwith to pay any
fine or penalty and costs which may be adjudged against him, it shall be
lawful for the court before which such conviction is had, after legal demand,
to order that such person so convicted as aforesaid shall be committed to the
village lock-up or other place provided by such village, or to the jail of
DuPage County, until discharged according to law.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 109)  (Ord. 108, passed 8-6-57)



   (G)   All fines and penalties for violation of any village
ordinance, and all money collected for licenses, permits or otherwise, shall
be paid in cash to the Village Treasurer within five days after collected.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 110)



   (H)   No suit, proceeding, right, fine or penalty instituted,
created, given or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal, shall
in anywise be affected, released or discharged by any such repeal, but may be
prosecuted the same as if such ordinance had continued in force.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 112)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of the
village for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be
fined not more than $500 for each and every violation thereof, and every day
the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 218-64, passed 7-21-64)



Statutory reference:



   Limitations on penalties, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1



   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see ILCS Ch.
65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1



CHAPTER 11:  VILLAGE STANDARDS



Section



   11.01   Corporate seal



   11.02   Datum and bench mark



§ 11.01  CORPORATE SEAL.



   The corporate seal of the village shall be as follows:  A circular
disc, so designed as to impress the words "Village of Itasca, DuPage County,
Ill." on the periphery thereof and "Village Seal" in the center.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 113)



§ 11.02  DATUM AND BENCH MARK.



   The Northeast corner of the lower stone water table at the Northeast
corner of the two story brick building known as Itasca Village Hall on the
west side of Walnut Street in the village, which is 688.35 feet above sea
level datum, is hereby fixed and established as the datum base line or
village standard bench from which all grades or elevations for public uses,
public works or public improvements of the village shall refer or be deduced.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 115)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES





         31.   BOARD OF TRUSTEES





         32.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS





         33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT





         34.   TAXATION AND REVENUE





         35.   VILLAGE POLICIES





         36.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT




CHAPTER 30:  VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES



Section



General Provisions



   30.001   Application of regulations



   30.002   Appointments



   30.003   Term of office; vacancies



   30.004   Money received



   30.005   Oath



   30.006   Salaries



   30.007   Assignment of duties



   30.008   Records



   30.009   Bond



   30.010   Power to make arrests



   30.011   Termination of office



   30.012   Impersonation unlawful



   30.013   Interference with officers unlawful



   30.014   Elections



   30.015   Participation in Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance
System



   30.016   Participation in Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund



   30.017   Guidelines for official conduct



Village President



   30.025   Election; term of office



   30.026   Duties



   30.027   Delegation of duties



   30.028   Bond; oath; salary



   30.029   President Pro Tem



Village Clerk



   30.035   Election; term



   30.036   Bond



   30.037   Duty to seal documents



   30.038   Disposition of money collected



   30.039   Accounts



   30.040   Records



   30.041   Custodian of seal



   30.042   Custodian of documents



   30.043   Index to documents and records



   30.044   Additional duties



   30.045   Deputy Clerk



   30.046   Vacancy



Treasurer



   30.050   Appointment



   30.051   Bond



   30.052   Duties



   30.053   Deposit of funds



   30.054   Records to be kept



   30.055   Accounting



Finance Director



   30.060   Position created



   30.061   Appointment



   30.062   Duties



Attorney



   30.070   Office created; appointment



   30.071   Special counsel may be retained



   30.072   Suits and actions



   30.073   Duty to render advice



Director of Public Works



   30.080   Organization



   30.081   Position created; appointment



Director of Community Development



   30.090   Appointment



   30.091   Duties



   30.092   Ex officio Plumbing Inspector



   30.093   Ex officio Electrical Inspector



   30.094   Entry powers



   30.095   Stop order; violation



Village Administrator



   30.105   Creation of office



   30.106   Appointment and selection



   30.107   Tenure of position



   30.108   Removal



   30.109   Bond, oath and compensation



   30.110   Powers and duties



   30.111   Conflict of interest



   30.112   Performance evaluation



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.001  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply alike to all officers and
employees of the village, regardless of the time of the creation of the
office or position or the time of the appointment of the officer or employee.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 87)



§ 30.002  APPOINTMENTS.



   All officers other than elective officers shall be appointed by the
President and the Board of Trustees, as is provided by statute; provided that
all employees shall, in the absence of any provisions to the contrary, be
appointed or selected by the Village President.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 88)



§ 30.003  TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES.



   Every appointive officer of the village shall hold office until the
first day of May following his appointment or until his successor is
appointed and qualified, unless it is otherwise provided by ordinance.  In
case of a vacancy in any such place, it shall be filled in the same manner in
which appointments or selections are made, in the absence of provisions to
the contrary.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 89)



§ 30.004  MONEY RECEIVED.



   Every officer of the village shall at least once each month turn over
all money received by him in his official capacity to the Comptroller with a
statement showing the source from which the same was received.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 90)



§ 30.005  OATH.



   Every officer of the village shall, before entering upon his duties,
take the oath prescribed by statute.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 91)



§ 30.006  SALARIES.



   All officers and employees of the village shall receive such salary as
may be from time to time provided by ordinance or resolution.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 92)



§ 30.007  ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES.



   The Board of Trustees shall have the power to assign to any appointive
officer any duty which is not assigned by ordinance to some other specific
officer; and shall determine disputes or questions relating to the respective
powers or duties of officers.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 93)



§ 30.008  RECORDS.



   All records kept by any officer of the village shall be open to
inspection by the President, or any member of the Board of Trustees at all
reasonable times, whether or not such records are required to be kept by
statute or ordinance.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 94)



§ 30.009  BOND.



   Every officer and employee shall, if required by the Board of Trustees
and upon entering upon the duties of his office, give a bond in such amount
and with such sureties as may be determined by said Board, conditioned upon
the faithful performance of the duties of his office or position.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 95)



§ 30.010  POWER TO MAKE ARRESTS.



   The Village President, members of the Board of Trustees, members of the
Fire Department, as well as every member of the Police Department, are hereby
declared to be conservators of the peace with such powers to make arrests as
are given to conservators of the peace by statute.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 96)



§ 30.011  TERMINATION OF OFFICE.



   Every officer and employee of the village, upon the expiration of his
term for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his successor all books and
records which may be the property of the village, and if no successor has
been appointed within one week after the termination of office such property
shall be delivered to the Village Clerk or Village Treasurer.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 97)



§ 30.012  IMPERSONATION UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate without lawful
authority any village officer or employee.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 98)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 30.013  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder any officer or
employee of the village while engaged in the duties of his office or
employment.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 99)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 30.014  ELECTIONS.



   Elections for municipal offices shall be held as provided by statute,
and at the time prescribed by statute.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 117)



§ 30.015  PARTICIPATION IN FEDERAL OLD-AGE AND SURVIVORS INSURANCE SYSTEM.



   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the
village to extend to the eligible employees thereof the benefits of the
Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance System as authorized by the Federal
Social Security Act and amendments thereto.  In pursuance of said policy,
and for that purpose, the Village President shall take such action as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations.



   (B)   The Village President is hereby authorized and directed to
execute an agreement with the State Employees' Retirement System (Social
Security Unit) to secure coverage of eligible employees as provided in
division (A) hereof.



   (C)   Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees for the
purpose provided in division (A) hereof, are hereby authorized to be made in
the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or
federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency in
such amounts and at such times as are designated by state laws or regulations.



   (D)   Employer contributions and administrative expense shall be
paid to the state agency in accordance with applicable state laws and
regulations from amounts appropriated for such purposes.



   (E)   The Village Treasurer shall maintain such records and submit
such reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations.



(Ord. 105-56, passed 2-7-56)



§ 30.016  PARTICIPATION IN ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND.



   The village does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois Municipal
Retirement Fund.



(Ord. 486-78, passed 9-19-78)



§ 30.017  GUIDELINES FOR OFFICIAL CONDUCT.



   (A)   The following are guidelines for this village, its officers
and employees in the conduct of official business:



      (1)   The village demands the highest standards of conduct by
and among its elected and appointed officials and employees.



      (2)   Village officers and employees should actively promote
public confidence in the village government through their administration of
the affairs of the village and by promoting decisions which benefit the
public interest.



      (3)   Village officers and employees are directed to evaluate
all decisions so that the best service or product is obtained at a minimal
cost without sacrificing quality, and while keeping safe all funds and other
properties of the village.



      (4)   Village officers and employees should inject the
prestige of the office into everyday dealings with public employees and
associates by maintaining a respectful attitude towards other employees,
public officials, colleagues, associates and those having business with the
village.



   (B)   The following are mandatory directives for this village and
its officers and employees:  the village, as a public corporation, requires
that all officers and employees faithfully comply with all state or local
laws and regulations applicable to the village.  It is the expectation of
the village that its officials and employees will familiarize themselves with
state laws prohibiting unethical conduct.



   (C)   The Village President and Board of Trustees shall be
responsible for resolving all matters in which there could be a conflict of
interest or a violation of these guidelines.



(Ord. 742-92, passed 2-11-92)



VILLAGE PRESIDENT



§ 30.025  ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE.



   The Village President shall be elected for a term of four years, and
shall be the President of the Board of Trustees, as is provided by statute.



('52 Code, Ch. 1, § 1)



§ 30.026  DUTIES.



   The President shall be the chief executive officer of the village, and
shall perform all such duties as may be required by statute or ordinance. 
The President shall have the power and authority to inspect all books and
records kept by any village officer or employee at any reasonable time.  The
President shall have supervision over all the executive officers of the
village, and over all the employees of the village.  The President shall
sign all orders upon the Treasurer of the village, and perform such other
acts as by law and ordinance may be required.



('52 Code, Ch. 1, § 2)



§ 30.027  DELEGATION OF DUTIES.



   Whenever there is a question as to the respective powers or duties of
any appointed officer of the village, this shall be settled by the President;
and the President shall have the power to delegate to any such officer any
duty which is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to
perform that duty.



('52 Code, Ch. 1, § 3)



§ 30.028  BOND; OATH; SALARY.



   Before entering upon the duties of the office the President shall give
a bond with sureties to be approved by the Board of Trustees conditioned upon
the faithful performance of the duties of the office in the sum of $3000. 
The President shall take the oath of office as prescribed by statute, and
shall receive such compensation as may be set from time to time by the Board
of Trustees.



('52 Code, Ch. 1, § 4)



§ 30.029  PRESIDENT PRO TEM.



   During a temporary absence or disability of the Village President the
Board of Trustees shall elect one of its number to act as President Pro Tem,
who during the absence or disability of the President shall perform the
duties pertaining to the office.



('52 Code, Ch. 1, § 5)



VILLAGE CLERK



§ 30.035  ELECTION; TERM.



   (A)   The Village Clerk shall be elected and serve for a four-year
term and until a successor is elected and qualified, as provided by statute.



('52 Code, Ch. 3, § 20)



   (B)   The base salary of the Village Clerk shall be $5,000 annually,
paid on a bi-weekly basis, and the office shall be considered a part-time
position; provided, however, if the Village Clerk becomes a Registered
Municipal Clerk under the Illinois Registered Clerk Program, the Clerk's
salary shall be increased by $2,000 per annum, and if the Village Clerk
obtains certification as a Municipal Clerk from the International Institute
of Municipal Clerks, then the Village Clerk's base salary shall be increased
by an additional $1,500 per annum, and if the Village Clerk obtains
certification from the Academy of Advanced Education of the International
Institute of Municipal Clerks, then the Village Clerk's base salary shall be
increased by an additional $500 per annum.



(Am. Ord. 1004-98, passed 10-6-98)



§ 30.036  BOND.



   Before entering upon the duties of the office, the Village Clerk shall
execute a bond in such amount as is provided by statute, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the duties of the office.



('52 Code, Ch. 3, § 21)



§ 30.037  DUTY TO SEAL DOCUMENTS.



   The Village Clerk shall seal and attest all contracts of the village
and all licenses, permits and such other documents as shall require this
formality.



('52 Code, Ch. 3, § 22)



§ 30.038  DISPOSITION OF MONEY COLLECTED.



   The Clerk shall turn over all money received on behalf of the village
to the Village Treasurer promptly upon receipt of the same; and with such
money shall give a statement as to the source thereof.



('52 Code, Ch. 3, § 23)



§ 30.039  ACCOUNTS.



   The Clerk shall keep accounts showing all money received and the source
and disposition thereof; and such other accounts as may be required by
statute or ordinance.



('52 Code, Ch. 3, § 24)



§ 30.040  RECORDS.



   In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the
Clerk is required by statute to keep, the Clerk shall keep a register of all
licenses and permits issued and the payments thereon; a record showing all
the officers and regular employees of the village; and such other records as
may be required by the Board of Trustees.



('52 Code, Ch. 3, § 24A)



§ 30.041  CUSTODIAN OF SEAL.



   The Clerk shall be the custodian of the Village Seal, and shall affix
its impression on documents whenever this is required.



('52 Code, Ch. 3, § 25)



§ 30.042  CUSTODIAN OF DOCUMENTS.



   The Clerk shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to the
village which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer.



('52 Code, Ch. 3, § 26)



§ 30.043  INDEX TO DOCUMENTS AND RECORDS.



   The Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and
records kept by him, so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had.



('52 Code, Ch. 3, § 27)



§ 30.044  ADDITIONAL DUTIES.



   In addition to the duties herein provided the Clerk shall perform such
other duties and functions as may be required by statute or ordinance.



('52 Code, Ch. 3, § 28)



§ 30.045  DEPUTY CLERK.



   The Village Clerk is authorized to appoint up to two deputy clerks to
discharge the functions and duties of the office of the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 1768-15, passed 10-6-15)



§ 30.046  VACANCY.



   In case the office of Village Clerk shall become vacant for any reason,
the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall
appoint a successor as provided by statute.



('52 Code, Ch. 3, § 29)  (Am. Ord. 1768-15, passed 10-6-15)



TREASURER



§ 30.050  APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the office of Village Treasurer, who shall be
appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the as provided by
statute.  The Treasurer shall serve for one year.



('52 Code, Ch. 4. § 30)



§ 30.051  BOND.



   The Treasurer shall give a bond, before entering upon the duties of the
office, in the sum required by the Board of Trustees, but such amount shall
not be less than that required by statute.  This bond shall be conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office by the Treasurer,
and shall be conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss by reason of
any neglect of duty or any act of the Treasurer.



('52 Code, Ch. 4. § 31)



§ 30.052  DUTIES.



   The Treasurer shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by statute
or ordinance.  The Treasurer shall receive all money paid into the village
whether directly from the person paying the money or from the hands of such
other officer or employee as may receive it, and shall pay out money only on
vouchers or orders properly signed by the President.



('52 Code, Ch. 4, § 32)



§ 30.053  DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.



   The Treasurer shall deposit the village funds in such depositories as
may be selected from time to time as provided by law; and shall keep the
deposit of the village money separate and distinct from his own money, and
shall not make private or personal use of any village money.



('52 Code, Ch. 4, § 33)



§ 30.054  RECORDS TO BE KEPT.



   He shall keep records showing all money received by him, showing the
source from which it is received and the purpose for which it is paid, and he
shall keep records at all times showing the financial status of the village.



('52 Code, Ch. 4, § 33)



§ 30.055  ACCOUNTING.



   The Treasurer shall keep such books and accounts as may be required by
statute or ordinance, and shall keep them in the manner required by the Board
of Trustees.



('52 Code, Ch. 4, § 35)



FINANCE DIRECTOR



§ 30.060  POSITION CREATED.



   There is hereby created the office of Finance Director, which shall be
an administrative office of the village.



(Ord. 1760-15, passed 8-18-15)



§ 30.061  APPOINTMENT.



   The Finance Director shall be appointed by the Village President with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The Finance Director shall
be appointed solely on the basis of his or her qualifications with special
reference to his or her training and actual experience in, and knowledge of,
accepted practices in municipal accounting and financial affairs. The Finance
Director shall report to, and work subject to the control of the Village
Administrator.



(Ord. 1760-15, passed 8-18-15)



§ 30.062  DUTIES.



   The duties of the Finance Director shall be as follows:



   (A)   The Finance Director shall be responsible for all aspects of
administration, planning, directing, and supervising the operations and
employees of the Finance Department, including but not limited to,
accounting, fixed assets, budget preparation, annual audit, grant reporting,
payroll, utility billing, accounts payable and receivables, collection,
disbursement, and investment of all village funds, debt management,
preparation of the annual appropriation and tax levy ordinances, labor
contract analysis, and all financial reporting.



   (B)   The Finance Director shall aid and assist the Village
Treasurer in the performance of the Village Treasurer's duties.



   (C)   The Finance Director shall attend all Village Board, Committee
of the Whole, and various committee and staff meetings each month and shall
advise the Village President and Board of Trustees and village officials and
employees on all financial related matters referred to him or her or handled
by the Finance Department.



   (D)   The Finance Director shall be the ex-officio Village Collector.



   (E)   The Finance Director shall perform any and all duties assigned
to him or her by the Village President and Board of Trustees or by the
Village Administrator.



(Ord. 1760-15, passed 8-18-15)



ATTORNEY



§ 30.070  OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the office of Village Attorney, an executive
office of the village. The Attorney shall be appointed by the President with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.



('52 Code, Ch. 4, § 43)



§ 30.071  SPECIAL COUNSEL MAY BE RETAINED.



   The President, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, may from time
to time retain an attorney to represent or advise the village on legal
matters if no Village Attorney has been appointed; and may likewise retain
special counsel to advise or represent the village on special matters or to
assist the Village Attorney.



('52 Code, Ch. 4, § 44)



§ 30.072  SUITS AND ACTIONS.



   The Village Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or
actions at law or equity to which the village may be a party, or in which it
may be interested, or which may be brought against or by any officer of the
village on behalf of the village or in the capacity of such person as an
officer of the village.



('52 Code, Ch. 4, § 45)



§ 30.073  DUTY TO RENDER ADVICE.



   The Attorney shall be the legal adviser of the Village and shall render
advice on all legal questions affecting it, whenever requested to do so by
any village official.  Upon request by the President of the Board, the
Attorney shall reduce any such opinion to writing.



('52 Code, Ch. 4, § 47)



DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS



§ 30.080  ORGANIZATION.



   The Village of Itasca Department of Public Works shall be organized as
follows:



   (A)   The Department shall be headed and supervised by a Director of
Public Works, appointed by the Village President, and who reports to the
Village Administrator.



   (B)   The Department shall consist of three superintendents who
report to the Director of Public Works and are in charge of a specialized
area within the Department. The superintendent positions are:



      (1)   Water/Waste Water Superintendent;



      (2)   General Services Superintendent;



      (3)   Utilities Superintendent.



(Ord. 1426-08, passed 1-8-08)



§ 30.081  POSITION CREATED; APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the position of Director of Public Works. The
Director shall be appointed by the Village President. The Director of Public
Works position shall be a non-officer position with the village. The Director
of Public Works shall report to and be supervised by the Village
Administrator. The Director shall have control and supervision over all
divisions and employees assigned to the Department, subject to the control of
the Village Administrator.



(Ord. 1426-08, passed 1-8-08)



DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT



§ 30.090  APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the office of Director of Community
Development, which shall be an administrative office of the village.  The
Director of Community Development shall be appointed by the Village President
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 985-98, passed 2-17-98)



§ 30.091  DUTIES.



   The duties of the Director of Community Development shall be as follows:



   (A)   The Director of Community Development shall serve additionally
as the Building Commissioner and have assigned to him or her the
responsibilities of the Building Commissioner as stated below and within the
codes and ordinances of the village.



   (B)   The Director of Community Development shall serve as the
Zoning Administrator and have assigned to him or her the responsibilities of
Zoning Administrator as stated within the codes and ordinances of the village.



   (C)   The Director of Community Development shall be responsible for
the administration of the Department of Community Development.



   (D)   The Director of Community Development shall advise the Village
President and Board of Trustees and village officials and employees on all
zoning, planning, annexation and development, re-development, transportation
and storm water management, building code and code-related matters referred
to him or her, and shall perform such duties as are provided by law or
ordinance and, in addition thereto, such other duties as from time-to-time
may be imposed upon him or her by the Village President and Board of Trustees
or the Village Administrator.



   (E)   The Director of Community Development shall advise the Village
President and Board of Trustees and village officials and employees on
economic development related matters, and shall be responsible for
developing, updating and implementing the economic development plans as
approved by the corporate authorities.



   (F)   The Director of Community Development shall see to the
enforcement of all ordinances relating to building or zoning and the
inspection of buildings and structures being constructed or altered as
frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance with village ordinances
and codes.



(Ord. 985-98, passed 2-17-98)



§ 30.092  EX OFFICIO PLUMBING INSPECTOR.



   The Director of Community Development shall act as ex officio Plumbing
Inspector and shall have the powers and perform all the duties connected with
that position.



(Ord. 985-98, passed 2-17-98)



§ 30.093  EX OFFICIO ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.



   The Director of Community Development shall act as ex officio
Electrical Inspector and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties
connected with that position.



(Ord. 985-98, passed 2-17-98)



§ 30.094  ENTRY POWERS.



   Pursuant to applicable laws, the Director of Community Development
shall have the power to make or cause to be made an entry into any building
or premises where the work of altering, repairing or constructing of any
building or structure is going on, for the purpose of making inspections, at
any reasonable hour, but only with the prior consent of the owner of said
building or premises or pursuant to an administrative warrant issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 985-98, passed 2-17-98)



§ 30.095  STOP ORDER; VIOLATION.



   (A)   The Director of Community Development shall have the power to
order all work stopped on construction, alteration or repair of buildings in
the village when such work is being done in violation of village codes and
ordinances. All work stopped by the Director of Community Development shall
be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Building Code of the
Village of Itasca.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall continue work in
violation of a stop order of the Director of Community Development shall be
fined as provided by ordinance.



(Ord. 985-98, passed 2-17-98)  Penalty, see § 10.99



VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR



§ 30.105  CREATION OF OFFICE.



   There is hereby created the Office of Village Administrator, an
administrative office of the Village of Itasca.  Nothing contained within
this subchapter shall be deemed to conflict with the statutory duties and
obligations of the Village President and Village Board.



(Ord. 850-95, passed 11-7-95)



§ 30.106  APPOINTMENT AND SELECTION.



   The Village Administrator shall be appointed by the President, with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, for such term as determined at
the time of his or her appointment or by contract or as otherwise provided by
law.  The Village Administrator shall be chosen solely on the basis of
executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to actual
experience in, and knowledge of, accepted practices with respect to the
duties of his or her employment as set forth herein and in the current job
description as established by the Village Board. Requirements and
qualifications are hereby declared to be such as requiring technical training
and knowledge.



   (A)   Review Committee. A Review Committee consisting of the
President and at least four Trustees shall oversee and determine an
appropriate selection process to assist the Village President in selecting a
qualified nominee for appointment as Village Administrator.



   (B)   Letter of conditions of employment. A letter of conditions of
employment shall further define and explain conditions of employment between
the Administrator and the Village of Itasca, but may not override, circumvent
or subvert any portion of this subchapter.  Any appointment of an individual
to the position of Village Administrator shall be dependent upon the
individual's acceptance of the terms of a letter of conditions of
employment.  The letter of conditions of employment shall be presented to
the applicant by the Village President.



   (C)   Residency. The Village Administrator shall reside either
within the Village of Itasca or within a reasonable distance as defined in
the letter of conditions of employment.  The Village Administrator shall be
granted one year from the date of employment to comply with the terms of this
section or be subject to dismissal.



   (D)   Vacancy.  In the event of a temporary absence or disability
of the Village Administrator, or in the event the position of a Village
Administrator becomes vacant for any reason, the Village President shall
appoint an acting Village Administrator with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees.



   (E)   Certificate of office. Upon appointment of the Village
Administrator, the Village President and Village Clerk shall issue the
appropriate certification designating the individual as holding the appointed
position of Village Administrator of the Village of Itasca.



(Ord. 850-95, passed 11-7-95)



§ 30.107  TENURE OF POSITION.



   The Village Administrator shall have no specified term for his or her
position, but shall remain the Village Administrator based on performance to
the satisfaction of the Village President and Board of Trustees.  This
section may be modified as dictated by the letter of terms of conditions of
employment or as dictated by state statute.



(Ord. 850-95, passed 11-7-95)



§ 30.108  REMOVAL.



   The Village Administrator may be removed by the Village President on
any formal charge, whenever the President is of the opinion of the interests
of the village demand removal.  Such removal is subject to the payment of
any valid remaining portion of the Administrator's term, as defined by the
letter of conditions of employment.  The Village President shall report the
reasons for such removal to the Village Board at a meeting to be held not
less than five nor more than ten days after the removal.  If the President
fails or refuses to report to the Board of Trustees the reasons for the
removal, or if the Village Board, by a two-thirds vote of all its members
authorized by law to be elected, disapproves of the removal, the Village
Administrator thereupon shall be restored to office.  Upon restoration, the
Village Administrator shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office and
be fully restored to his or her certificate of appointment.



(Ord. 850-95, passed 11-7-95)



§ 30.109  BOND, OATH AND COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Oath. Before entering upon the duties of office, the Village
Administrator shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the statutes of
the State of Illinois in such case provided.



   (B)   Bond. Before entering upon the duties of office, the Village
Administrator shall furnish a surety bond as dictated by the letter of
conditions of employment.  This bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the Administrator's duties. The premium for the bond shall be
paid by the Village of Itasca.



   (C)   Compensation. The Village Administrator shall receive such
compensation and benefits as the President and Board of Trustees shall
determine by ordinance, or alternatively, have agreed to in the letter of
conditions of employment.  All compensation paid to the Village
Administrator shall be defined by the appropriation ordinance or any separate
ordinance and shall further be approved through the village's budgeting
process.  No compensation shall be paid to the Village Administrator in
addition to that provided by ordinance, resolution or the letter of
conditions of employment, except, however, the Village Administrator shall be
entitled to reimbursement for any reasonable, actual expenses incurred in the
performance of his or her duties.  All matters subject to reimbursement must
be budgeted, documented and approved by the Village President.  Any
non-budgeted reimbursable item must be approved by the Village President with
the consent of the Village Board.



(Ord. 850-95, passed 11-7-95)



§ 30.110  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Village Administrator shall be the administrative officer of the
village and be responsible to the Village President and Village Board for the
proper administration of all affairs of the village.  To that end, the
Village Administrator shall have power and shall be required to:



   (A)   See that all laws and ordinances of the village are duly
enforced.



   (B)   Attend all meetings of the President and Board of Trustees,
unless excused by the President, and give the corporate authorities all
information possible on matters under consideration.  The Village
Administrator shall be responsible for preparing the agenda for all regular
and special meetings of the Village Board and shall be entitled to notice of
all regular meetings of the Village Board.



   (C)   Recommend to the President and Board of Trustees, adoption of
such measures deemed necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare
of the community or for the improvement of administrator services.



   (D)   At the request of the President and Board of Trustees,
recommend officers of the village who are required to be appointed and
recommend the removal or suspension of any such officer to the President and
Board of Trustees when such removal or suspension will be consistent with the
best interests of the village.  All recommendations for appointments or
removal shall be based upon merit and upon qualifications or
disqualifications of such officer without regard to political belief or
affiliations.



   (E)   Supervise the appointed officers and employees of the
village.  All persons shall perform their duties subject to direction of the
Administrator, except as otherwise provided or required by statute or
ordinance.  At the request of the President or Board of Trustees he or she
shall make reports to the President and the Board concerning the activities
of village officers or employees.



   (F)   Recommend to the President and Board of Trustees the hiring,
suspension or discharge of all employees of the village; except that this
authority shall not extend to the Village Clerk or to sworn personnel of the
police department.



   (G)   Settle questions as to the respective powers or duties of any
appointed officer of the village and have such power to delegate to any such
officer any duty which is to be performed when no specific officer has been
directed to perform the duty.



   (H)   Supervise and coordinate the work of all departments of the
village.



   (I)   Set the salary for all non-represented village employees, with
the exception of department heads, in accordance with the village’s
compensation policy.



   (J)   Recommend to the President and Board of Trustees, the
creation, consolidation and combining of offices, positions, departments or
units of the administrative and executive departments of the village.



   (K)   Monitor the affairs of the village or any department or
division thereof.  Investigate or provide for the investigation of all
complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the
government of the village, including oversight of service maintained by the
public utilities in the village, and to oversee that all franchises, permits
or privileges granted by the village are faithfully observed.



   (L)   Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies and
equipment for which funds are provided in the budget; let contracts for
operation and maintenance of village services for amounts up to and including
$5,000; receive bids for purchases or contracts in excess of $5,000; and
advise the Village Board on the advantages or disadvantages of the contract
or merchandise on which such bids have been received.  No purchase shall be
made, contract let or obligation incurred for any category or commodities or
services which exceeds the current budget category within each department's
or activity's budget without a supplemental amount being budgeted by the
Board.  No purchase, acquisition, construction or other contract or any
increase to an existing contract of any type shall be made in excess of
$5,000 except by approval of the Village Board.  The Village Administrator
may issue such rules governing purchasing procedures within the
administrative organization as the President and Village Board shall approve.



   (M)   Prepare, or cause to be prepared for the President and Board
of Trustees on or before May 1 of each year, a budget report indicating the
funds necessary to defray the estimated expenses of the village for the next
fiscal year; prepare or cause to be prepared the annual appropriation
ordinance for consideration and enactment and prepare or cause to be prepared
for consideration and enactment the annual tax levy.  For the purpose of
preparing the aforesaid budget report and ordinances, the Village
Administrator may require all officers and employees to submit statements of
the conditions and expenses of their respective offices or departments; a
description of all unperformed contracts; and a statement of all unexpended
or unexpired appropriations of the preceding year.



   (N)   Submit to the President and Board of Trustees, promptly
following the end of the fiscal year, a report on the activities of the
village for said fiscal year.



   (O)   Devote full time to the duties of Village Administrator and
shall not engage in any other employment without the written consent of the
Village Board.



   (P)   Perform such other lawful duties as may be required by
resolution, ordinance or direction of the President and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 850-95, passed 11-7-95; Am. Ord. 850-95, passed 9-2-03; Am. Ord.
1428-08, passed 2-19-08; Am. Ord. 1701-14, passed 7-1-14; Am. Ord. 1761-15,
passed 8-18-15)



§ 30.111  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   The Village Administrator shall not have a vested interest directly or
indirectly in any contract, work or business of the village, or in the sale
of any article to the village or in the purchase of any property belonging to
the village or in any property sold for taxes or assessments as the result of
suit by the village, except that the Administrator may own stock in firms
doing business with the village to the extent permitted by state law.  The
Village Administrator shall file the appropriate disclosures of economic
interests and contracts as required under state law and the Village
Administrator shall properly disclose any potential conflict of interest to
the President and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 850-95, passed 11-7-95)



§ 30.112  PERFORMANCE EVALUATION.



   The President shall provide to the Village Administrator a written
evaluation of his or her performance on an annual basis.  Such report shall
include, but not be limited to, an evaluation of the Village Administrator as
submitted by individual Trustees.



(Ord. 850-95, passed 11-7-95)



CHAPTER 31:  BOARD OF TRUSTEES



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Elections; functions



   31.02   Oath; salary



   31.03   Meetings



   31.04   President



   31.05   Consent agenda



Rules of Order



   31.10   Order of business



   31.11   Rescinded action



   31.12   Addressing meetings



   31.13   Resolutions



   31.14   Suspension of rules



   31.15   Robert's Rules of Order



   31.16   Quorum



   31.17   Committees



   31.18   Disturbing meetings unlawful



   31.19   Attendance by means other than physical presence



   31.20   Executive session confidentiality



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  ELECTIONS; FUNCTIONS.



   The Board of Trustees, consisting of the President and six Trustees,
shall be elected to office for a four-year term, according to the method
provided by statute.  This Board shall be the legislative department of the
village government, and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may
be delegated by statute to it.



('52 Code, Ch. 2, § 6)



§ 31.02  OATH; SALARY.



   The members of the Board of Trustees shall take the oath of office
prescribed by statute, and shall receive such compensation as may be provided
by ordinance.



('52 Code, Ch. 2, § 7)



§ 31.03  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   The regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be
held on the first and third Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m.



      (2)    The meeting place of the said Board shall be at the
Village Hall, unless otherwise ordered by the Board.



      (3)    Special meetings may be called by the President of the
village or any three trustees upon at least 24 hours notice to all members
and the President; provided that if all of the Trustees are present at a
special meeting no notice of the meeting shall be necessary to the Trustees
and such notice shall be deemed waived.



   (B)   Recording.  It shall be the responsibility and an additional
duty of the Village Clerk to ensure compliance with the provisions of P.A.
93-0523 by arranging for all closed meetings of the Village Board of Trustees
to be recorded by either audio or video recording.  The Village Clerk shall
further assist all Committees and Boards of the Village Government
(subsidiary public body) in complying with the provisions of P.A. 93-0523 and
this section.  Each subsidiary public body of the Village shall designate an
individual to be responsible for the recording of any and all closed sessions
of the subsidiary public body and shall provide the Village Clerk with a copy
of any such recording.



   (C)   Maintenance.  The Village Clerk shall securely maintain the
audio or video recording of each closed meeting for no less than 18 months
after the completion of the recorded meeting and the Village Clerk is
authorized to destroy each and every recording at the expiration of these 18
months, except in cases as follows:



      (1)   A court order of competent jurisdiction has ordered
preservation of the recording; or



      (2)   The corporate authorities of the village have passed a
motion requiring preservation of the recording.



   (D)    Closed session minutes. In addition to the audio or video
recordings of closed sessions as outlined in P.A. 93-0523, the village shall
maintain written minutes of all closed meetings in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Meetings Act (ILCS, Ch. 5, Act 120, § 2.06).



   (E)    Equipment malfunction. In the event it is determined that the
recording equipment has malfunctioned during the closed session, the closed
session shall be temporarily suspended during the time frame of the
malfunction.  In the event that the equipment malfunction cannot be
corrected immediately, the closed session shall terminate until such time as
the closed session may proceed with a functioning recording device.



   (F)   Maintenance and public release of recordings and access to
tapes.  The audio or videotape recordings of closed sessions shall be
maintained for 18 months after the closed session and shall not be released
to the public unless such release is required by a court order or
specifically authorized for release by a vote of the Village Board.  Members
of the corporate authorities may listen to the closed session recordings in
the presence of the Village Clerk or his/her designee.  Copies of such tapes
will not be made or be provided to anyone unless specifically authorized by
vote of the Village Board or required by court order.



   (G)    Periodic review of written minutes.   Notwithstanding the
periodic review of written minutes and any determination that confidentiality
no longer exists as to written minutes, audio or video recordings of meetings
shall be maintained for a minimum of 18 months.



('52 Code, Ch. 2, § 9)  (Am. Ord. 957-97, passed 6-10-97; Am. Ord. 1158-03,
passed 1-21-03; Am. Ord. 1195-04, passed 2-3-04)



§ 31.04  PRESIDENT.



   The Village President shall be the presiding officer of all regular and
special meetings of the Board of Trustees and at all times when the Board
meets as committee of the whole, except in those instances where the Board
meets as part of the established standing committee structure.



('52 Code, Ch. 2, § 10)  (Am. Ord. 847-95, passed 7-25-95)



§ 31.05  CONSENT AGENDA.



   (A)   Agendas for regular Village Board Meetings shall be prepared
in such a fashion that all proposed consent items be placed in a separate
"consent agenda" section of the regular agenda for that Village Board
Meeting. Each item included in the consent agenda portion shall be placed in
the consent agenda section on the presumption that the item is likely to
receive unanimous consent.



   (B)   Upon individual request of the President or any Trustee, an
item shall be removed from the consent agenda to be voted upon separately in
accordance with all required and customary procedures of the Village Board.



   (C)   All items placed on the consent agenda shall be voted upon in
a single vote which must be by unanimous consent.  The Clerk is directed to
record in the minutes a designation of all items passed in a consent agenda
by utilizing the phrase "omnibus vote" or "consent agenda."  The Clerk shall
further record the single vote of the unanimous consent by listing each
individual of the Village Board as having voted in favor of the single vote
to pass the consent agenda.



(Ord. 992-98, passed 4-7-98)



RULES OF ORDER



§ 31.10  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   The order of business of the Board of Trustees of the village shall be
as follows:



   (A)   Roll call;



   (B)   Minutes of the preceding meeting;



   (C)   Public comment;



   (D)   Communications, resolutions, ordinances and bills;



   (E)   Reports of officers;



   (F)   Reports of committees; and



   (G)   Other business



('52 Code, Ch. 2, § 11)  (Am. Ord. 849-95, passed 9-19-95)



§ 31.11  RESCINDED ACTION.



   No vote or action of the Board of Trustees shall be rescinded at any
special meeting of the Board of Trustees unless there be present at such
special meeting as many members of the Board of Trustees as were present at
the meeting when such vote or action was taken, as provided by statute.



('52 Code, Ch. 2, § 12)



§ 31.12  ADDRESSING MEETINGS.



   No person other than the President or a member of the Board shall
address that body at any regular or special meeting except upon consent of a
majority of the members present.



('52 Code, Ch. 2, § 13)



§ 31.13  RESOLUTIONS.



   Any resolutions submitted to the Board of Trustees shall be reduced to
writing before being voted upon, on request of any two members of the Board.



('52 Code, Ch. 2, § 14)



§ 31.14  SUSPENSION OF RULES.



   The rules of order, other than those prescribed by statute, may be
suspended at any time by the consent of a majority of the members present at
any meeting.



('52 Code, Ch. 2, § 15)



§ 31.15  ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER.



   Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the deliberations of the Board of
Trustees except when in conflict with any foregoing rules.



('52 Code, Ch. 2, § 16)



§ 31.16  QUORUM.



   A majority of the Trustees shall constitute a quorum to do business,
but no ordinance shall be passed except upon the favorable vote of a majority
of the elected members, as provided by statute.



('52 Code, Ch. 2, § 17)



§ 31.17  COMMITTEES.



   (A)   The Village President shall appoint all standing committees.



   (B)   Special committees shall be created from time to time as
directed by the Board of Trustees.



   (C)   All standing committees shall consist of all sitting Board
members, including the duly appointed Chairman of the respective committee. 
All special committees shall consist of three members each, including the
chairman, unless the Board shall direct otherwise.  All committees shall be
appointed by the President.



('52 Code, Ch. 2, § 18)  (Am. Ord. 847-95, passed 7-25-95)



§ 31.18  DISTURBING MEETINGS UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any meeting of the Board
of Trustees or of any committee thereof.  Any person violating the
provisions of this section shall be fined as provided in § 10.99.



('52 Code, Ch. 2, § 19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 31.19  ATTENDANCE BY MEANS OTHER THAN PHYSICAL PRESENCE.



   If a quorum is physically present at a meeting of the Board of
Trustees, any member of the Board of Trustees who is prevented from
physically attending because of personal illness or disability; employment
purposes or the business of the village; or a family or other emergency, is
permitted to attend that meeting by video or audio conference.  A member of
the Board of Trustees who wishes to attend a meeting by means other than
physical presence in accordance with this section must notify the Village
Clerk in advance of the meeting unless advance notice is impractical.



(Ord. 1524-10, passed 5-4-10)



§ 31.20  EXECUTIVE SESSION CONFIDENTIALITY.



   From time to time, in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act,
the Board of Trustees may enter into executive session. In such case, any
subject matter committed to executive session shall be confidential. No
disclosure of any discussion held or any decision made in executive session
shall be made until publicized by announcement, publication, or official
action by or at the direction of the Board of Trustees. A violation of this
section by any member of the Board of Trustees, village officer, or village
employee shall be considered a breach of the member, officer, or employee's
fiduciary duty to the village. Any individual found by the Board of Trustees
to be in violation of this section may either be terminated, disciplined,
censured, or reported to the DuPage County State's Attorney for consideration
of misconduct charges under the Illinois Criminal Code or the Illinois
Municipal Code.



(Ord. 1700-14, passed 7-1-14)



CHAPTER 32:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Board of Police and Fire Commissioners



   32.01   Creation; appointments



   32.02   Qualification and compensation



   32.03   Duties and powers



   32.04   Secretary may be employed



   32.05   Counsel



Electrical Commission



   32.15   Commission established; qualifications of appointees



   32.16   Duties



Plan Commission



   32.25   Created; membership; vacancies



   32.26   Records and reports



   32.27   Powers and duties



   32.28   Consideration of improvements



   32.29   Expenditures



   32.30   Meetings and rules



   32.31   Decisions



   32.32   Combined with Zoning Board of Appeals



Sewer and Water Appeals Board



   32.35   Creation; membership; vacancies



   32.36   Powers and duties



Youth Council



   32.45   Re-establishment



   32.46   Terms; organization



   32.47   Vacancies



   32.48   Expending funds; incurring obligations



   32.49   Enlistment of volunteers



   32.50   Duties



   32.51   Meetings



   32.52   Reports to the Board of Trustees



BOARD OF POLICE AND FIRE COMMISSIONERS



§ 32.01  CREATION; APPOINTMENTS.



   There is hereby established a Board of Police and Fire Commissioners
for the village, which shall consist of three members.  The Village
President, by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees, and in
compliance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-1 et seq.,
shall appoint the three Commissioners, no more than two of which shall be
from the same political party.  Party affiliations shall be determined by
affidavit of the person so appointed.  Vacancies shall be filled in the same
manner as provided above and appointments to such vacancies shall be
effective until the end of the term of the Commissioner being replaced.  All
appointments shall be for three-year terms.  Said three Board members shall
elect one of themselves as chairperson, to serve until the end of each
municipal fiscal year.  A majority of Board of Police and Fire Commissioners
shall constitute a quorum.



(Ord. 450-76, passed 4-20-76)



§ 32.02  QUALIFICATION AND COMPENSATION.



   Each member so appointed shall file an oath and fidelity bond, which
shall be in the amount of $1,000, the cost of which shall be paid by the
village.  Each member so qualified shall be considered as an officer of the
village.  Each Commission member who obtains and maintains certification, or
is in the process of obtaining certification, through the Illinois Fire and
Police Commissioners Association, or their affiliates, shall receive
compensation for service on the Commission in the amount of $50 per meeting.
A member shall be deemed to be in the process of obtaining certification by
providing proof of attendance and completion of at least one training module
at a semi-annual conference hosted by the Illinois Fire and Police
Commissioners Association. Following the commencement of the certification
process, if a member misses two consecutive semi-annual conferences hosted by
the Illinois Fire and Police Commissioners Association, the member shall no
longer be eligible to receive compensation for service on the Commission. No
member, once appointed and qualified, shall be removed except for cause and
in the manner provided by statute.



(Ord. 450-76, passed 4-20-76; Am. Ord. 1006-98, passed 10-6-98; Am. Ord.
1636-12, passed 11-20-12)



§ 32.03  DUTIES AND POWERS.



   The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall appoint all officers
and members of the Police Department, except auxiliary police officers and
except the Chief of Police.  The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the
President of the Village, by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees. 
The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall promulgate its own rules and
regulations, conduct examinations, prepare reports and submit annual budgets,
and do all other acts and things required of them, pursuant to and according
to the provisions of state statute.



(Ord. 450-76, passed 4-20-76)



§ 32.04  SECRETARY MAY BE EMPLOYED.



   The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners may employ a secretary, who
shall be paid such compensation as may be approved by the Board of Trustees
from time to time in the appropriation ordinance or otherwise.



(Ord. 450-76, passed 4-20-76)



§ 32.05  COUNSEL.



   The Village Attorney, or an attorney appointed by the Village President
with the consent of the Board of Trustees, shall serve as counsel for the
Board of Police and Fire Commissioners.



(Ord. 450-76, passed 4-20-76)



ELECTRICAL COMMISSION



§ 32.15  COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; QUALIFICATIONS OF APPOINTEES.



   There is hereby created an Electrical Commission consisting of five
members appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees.  The Commissioner of Buildings or the Chief Electrical
Inspector shall be a member and ex officio chairman of such Commission; of
the other four members, one shall be an electrical contractor, one a
journeyman electrician, one a representative of an inspection bureau
maintained by the Fire Underwriters (or, if no such representative resides in
the village, then the Chief of the Fire Department), and one a representative
of an electrical supply company.  If there is no person residing in the
village who is qualified under any of these descriptions, or if such person
refuses such appointment, the President may appoint some other person to fill
that position.  Such members shall be appointed for one year and shall serve
until their successors have been appointed and qualified.



(Ord. 234-65, passed 8-3-65)



§ 32.16  DUTIES.



   The Electrical Commission shall recommend safe and practical standards
and specifications for the installation, alteration and use of electrical
equipment in the village designed to meet the necessities and conditions in
this locality, shall arbitrate disputes with reference to electrical code
compliances and inspections, and shall recommend reasonable rules and
regulations governing the issuance of permits and fees to be paid; however,
such standards and specifications, rules and regulations, and fees shall not
be effective until adopted by ordinance.



(Ord. 234-65, passed 8-3-65)



PLAN COMMISSION



§ 32.25  CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; VACANCIES.



   A Plan Commission is hereby created. The Plan Commission shall consist
of seven members appointed by the President and confirmed by the Village
Board of Trustees.  The members of the Plan Commission shall serve
respectively for the following terms: One for one year; one for two years;
one for three years; one for four years; one for five years; one for six
years; and one for seven years, the successor to each member so appointed to
serve for a term of four years.  One of the members of the Plan Commission
so appointed shall be named as Chairperson by the President of the Village
Board and shall hold said office until a successor shall be appointed. The
Village President shall have the power to remove any member of said
Commission for cause and after a public hearing. Vacancies upon said
Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place
has become vacant in the manner herein provided for the appointment of such
member.



(Ord. 587-85, passed 6-18-85; Am. Ord. 1546-10, passed 9-21-10)



Statutory reference:



   Removal of officers, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-10



§ 32.26  RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   The Plan Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings which
shall be open at all times to public inspection.  The Commission shall also
file an annual report with the President and Board of Trustees setting forth
its transactions and recommendations.



(Ord. 587-85, passed 6-18-85)



§ 32.27  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   Prepare and recommend to the President and Board of Trustees a
comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of
the village.  Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical
or functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the official
comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the village.  This plan may include
reasonable requirements with reference to streets, alleys, public grounds and
other improvements hereinafter specified.  The plan, as recommended by the
Plan Commission and as thereafter adopted shall be applicable to land
situated within the corporate limits and contiguous territory not more than
one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any
municipality.  Such plan may be implemented by ordinances establishing
reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of
unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in respect to public
improvements as herein defined; establishing reasonable requirements
governing the location, width, course and surfacing of public streets and
highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, street lights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to
be used for residential purposes, storm water drainage, water supply and
distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment; and may
designate land suitable for annexation to the village and the recommended
zoning classification for such land upon annexation.



   (B)   Recommend changes, from time to time, in the official
comprehensive plan.



   (C)   Prepare and recommend to the President and Board of Trustees,
from time to time, plans for specific improvements in pursuance of the
official comprehensive plan.



   (D)   Give aid to the village officials charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further
the making of these projects, and generally, to promote the realization of
the official comprehensive plan.



   (E)   The Plan Commission shall review all plans and plats for
subdivisions for territory within the village and for one and one-half miles
beyond the corporate limits (if not within the limits of another
municipality) and upon reviewing the same, shall report its findings to the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village.  The President and Board of
Trustees of the Village shall determine whether a proposed plat of
subdivision or resubdivision complies with the official map.  To secure such
determination, the person requesting the subdivision or resubdivision shall
file four copies of a plat thereof with the Village Clerk, and shall furnish
therewith four copies of all data necessary to show compliance with all
applicable village regulations, and shall make application for preliminary or
final approval of the proposed plat.



   (F)   Hear all applications for amendments and special uses and
thereafter submit reports of findings and recommendations thereon to the
Village Board in the manner prescribed for amendments and special uses.  All
changes in the nature of a general change or amendments in the Zoning
Ordinance of the village shall be enacted only after a public hearing before
the Plan Commission of the village, and after its recommendation to the
President and Board of Trustees.



   (G)   Changing the zoning classification as to a specific piece of
property shall be done only after a public hearing before the Plan Commission
of the village, and after its recommendation to the President and Board of
Trustees.



   (H)   Before any special uses are granted or any planned development
approved there shall be a public hearing before the Plan Commission and the
Plan Commission shall report to the President and Board of Trustees of the
village in its findings in respect thereto.



   (I)   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by
this chapter as may be conferred by the President and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 587-85, passed 6-18-85)



§ 32.28  CONSIDERATION OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   The Village Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission for its
consideration a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public
improvements of any nature.  The Plan Commission may report in relation
thereto if it deems a report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of
the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 587-85, passed 6-18-85)



§ 32.29  EXPENDITURES.



   The Plan Commission may, at the discretion of the Board of Trustees,
employ necessary help whose salaries, wages, and other necessary expenses
shall be provided for by adequate appropriation made by the Board of Trustees
from public funds.  If said Plan Commission shall deem it advisable to
secure technical advice or services, it may be done upon authority from the
Board of Trustees and appropriations by the Board of Trustees therefor.



(Ord. 587-85, passed 6-18-85)



§ 32.30  MEETINGS AND RULES.



   All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson, and at such times as the Plan Commission may determine.  All
hearings conducted by said Plan Commission under this subchapter shall be in
accordance with state statutes.  In all proceedings of the Plan Commission
provided for in this subchapter, the Chairperson, and in the Chairperson's
absence the Vice Chairperson, shall have the power to administer oaths.  All
testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in this subchapter shall
be given under oath.  The Plan Commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official
actions.  A copy of every rule or regulation, every amendment and special
use, and every recommendation, order, requirement, decision or determination
of the Plan Commission under this subchapter shall be filed in the office of
the Village Clerk and shall be a public record.  The Plan Commission shall
adopt its own rules and procedures, not in conflict with this subchapter or
with applicable state statutes.



(Ord. 587-85, passed 6-18-85)



§ 32.31  DECISIONS.



   The Village Board, upon report of the Plan Commission and without
further public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed amendment in
accordance with applicable statutes of the state, or may refer it back to the
Plan Commission for further consideration.



(Ord. 587-85, passed 6-18-85)



§ 32.32  COMBINED WITH ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby combined with the Plan
Commission, and the members of the Plan Commission shall serve the function
of both the Plan Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals for purposes of
the Illinois Municipal Code and all ordinances of the Village of Itasca,
including, but not limited to, the Itasca Subdivision Regulations and Zoning
Ordinance.



   (B)   The present members of the Zoning Board of Appeals are hereby
discharged from their offices.



   (C)   All references to the Plan Commission in the village
ordinances, including, but not limited to the Subdivision Regulations and the
Zoning Ordinance, shall be construed to mean the combined Plan Commission and
Zoning Board of Appeals created by this section.



   (D)   All references to the Zoning Board of Appeals in village
ordinances, including, but not limited to the Subdivision Regulations and the
Zoning Ordinance, shall be construed to mean the combined Plan Commission and
Zoning Board of Appeals created by this section.



(Ord. 868-96, passed 1-16-96)



SEWER AND WATER APPEALS BOARD



§ 32.35  CREATION; MEMBERSHIP; VACANCIES.



   There is hereby created a Sewer and Water Appeals Board consisting of
three members appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees.  The Village President shall be a member and ex officio
chairperson of such Appeals Board.  The Village Administrator shall also be
a member of the Appeals Board.  The third member of the Appeals Board shall
be a trustee of the village. Such members shall be appointed for one year and
shall serve until their successors have been appointed.  Vacancies upon said
Appeals Board shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose
place has become vacant in the manner herein provided for the appointment of
such member.



(Ord. 1274-05, passed 11-1-05)



§ 32.36  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Sewer and Water Appeals Board shall have the final authority to
hear and decide appeals from a denial of hardship by the Building
Commissioner pursuant to §§ 52.07 or 53.02 of this code.  A decision of
the Appeals Board with respect to a property owner's appeal from a denial of
hardship shall constitute the final decision of the village, subject to
review pursuant to ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, § 3-101 et seq.



(Ord. 1274-05, passed 11-1-05)



YOUTH COUNCIL



§ 32.45  RE-ESTABLISHMENT.



   The corporate authorities of the Village of Itasca hereby re-establish
the “Village of Itasca Youth Council,” which was previously established
in Resolution No. 209-96, as a volunteer council with the primary purpose of
promoting youth welfare in the Itasca area.



(Ord. 1697-14, passed 5-20-14)



§ 32.46  TERMS; ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Village of Itasca Youth Council shall consist of 12
members.  The Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, shall appoint nine members of the Council.  The Police Department,
the Park District, and School District No. 10 shall each appoint one member
of the Council. The Village President, with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees, shall appoint one of the Council's members to be the
Chairman of the Council.



   (B)   Terms of the members of the Council appointed by the Village
President shall be for three years. Three initial members of the Council
shall have full three year terms, while three initial members of the Council
shall be appointed for a two year term, and while the remaining three initial
members of the Council shall be appointed for a one year term. Terms of the
members of the Council appointed by the Police Department, the Park District,
and School District No. 10 shall be for one year only.



   (C)   Members of the Council are not required to be residents or
registered electors of the village.



(Ord. 1697-14, passed 5-20-14)



§ 32.47  VACANCIES.



   Any vacancy on the Council shall be filled in the same manner as
original appointments and shall be for the length of time remaining for that
term.



(Ord. 1697-14, passed 5-20-14)



§ 32.48  EXPENDING FUNDS; INCURRING OBLIGATIONS.



   In no event shall the Council be authorized to expend village funds or
incur obligations on behalf of the village without the prior approval of the
corporate authorities.



(Ord. 1697-14, passed 5-20-14)



§ 32.49  ENLISTMENT OF VOLUNTEERS.



   The Council is authorized to enlist the volunteer services of such
other members of the community who will assist in achieving the duties and
goals set forth herein, recognizing that broad community involvement will
assure broad community support.



(Ord. 1697-14, passed 5-20-14)



§ 32.50  DUTIES.



   The Council shall:



   (A)   Make or cause to be made studies and surveys of community
conditions and problems affecting youth.



   (B)   Recommend plans for the improvement of opportunities for the
wholesome development of youth in the village; propose necessary action for
the protection of children from exposure to harmful influences and
conditions; propose plans for prevention of delinquency and for development
of services for the rehabilitation of delinquent children.



   (C)   Coordinate and integrate governmental plans and public and
private services affecting the welfare of youth.



   (D)   Request and obtain such cooperation, assistance and data from
governmental departments and public and private agencies as may be reasonably
necessary to carry out its work; create subcommittees, composed of members or
non-members of the Council, to aid and assist in the work of the Council.



(Ord. 1697-14, passed 5-20-14)



§ 32.51  MEETINGS.



   The Council shall meet at such times as may be determined by the Youth
Council, and such meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairman or any
three members thereof. Not more than two meetings shall be held in any
calendar month. All meetings shall be subject to the Illinois Open Meetings
Act. Absence from three Youth Council meetings within any 12 month period
shall constitute the resignation of a member, unless the Youth Council, by
majority vote, allows an exception.



(Ord. 1697-14, passed 5-20-14)



§ 32.52  REPORTS TO THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   On or before March 1 of each year, the Council shall prepare and submit
to the Board of Trustees a summary report of its operations during the
preceding calendar year, along with a statement of projected plans
recommended for action by the Board of Trustees and a request for allocations
of necessary funds.



(Ord. 1697-14, passed 5-20-14)



CHAPTER 33:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



General Provisions



   33.01   Department created



   33.02   Duties of Department



   33.03   Office of Chief and Director of Police created



   33.04   Duties of Chief



   33.05   Custody of stolen property



   33.06   Serving processes



   33.07   Witness fees



   33.08   Rules and regulations



   33.09   Special police officers



   33.10   Ranks for officers



Police Pension Fund



   33.20   Established



   33.21   Administration



   33.22   Appointment and election of members



   33.23   Sufficient funds required; wage deductions



   33.24   Duties



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 33.01  DEPARTMENT CREATED.



   There is hereby created a Police Department, an executive department of
the village.  The Police Department shall consist of the Village Marshal who
shall be the Chief of Police, and such other members as may be provided for
from time to time by the President and Board of Trustees.  The Police
Department is organized into a division for Field Operations and a division
for Support Services, and each division shall be headed by a division
commander who will be exempt from civil service jurisdiction and designated
by the Chief of Police with the concurrence of the President and Board of
Trustees.  Division commanders shall serve solely at the discretion of the
Chief of Police.



('52 Code, Ch. 6, § 68)  (Am. Ord. 748-92, passed 9-1-92)



§ 33.02  DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to
the enforcement of all ordinances of the village, and of all statutes
effective in the village, and to preserve order and prevent infractions of
the law and to arrest violators thereof.  Every member of the Police
Department is hereby declared to be a conservator of the peace.



('52 Code, Ch. 6, § 69)



§ 33.03  OFFICE OF CHIEF AND DIRECTOR OF POLICE CREATED.



   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Chief of Police.  The
Chief shall be appointed by the President by and with the consent of the
Board of Trustees.  The Chief shall be the chief executive officer of the
Police Department.  The position of Chief of Police shall be exempt from
Civil Service jurisdiction.



   (B)   There is hereby created the office of the Director of Police.
The Director shall be appointed by the President by and with the consent of
the Board of Trustees. The Director shall be responsible for the oversight of
all Police Department functions, being the final department authority on all
matters of policy and discipline. The Director of Police shall have the same
powers, duties, responsibilities and authority as the Chief of Police, as
outlined in this chapter, the Village Code of Ordinances, and the village’s
ordinances and resolutions, except that the Director shall not be a sworn
officer and shall not have the power of arrest.



   (C)   The President may appoint and with the consent of the Board of
Trustees either a Chief of Police or a Director of Police but not both
concurrently.



('52 Code, Ch. 6, § 70)  (Ord 469-77, passed 6-28-77; Am. Ord. 748-92,
passed 9-1-92; Am. Ord. 1817-16, passed 9-20-16)



§ 33.04  DUTIES OF CHIEF.



   The Chief of Police shall be keeper of the village jail, and shall have
custody of all persons incarcerated therein.  The Chief shall keep such
records and make such reports concerning the activities of the Police
Department as may be required by statute or ordinance. The Chief shall be
responsible for the performance by the Police Department of all its
functions, and all persons who are members of the department shall serve
subject to the orders of the Chief of Police.



('52 Code, Ch. 6, § 71)



§ 33.05  CUSTODY OF STOLEN PROPERTY.



   The Chief of Police shall be custodian of all lost, abandoned or stolen
property in the village.



('52 Code, Ch. 6, § 72)



§ 33.06  SERVING PROCESSES.



   The Chief of Police shall be authorized to serve writs, summons, and
other processes, but no police officer shall serve any such summons or
process except on the order of the Chief of Police or of the Village
President.



('52 Code, Ch. 6, § 73)



§ 33.07  WITNESS FEES.



   Every member of the Police Department shall appear as a witness
whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of a village
ordinance or of a state or federal law.  But no such member shall receive
any witness fee for such services in any action or suit to which the village
is a party. All fees due for such services shall, if paid, be turned over to
the Village Treasurer.



('52 Code, Ch. 6, § 74)



§ 33.08  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Chief of Police may make or describe such rules and regulations for
the guidance of the members of the Department as the Chief shall see fit. 
Such rules, when approved by the President and Board of Trustees, shall be
binding on such members.



('52 Code, Ch. 6, § 75)



§ 33.09  SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS.



   The President, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, may appoint
any reputable person as a special police officer to serve for such term and
on such conditions as may be designated by the terms of such appointment. 
Special police officers shall have the powers and duties of a conservator of
the peace, and shall receive no compensation from the Village unless such
compensation is ordered by the Board of Trustees.  Appointments may be
revoked at any time by the President, the Board of Trustees, or the Chief of
Police.



('52 Code, Ch. 6, § 76)



§ 33.10  RANKS FOR OFFICERS.



   (A)   The following ranks for officers of the Police Department are
hereby established, in declining order:  Chief of Police, two Deputy Police
Chiefs, six Sergeants, and 19 patrol officers.  The Deputy Police Chief
positions shall be filled at the discretion of the Police Chief and with the
advice and consent of the Village Board.  The rank of Deputy Police Chief
shall be below the rank of Police Chief and above that of Sergeant.  The
Police Chief shall retain the discretion to remove, with or without cause,
any individual from the position of Deputy Chief.



   (B)   All other ranks shall be filled by appointment by the Board of
Police Commissioners.



(Ord 469-77, passed 6-28-77; Am. Ord. 748-92, passed 9-1-92; Am. Ord.
1035-99, passed 10-5-99)



POLICE PENSION FUND



§ 33.20  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established a Police Pension Fund for the benefit of
its police officers as defined in ILCS Ch. 40, Act 5, § 3-101 and of their
widows, children, and certain other dependents, to be administered in the
manner prescribed by statute.



(Ord. 451-76, passed 4-20-76)



§ 33.21  ADMINISTRATION.



   There is hereby established a Board of Trustees of the Police Pension
Fund of the village (Police Pension Board) to administer the pension fund and
to designate the beneficiaries thereof.  Said Board shall be composed of
five members, a majority of whom shall be residents of the village.  No
member of the Board shall receive any money or other compensation from the
fund as payment for services performed by such board member.



(Ord. 451-76, passed 4-20-76)



§ 33.22  APPOINTMENT AND ELECTION OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   Two members of the Board shall be appointed by the President
of the Board of Trustees of the village.  All successors of such appointed
members shall serve for two-year terms or until their successors are
appointed and qualified.



   (B)   The third and fourth members of the Board shall be elected
from the regular police force by the active members thereof.  Elections
shall be held biennially on the third Monday in April starting in 1978.  All
elections shall be in the manner prescribed by statute.  If there is a
vacancy of any member under this section by reason of the death, resignation
or inability to act of any member, that member's successor shall be elected
for the unexpired term at a special election to be called by the Board and
conducted as above.



   (C)   The fifth member shall be elected by and from among the
beneficiaries of the fund, as and when a class of beneficiaries is created. 
Such election shall also be held biennially on the third Monday in April for
two-year terms.



(Ord. 451-76, passed 4-20-76)



§ 33.23  SUFFICIENT FUNDS REQUIRED; WAGE DEDUCTIONS.



   The village shall maintain reserves and annually levy a tax sufficient
to meet statutory requirements.  Furthermore, there shall be deductions from
the salaries and wages of all policemen at the rate prescribed by statute,
starting from the time the Village Board of Trustees determines that the
population of the Village exceeded 5,000 inhabitants.  All of said moneys
collected, together with any donations or gifts, shall be to the credit of
the pension fund.



(Ord. 451-76, passed 4-20-76)



§ 33.24  DUTIES.



   The Police Pension Board shall elect its officers, hold board meetings,
and control and manage the pension fund, including making investments as
prescribed by statute, submit annual lists and reports, pay expenses, and
further, pay benefits to those beneficiaries entitled by statute, and do all
other acts and things permitted by law for the purpose of which this pension
fund was created.



(Ord. 451-76, passed 4-20-76)



CHAPTER 34: TAXATION AND REVENUE



Section



General Provisions



   34.01   Fiscal year



Municipal Automobile Renting Use Tax



   34.10   Tax imposed



   34.11   Who must pay tax



   34.12   Payment of tax



Eating Establishment Tax



   34.15   Eating establishment tax



Municipal Automobile Renting Occupation Tax



   34.20   Tax imposed



   34.21   Report to be filed



   34.22   Payment of tax



Hotel and Motel Occupancy Tax



   34.30   Definition



   34.31   Tax imposed



   34.32   Payment and collection



   34.33   Administration



   34.34   Return to be filed



   34.35   Payment of tax



   34.36   Inspection of books



   34.37   Enforcement; hearing



   34.38   Interest



   34.39   Disposition of proceeds



Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax and Municipal Service Occupation Tax



   34.40   Municipal retailers' occupation tax



   34.41   Municipal service occupation tax



Municipal Gas Utility Tax



   34.45   Definitions



   34.46   Tax imposed



   34.47   Exemptions from tax; construction with other taxes



   34.48   Return filed; payment of tax



   34.49   Credit issues; limitations; penalties



Municipal Electric Utility Tax



   34.55   Definitions



   34.56   Tax imposed; implementation and collection of tax



   34.57   Exemption from tax; construction with other laws



   34.58   Tax remittance and return



   34.59   Books and records; credits and refunds; penalties



Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee



   34.60   Definitions



   34.61   Registration of telecommunications providers



   34.62   Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee



   34.63   Collection, enforcement, and administration of
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fees



   34.64   Compliance with other laws



   34.65   Existing franchises and licenses



   34.66   Penalties



   34.67   Enforcement



Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility



   34.71   Scope



   34.72   Definitions



   34.73   Notices



   34.74   Late payment



   34.75   Payment



   34.76   Certain credits and refunds



   34.77   Audit procedure



   34.78   Appeal



   34.79   Hearing



   34.80   Interest and penalties



   34.81   Abatement



   34.82   Installment contracts



   34.83   Statute of limitations



   34.84   Voluntary disclosure



   34.85   Publication of tax ordinances



   34.86   Review procedure



   34.87   Application



 



   34.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 34.01  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year for the village shall begin on the first day of May of
each year and end on the last day of April of the following year.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 114)



MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX



§ 34.10  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this village an
automobile which is rented from a renter outside the state and which is
titled or registered with an agency of this state's government in this
village at the rate of 1% of the rental price of such automobile while this
subchapter is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 8-11-8, of the Illinois Municipal Code.



(Ord. 295-69, passed 8-19-69)



§ 34.11  WHO MUST PAY TAX.



   The tax provided for in this subchapter shall be collected from the
persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given
as being in this village.



(Ord. 524-82, passed 1-5-82)



§ 34.12  PAYMENT OF TAX.



   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be paid to the Illinois
Department of Revenue.



(Ord. 524-82, passed 1-5-82)



EATING ESTABLISHMENT TAX



§ 34.15  EATING ESTABLISHMENT TAX.



   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following words or
phrases shall mean:



      GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, property and
services, at a retail business subject to this section. GROSS RECEIPTS shall
not include amounts paid for federal, state and local taxes, including the
tax levied by this section, and shall not include amounts paid as gratuities
for the employees of the place for eating.



      OWNER. Any person(s) or legal entity having an ownership interest
in or conducting the operation of a place for eating.



      PATRON or PATRONS. Any natural individual, firm, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, public or private
corporation, limited liability company, club, fraternal organization or a
receiver, executor, trustee, conservator, or other representative appointed
by order of any court.



      PLACES FOR EATING or PLACE FOR EATING. All premises located
within the corporate limits of the Village of Itasca where prepared food is
sold at retail for immediate consumption, with seating provided for that
consumption, whether consumed on premises or not, and whether or not such
places for eating use is conducted along with any other use(s) in a common
premise or business establishment. PLACES FOR EATING or PLACE FOR EATING
shall include, but is not limited to, those establishments commonly known as
restaurants, eating places, drive-in restaurants, buffets, bakeries, banquet
facilities, cafeterias, cafes, lunch counters, fast food outlets, catering
services, coffee shops, diners, sandwich shops, soda fountains, bars,
cocktail lounges, soft drink parlors, ice cream parlors, tea rooms,
delicatessens, hotels, motels, wine shops or clubs, or any other
establishment which sells at retail prepared food for immediate consumption.
PLACES FOR EATING or PLACE FOR EATING shall not include Illinois not for
profit corporations or religious corporations in good standing with the
Office of the Illinois Secretary of State.



      PREPARED FOOD. Any solid, liquid (including both alcoholic and
non-alcoholic liquid), powder or item used or intended to be used for human
internal consumption, whether simple, compound, or mixed, cooked or raw, and
which has been prepared for immediate consumption.



      SOLD AT RETAIL. To sell for use or consumption in exchange for a
consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter or any other
value, and not for resale, with said transaction being subject to either the
Illinois Retailers’ Occupation Tax (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.)
or the Illinois Service Occupation Tax (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.)



      TAX. The tax imposed by this chapter.



   (B)   Tax imposed.



      (1)   There is hereby levied and imposed upon owners of places
for eating within the corporate limits of the Village of Itasca a tax at the
rate of 1% of gross receipts received for prepared food sold at retail by the
owner on or after October 1, 2011.



      (2)   The owner of a place for eating may collect an amount
from patrons who purchase prepared food at the place for eating which shall
reimburse the owner for the tax imposed on the owner by this section. Failure
of an owner to collect the tax from patrons purchasing prepared food at the
place for eating shall not absolve the owner of the duty to pay the tax.



      (3)   The tax levied shall be paid in addition to any and all
other taxes and charges.



      (4)   In the event the prepared food is sold at retail on
credit, an owner shall not be liable for payment of the tax imposed on such a
sale until payment is received.



   (C)   Administration; enforcement. The Village Administrator or his
or her designee is hereby designated as the Administrative Enforcement
Officer of the tax hereby imposed. The Village Administrator or his or her
designee may enter the premises of any place for eating for inspection,
examination, copying, and auditing of books and records including, but not
limited to, Illinois Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Illinois Service
Occupation Tax returns filed with the Illinois Department of Revenue, in
order to effectuate the proper administration and assure collection of the
tax. To the extent reasonably possible, entry shall be done in a manner that
is least disruptive to the business of the place for eating. It shall be
unlawful for anyone to prevent, hinder, or interfere with the Village
Administrator or his or her designee in the discharge of their duties in the
performance of this section. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep
accurate and complete books and records to which the Village Administrator or
his or her designee shall have full access to at all times and which records
shall include a daily sheet showing the amount of gross receipts received
during each business day. In the event that the inspection and examination by
the Village Administrator or his or her designee discloses a discrepancy in
excess of 5% from the information furnished by the owner and the tax paid,
the cost of the inspection and examination shall be borne by the owner.



   (D)   Transmittal of tax revenue by owner; delinquency.



      (1)   The owner or owners of each place for eating shall file
a sworn monthly tax return showing the gross receipts received during each
calendar month upon forms prescribed by the Village Administrator or his or
her designee. The return shall be filed within 20 days after the end of the
month covered by the return, with the tax imposed being due and owing as of
the twentieth day of the month following the month covered by the return.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that the owner of the place for
eating is allowed to file Illinois Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Illinois
Service Occupation Tax returns with the Illinois Department of Revenue at
intervals which are greater than monthly, the owner(s) shall be allowed to
file tax returns with the village for the tax at those greater intervals
provided they provide proof of the filing agreement. At the time of the
filing of the tax returns, the owner shall pay to the Village Administrator
or his or her designee all taxes due for the period to which the tax return
applies.



      (2)   If for any reason any tax due is not timely paid
penalties and interest thereon shall be imposed in accordance with the
provisions of division (I) below.



      (3)   Owner(s) filing tax returns pursuant to this section
shall, at the time of filing such return, pay to the village the amount of
the tax less a commission of 1% of the amount of the tax, which is allowed to
reimburse the owner for the expenses incurred in keeping records, billing,
preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax, and supplying data to the
village upon request. No commission may be claimed by an owner for taxes not
timely remitted to the village.



   (E)   Transmittal of excess tax collections. If any owner collects
an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed, but which amount is
purported to be the collection of the tax, or if an owner collects an amount
upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax imposed and does not for any
reason return the same to the purchaser who paid the same before filing the
return for the period in which such occurred, the owner shall account for and
pay over those amounts to the village along with the tax properly collected.



   (F)   Registration. Every owner maintaining a place for eating in
the Village of Itasca shall register with the Village Administrator or his or
her designee on a date no later than September 1, 2011, or within five
business days of the date of becoming such an owner where the person becomes
an owner after the effective date of this section. A delay in registration
shall not absolve an owner of the obligations imposed by this section.



   (G)    Collection. Whenever any owner fails to pay the tax, the
Village Attorney shall, upon direction of the corporate authorities of the
village, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of the
tax on behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.



   (H)   Suspension of licenses. If the Village President, after
holding a hearing, finds that an owner has willfully failed to pay any tax
imposed by this chapter, that person’s village licenses, including, but not
limited to, any liquor license issued under the Municipal Code, may be
suspended or revoked. Hearings to suspend or revoke a village license shall
be held after notice to the owner. The owner shall have the opportunity to
present evidence in defense of the allegations. The only defenses to any
allegation of a failure to pay a tax shall be that the tax was paid or, where
there is an issue of willfulness, that the violation was not willful. The
rules of evidence shall not apply in the hearing. Any suspension or
revocation of any license(s) shall not absolve or discharge the owner from
liability for the payment of the tax or from prosecution for such offense.



   (I)   Interest; penalties.



      (1)   In the event of a failure by any owner to pay the
village the tax within ten days after it is due, interest shall be imposed
and due upon said tax at a rate of 1% per month commencing as of the first
day of the month following the month for which tax was to have been paid to
the village. In addition, a penalty of 10% of the tax and interest due shall
be assessed and collected against any owner who fails to pay the tax.



      (2)   Any owner found guilty of violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with or unlawfully resisting or
opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section, upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $500 for the first offense, and not less than $100 nor more than $500
for the second and each subsequent offense in any 180-day period. Each day
that any violation of this section exists, shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. Any owner subjected to the penalties provided for by this
division (I) shall not be discharged or released from the payment of any tax
due. These fines may be imposed in addition to the suspension or revocation
of licenses as set forth in division (H) above.



(Ord. 1576-11, passed 7-19-11)



MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX



§ 34.20  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
renting automobiles in this village at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts
from such rentals made in the course of such business while this subchapter
is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
8-11-7, of the Illinois Municipal Code.



(Ord. 525-82, passed 1-5-82)



§ 34.21  REPORT TO BE FILED.



   Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on
or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State
Department of Revenue required by §§ 2 and 3 of "An Act in Relation to a
Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal
Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption," approved June 29, 1933, as
amended.



(Ord. 525-82, passed 1-5-82)



§ 34.22  PAYMENT OF TAX.



   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
renting of automobiles during the preceding month.



(Ord. 525-82, passed 1-5-82)



HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX



§ 34.30  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicated or requires a different meaning.



   HOTEL.  Every building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised
and held out to the public to be a place where lodging, or lodging and food,
or apartments, or suites or other accommodations are offered for a
consideration to guests, in which ten or more rooms, apartments, suites or
other accommodations are used for the lodging, or lodging and food, for such
guests.



(Ord. 554-83, passed 10-18-83; Am. Ord. 861-96, passed 1-2-96)



§ 34.31  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is hereby established, levied and imposed upon the use and
privilege of renting, leasing or letting of rooms in a motel or hotel in the
village at a rate of 5% of the gross rental receipts from such rental,
leasing or letting.  The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of
said tax shall be borne by the user, lessee or tenant of said rooms.  The
tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes.



(Ord. 554-83, passed 10-18-83; Am. Ord. 652-88, passed 5-17-88; Am. Ord.
715-91, passed 5-21-91; Am. Ord. 716-91, passed 5-28-91)



§ 34.32  PAYMENT AND COLLECTION.



   The owner and operator of each hotel or motel and the person to whom
the license to operate said hotel or motel shall have been issued by the
village shall bear, jointly and severally, the duty to collect the tax from
each user, lessee or tenant of rooms in such hotel or motel.  Every person
required to collect the tax levied by this subchapter shall secure said tax
from the user, lessee or tenant of a room or rooms at the time that such
person collects the price, charge or rent to which it applies.



(Ord. 554-83, passed 10-18-83)



§ 34.33  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Village Collector hereby is designated as the administration and
enforcement officer of the tax hereby imposed on behalf of the village.  It
shall be the responsibility and duty of the Village Collector to collect all
amounts due the village from the owners, operators and licensees of hotels
and motels in the village.



(Ord. 554-83, passed 10-18-83)



§ 34.34  RETURN TO BE FILED.



   A sworn quarterly hotel and motel occupancy tax return shall be filed
by each owner, operator or licensee of each hotel or motel in the village on
forms prescribed by the Village Collector, showing all receipts from each
renting, leasing or letting of rooms during the preceding quarter.



(Ord. 554-83, passed 10-18-83)



§ 34.35  PAYMENT OF TAX.



   Each return shall be accompanied by payment to the village of all taxes
due and owing for the quarter covered by the return, and shall be filed and
paid no later than the 15th of the month following the end of each calendar
quarter; provided, however, that the person making said return may retain an
amount of money equal to 2% of the tax due as compensation for services
rendered in the collection and payment of such tax.



(Ord. 554-83, passed 10-18-83)



§ 34.36  INSPECTION OF BOOKS.



   The Village Collector or any person certified by him as the Collector's
deputy or representative may enter the premises of any hotel or motel for the
purpose of inspection and examination of its books and records for the proper
administration of this subchapter, and for the enforcement of collection of
the tax hereby imposed.  It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or
interfere with the Village Collector or the Collector's authorized deputy or
representative in the discharge of the Collector's duties hereunder.



(Ord. 554-83, passed 10-18-83)  Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.37  ENFORCEMENT; HEARING.



   (A)   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any taxes herein
provided, or when any owner, operator, or licensee of a hotel or motel in the
village shall fail to collect the tax hereby imposed from any person who has
the ultimate liability for payment of the same, the Village Attorney shall,
upon request of the Village Collector, bring or cause to be brought an action
to enforce the collection and payment of said tax on behalf of the village in
any court of competent jurisdiction.



   (B)   If the Village President, after a hearing held by or for the
President, shall find that any hotel or motel owner, operator or licensee has
wilfully evaded his responsibility to collect the tax imposed by this
subchapter, the President may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by
such tax evader.  Said person shall have an opportunity to be heard at such
hearing, to be held not less than five days after notice of the time and
place thereof.  The notice shall be signed by the Village President and
either delivered personally or sent by certified mail with proper postage
prepaid to said hotel or motel owner, operator, or licensee, at said parties'
last known place of business.  The notice shall be deemed to have been given
on the date personally served, and if mailed on the date of mailing.  Any
suspension or conviction resulting from such hearing shall not relieve or
discharge any civil liability for non-payment of the tax due.



(Ord. 554-83, passed 10-18-83)



§ 34.38  INTEREST.



   In the event of failure by any person to pay to the Village Collector
the tax required hereunder within 30 days after the same shall be due,
interest shall accumulate and be due upon said tax at the prime rate at the
First National Bank of Chicago.



(Ord. 554-83, passed 10-18-83)



§ 34.39  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.



   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this
subchapter, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the treasury
of the village and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of
the village, to be used solely for the promotion of tourism, conventions and
other special events.



(Ord. 554-83, passed 10-18-83)



MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX



§ 34.40  MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property at retail within the village
at the rate of ½% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course
of such business, subject to and in accordance with the provisions of ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.3.



   (B)   The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Illinois Department of Revenue.  The Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 1256-05, passed 5-3-05)



§ 34.41  MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of making sales of service within the village at the rate of ½% of
the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by said
person either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of
real estate as an incident to a sale of service, subject to and in accordance
with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-11.4.



   (B)   The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Illinois Department of Revenue.  The Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 1256-05, passed 5-3-05)



MUNICIPAL GAS UTILITY TAX



§ 34.45  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as the
case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit,
services and property of every kind and material and for all services
rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of
materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever,
provided that GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include any amounts specifically
excluded from the definition of gross receipts in section 8-11-2(d) of the
Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2).



   PERSONS. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the State of Illinois or political
subdivision thereof, any state university created by statute, or a receiver,
trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.



   VILLAGE. The Village of Itasca, DuPage County, Illinois.



(Ord. 1571-11, passed 6-7-11)



§ 34.46  TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following
occupations or privileges: persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the village, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the
gross receipts therefrom.



   (B)   The tax provided for in this subchapter shall be based on the
gross receipts, as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services
billed on or after July 1, 2011.



(Ord. 1571-11, passed 6-7-11)



§ 34.47  EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX; CONSTRUCTION WITH OTHER TAXES.



   (A)   No tax is imposed by this subchapter with respect to any
transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such
business may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States,
be made subject to taxation by the state or any political subdivision
thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas be subject to taxation under the
provisions of this subchapter for such transactions as are or may become
subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers’
Occupation Tax Act authorized by section 8-11-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.1).



   (B)   Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money or value
of products or services furnished to the village by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereupon or thereunder of poles,
wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s
business.



(Ord. 1571-11, passed 6-7-11)



§ 34.48  RETURN FILED; PAYMENT OF TAX.



   (A)   On or before the last day of August 2011, each taxpayer
subject to this section shall make a return to the Village Treasurer (or his
or her designee) for the month of July 2011, stating:



      (1)   His or her name;



      (2)   His or her principal place of business;



      (3)   His or her gross receipts during those months upon the
basis of which the tax is imposed;



      (4)   Amount of tax;



      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the
corporate authorities of the village or the Village Treasurer (or his or her
designee) may require.



   (B)   On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each
taxpayer subject to this subchapter shall make a like return to the Village
Treasurer for a corresponding one-month period.



   (C)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at
the time of making such return, pay to the Village Treasurer the amount of
tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer
may, if he or she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her
total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the
return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt
adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such
billings and the taxable gross receipts.



(Ord. 1571-11, passed 6-7-11)



§ 34.49  CREDIT ISSUED; LIMITATIONS; PENALTIES.



   (A)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which
was not due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of
a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any tax due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously
paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be
so credited.



   (B)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after
the due date of such amount.



   (C)   Any taxpayer subject to the tax imposed under this subchapter
who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who
willfully violates any other provision of this subchapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine as specified from time to time in § 34.99
of this code, notwithstanding any other provision of § 34.99, and in
addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.



(Ord. 1571-11, passed 6-7-11)



MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX



§ 34.55  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of the tax authorized by this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university credited by statute, or a receiver,
trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.



   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any person having
or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other
affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility,
transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent, or other representative operating within this state under
the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate irrespective
of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located
in this state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary
or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this state.



   PUBLIC UTILITY. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 3-105
of the Public Utilities Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-105) and shall include
telecommunications carriers as defined in section 13-202 of that Act (ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 13-202) and alternative retail electric suppliers as
defined in section 16-102 of that Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-102).



   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility directly in the generation,
production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.



   PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits
of the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.



   TAX COLLECTOR. The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.



   VILLAGE. The village of Itasca, DuPage County, Illinois.



(Ord. 1572-11, passed 6-7-11)



§ 34.56  TAX IMPOSED; IMPLEMENTATION AND COLLECTION OF TAX.



   (A)   Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2) and any and all other applicable authority, a
tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity
acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate
limits of the village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis
for each purchaser:



 


Kilowatt Hours Used Or Consumed In A Month

 

Cents Per Kilowatt Hour






First 2,000

 

0.61




Next 48,000

 

0.40




Next 50,000

 

0.36




Next 400,000

 

0.35




Next 500,000

 

0.34




Next 2,000,000

 

0.32




Next 2,000,000

 

0.315




Next 5,000,000

 

0.31




Next 10,000,000

 

0.305




All in excess of 20,000,000

 

0.30





 



   (B)   The tax imposed by this subchapter with respect to the use or
consumption of electricity by residential and nonresidential customers shall
begin with the first bill issued on or after July 1, 2011, and shall be
applicable thereafter.



   (C)   Collection of tax.



      (1)   Subject to the provision of § 34.57(A) of this
subchapter regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax
imposed under this subchapter shall be collected from the purchaser by the
person maintaining a place of business in the state who delivers electricity
to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the
person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid is
recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the
electricity.



      (2)   Any tax required to be collected by this subchapter and
any such tax which is collected by a person delivering electricity shall
constitute a debt owed to the village by the person delivering the
electricity; provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be
allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity, the charges
for which are written off as uncollectible; and provided further, that if
such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be
obligated to remit such tax.



      (3)   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax
from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add
to such gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person
delivering electricity for the expenses incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data
to the village upon request. For purposes of this section, any partial
payment not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be
for the delivery of electricity. If the person delivering electricity fails
to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required
to pay the tax directly to the village. Persons delivering electricity who
file returns pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall, at the time
of filing such return, pay the village the amount of the tax collected
pursuant to this subchapter.



(Ord. 1572-11, passed 6-7-11)



§ 34.57  EXEMPTION FROM TAX; CONSTRUCTION WITH OTHER LAWS.



   (A)   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the village shall
be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Village
Administrator (or his or her designee) and furnishes that number to the
person who delivers the electricity, and certifies to that person that the
sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.



      (1)   Application for resale number; issuance. If a person who
receives electricity in the village claims to be an authorized reseller of
electricity, such person shall apply to the Village Administrator (or his or
her designee) for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which
will show the village why such applicant is not liable for the tax imposed by
this subchapter on any of such purchases of electricity and shall furnish
such additional information as the village may reasonably require. Upon
approval of the application, the Village Administrator (or his or her
designee) shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the
number to the applicant.



      (2)   Cancellation of resale number. The Village Administrator
(or his or her designee) may cancel any resale number which is obtained
through misrepresentation, or which is used to obtain electricity used or
consumed by such person tax free when such actions in fact are not for
resale, or which no longer applies because such person has discontinued
making resales.



      (3)   Partial resale. If a reseller has acquired electricity
partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay
the tax imposed by this subchapter directly to the village pursuant to §
34.58(B) of this subchapter on the amount of electricity that that reseller
uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to § 34.56(C) of this
subchapter and remit the tax pursuant to § 34.58(A) of this subchapter on
the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser. Any
person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number
and complying with all other conditions of this subchapter shall be excused
from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller; provided, that such person reports to the Village
Administrator (or his or her designee) the total amount of electricity
delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the Village
Administrator (or his or her designee) may reasonably require.



   (B)   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue
measures imposed by the village, the state or any other political subdivision
of the state.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, the
tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection
of the tax would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or
the constitution or statutes of the state of Illinois.



(Ord. 1572-11, passed 6-7-11)



§ 34.58  TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN.



   (A)   Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis make and file a
tax return in a form prescribed by the Village Administrator (or his or her
designee). The tax return shall be due on or before the last day of the month
following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be
collected under § 34.56(C) of this subchapter. The tax collectors filing
returns pursuant to this subchapter shall at the time of filing such return
pay the village the amount of the tax imposed by this subchapter.



   (B)   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax
from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under § 34.57(A) of
this subchapter, then the purchaser shall file a tax return in a form
prescribed by the Village Administrator (or his or her designee) and pay the
tax directly to the village on or before the last day of the month following
the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.



(Ord. 1572-11, passed 6-7-11)



§ 34.59  BOOKS AND RECORDS; CREDITS AND REFUNDS; PENALTIES.



   (A)   Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the
tax imposed by this subchapter, shall keep accurate books and records of the
business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting
the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability
under this subchapter. The books and records shall be subject to and
available for inspection at all times during business hours of the day.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this subchapter, in
order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the village, no person
shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this
subchapter unless such person files a claim for refund or credit within one
year after the date on which the tax was paid.



   (C)   Any taxpayer subject to the tax imposed under this subchapter
who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully
violates any other provision of this subchapter shall be punished by a fine
as specified from time to time in § 34.99 of this code. In addition to the
fine herein set forth, such person shall be liable in a civil action for the
amount of tax due and unpaid.



(Ord. 1572-11, passed 6-7-11)



TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE



§ 34.60  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:



   GROSS CHARGES.   The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for
the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within
the village, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in
money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services,
and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In
case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and
when paid. GROSS CHARGES for private line service shall include charges
imposed at each channel point within the village, charges for the channel
mileage between each channel point within the village, and charges for that
portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within the village.
However, GROSS CHARGES shall not include:



      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a
charge made under: (i) the fee imposed by this section, (ii) additional
charges added to a purchaser's bill under Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the
Public Utilities Act, (iii) amounts collected under Section 8-11-17 of the
Illinois Municipal Code, (iv) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications
Excise Tax Act, (v) 911 surcharges, or (vi) the tax imposed by Section 4251
of the Internal Revenue Code;



      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received
outside the village;



      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the
storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of
data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment
includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also
includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;



      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment
that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such
charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;



      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under Section
9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and
during the period of time specified by the village;



      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only
to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit other
than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such services;



      (7)   Bad debts ( BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is
related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise
deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as
determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and
pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment
is made);



      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunications devices; or



      (9)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided to the billage.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.   Any municipal street, alley, water or public
right-of-way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including
utility easements wherein the village has acquired the right and authority to
locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications
facilities. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal
village property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence
and shall not include village buildings and other structures or improvements,
regardless of whether they are situated in the public right-of-way.



   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE, or any like
term, means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State
of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such
place of business or agent or other representative is located here
permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is
licensed to do business in this state.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL.   The transmitting, supplying,
or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SERVICE ADDRESS.   The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined location,
as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime
systems, air-to-ground systems, and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the
location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as
defined by the location in Illinois where bills are sent.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.   Includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio
services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic
or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics,
laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context
clearly requires otherwise, TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also include wireless
telecommunications as hereinafter defined. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are
used to act on the form, content, code, and Protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for
use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales
for resale. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable
services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of
1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or
cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee
payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the Rules
of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as
now or hereafter amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.   Any telecommunications retailer; and
any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns,
operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER or RETAILER or CARRIER.   Includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at
retail as defined in this section. The village may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any
retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the
satisfaction of the village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection
and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such
retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications
in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer
maintaining a place of business within the village.



   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS.   Includes cellular mobile telephone
services, personal wireless services as defined in Section 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C. §
332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services, and paging services.



(Ord. 975-97, passed 11-4-97)



§ 34.61  REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS.



   (A)   Every telecommunications provider as defined by this chapter
shall register with the village within 30 days after the effective date of
this chapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later,
on a form to be provided by the village, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to § 34.63(C)
of this chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this
section.



   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the
village pursuant to division (A) hereof has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by § 34.63(C), as
the case may be, to the village within 30 days from the date of the
occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the
telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return on
file with the village.



(Ord. 975-97, passed 11-4-97)



§ 34.62  MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.



   (A)   A village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is
hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one
percent of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to
service addresses within the village for telecommunications originating or
received in the village.



   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this chapter, the village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights-of-way within the village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this chapter
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.



   (C)   The village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in § 34.63 of this chapter.



(Ord. 975-97, passed 11-4-97)



§ 34.63  COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES.



   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from
each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the village
infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service
address.



   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the Village Administrator the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the village not later than the last day of the month subsequent
to the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however,
that the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2% of
the village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse
itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.



   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the village
shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Village
Administrator, which shall contain such information as the Village
Administrator may reasonably require.



   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected
pursuant to this chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee
collected by such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by
the telecommunications retailer to the village.  The charge imposed under
division (A) hereof by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this
chapter shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications
retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable
at law in the same manner as the original charge for such services.



   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure
maintenance fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this
chapter, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then
such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due,
or to become due, under this chapter, from the telecommunications retailer
who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the Village Administrator
may request, and telecommunications retailer shall provide, written
substantiation for such credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made
more than three years after the date of the erroneous payment unless, the
credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by the village
within the applicable statutory period of limitations, and the credit derives
from an overpayment made by the same telecommunications retailer during the
applicable statutory period of limitations.



   (F)   Amounts paid under this chapter by telecommunications
retailers shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following
acts as described immediately below:



      (1)   "Gross charges" for purposes of the Telecommunications
Excise Tax Act;



      (2)   "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility
tax as prescribed in Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code;



      (3)   "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal
telecommunications tax as prescribed in Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois
Municipal Code;



      (4)   "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross
revenue of public utilities prescribed in Section 2-202 of the Public
Utilities Act.



   (G)   The village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit
the books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this
chapter to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly
accounted to the village for the village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any
underpayment of the amount of the village infrastructure maintenance fee due
to the village by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the
village plus five percent of the total amount of the underpayment determined
in an audit, plus any costs incurred by the village in conducting the audit,
in an amount not to exceed five percent of the total amount of the
underpayment determined in an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the village
within 21 days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.



   (H)   The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, may
promulgate such further or additional regulations concerning the
administration and enforcement of this chapter, consistent with its
provisions, as may be required from time to time and shall notify all
telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant to § 34.61 of this
chapter of such regulations.



(Ord. 975-97, passed 11-4-97)



§ 34.64  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall excuse any person or entity from
obligations imposed under any law, including but not limited to:



   (A)   Generally applicable taxes; and



   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of
or repair of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to free
standing towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as
provided; and



   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such
generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over,
under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and



   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code
concerning uses or structures not located on, over, or within the
right-of-way.



(Ord. 975-97, passed 11-4-97)



§ 34.65  EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES.



   Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between
telecommunications retailers and the village entered into before the
effective date of this chapter regarding the use of public rights-of-way
shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any
fees, charges or other compensation to the extent waived.



(Ord. 975-97, passed 11-4-97)



§ 34.66  PENALTIES.



   Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of the
Village Municipal Code.



(Ord. 975-97, passed 11-4-97)



§ 34.67  ENFORCEMENT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 975-97, passed 11-4-97)



LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY



§ 34.71  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the village's
procedures in connection with all of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.72  DEFINITIONS.



   Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them
as follows:



   ACT.   The Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.   The Village's President and Board of Trustees.



   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR.   The Village's Administrator is charged with
the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered
taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized
by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead.
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms
of this subchapter to give full effect to this subchapter. The exercise of
such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with
this subchapter and the Act.



   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX.   Each tax imposed by the
village that is collected or administered by the village, not an agency or
department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the village other
than infrastructure maintenance fees.



   NOTICE.   Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice
or communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.



   TAX ORDINANCE.   Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes
any locally imposed and administered tax.



   TAXPAYER.   Any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes
the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the village.



   VILLAGE.   The Village of Itasca, Illinois.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.73  NOTICES.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be
given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar
days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other
scheduled act of the local tax administrator.



   (B)   The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:



      (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail,
addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address; or



      (2)   Personal service or delivery.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.74  LATE PAYMENT.



   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to
the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it
is (a) physically received by the village on or before the due date, or (b)
received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S.
Postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village,
with adequate postage prepaid.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.75  PAYMENT.



   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in
the following order:  first to the tax due for the applicable period; second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and third to the penalty for
the applicable period.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.76  CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.



   (A)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily
paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a
locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.



   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund
shall be within four years after the end of the calendar year in which
payment in error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of
locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person
who has not paid the amounts directly to the village.



   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be
as follows:



      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator
in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:



         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered
tax subject to the claim;



         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and
administered tax subject to the claim;



         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim
and the cancelled check or receipt for the payment;



         (d)   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an
amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and



         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in
connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and
penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount
overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit
given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the village.



      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt by the local tax
administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax
administrator shall either:



         (a)   Grant the claim; or



         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with
a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.



      (3)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in
whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for
refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of 3% per annum, based on a
year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the
overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.77  AUDIT PROCEDURE.



   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax
shall comply with the notice requirements of this subchapter.



   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The tax;



      (2)   The time period of the audit; and



      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made
available for the auditor.



   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and
if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable
to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer
within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.



   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted.  The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more
than 30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the
local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event
the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing,
that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.



   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have
given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be
kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for
inspection by the village.



   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the village.  If the
taxpayer or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit
within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax
determination and assessment based on the tax administrator's determination
of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.



   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of
the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.



   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect
local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.78  APPEAL.



   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a
taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice
of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding
any tax.  The notice shall include the following information:



      (1)   The reason for the assessment;



      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;



      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and



      (4)   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal,
refund and collection process.



   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing.  The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax
administrator within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.



   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed,
the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and
shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for
a date within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.



   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed
within the 45 day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.



   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the
full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of
the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall
the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45 day period.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.79  HEARING.



   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely
written protest and petition for hearing under § 34.78, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.



   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a
continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer.
Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance
granted shall not exceed 14 days.



   (C)   At the hearing, the local tax administrator shall preside and
shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply.



   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator
shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at
the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of
the written decision.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.80  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.



   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.



   (A)   Interest.  The village hereby provides for the amount of
interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the
tax, to be 4% per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days
elapsed.



   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties.  If a tax return is not
filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a
late filing penalty of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on
a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due
shall be imposed.  If no return is filed within the time or manner provided
by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice of
tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty
shall be assessed equal to 10% of the total tax due for the applicable
reporting period for which the return was required to be filed.  A late
filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is
imposed by the controlling ordinance.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.81  ABATEMENT.



   The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate
any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if
the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay
or failure to make a filing.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.82  INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.



   The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer
for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance.  The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing.  Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency.  If the taxpayer fails
to cure the delinquency within the 14 day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator,
the installment contract shall be cancelled without further notice to the
taxpayer.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.83  STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review
all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any
amounts due and owing.  The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving
notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide
any tax still due and owing.



   (B)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than
four years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.



   (C)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year
period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by
the village, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was filed.



   (D)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax
return was filed by the taxpayer.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.84  VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.



   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has
not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from
the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application
with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A
taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the
amount of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four years before the date
of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty
for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the
taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the
taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on
the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the
part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid
and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90
days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under
this section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.85  PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.



   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements.  The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements.  Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Village
Clerk's office.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.86  REVIEW PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. 
Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid,
the lien shall remain in full force and effect. 



   (B)   If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax
administrator shall:



      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;



      (2)   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and



      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed
lien.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.87  APPLICATION.



   This subchapter shall be liberally construed and administered to
supplement all of the village's tax ordinances.  To the extent that any tax
ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this subchapter, this
subchapter shall be controlling.



(Ord. 1053-00, passed 12-19-00)



§ 34.99  PENALTY.



   Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting
or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any
provision of §§ 34.30 through 34.39, except when otherwise specifically
provided, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $500 for the first offense, and not less than $50 nor
more than $500 for the second and each subsequent offense in any 180-day
period.  Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.



(Ord. 554-83, passed 10-18-83)



CHAPTER 35:  VILLAGE POLICIES



Section



   35.01   Fees and charges for public hearings



   35.02   Surety bonds



   35.03   Smoking policy for village buildings



   35.04   Prevailing rate of wages for laborers, workmen and mechanics
employed on public works



   35.05   State Gift Ban Act



§ 35.01  FEES AND CHARGES FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS.



   (A)   A fee shall be charged for all public hearings under the
ordinances of the village in the amount of $50 each, which is exclusive of
publication or any other costs.



   (B)   The petitioners or applicants for public hearings shall
further pay the costs of publication made necessary by or incident to such
public hearings and notice thereof, which charge is in addition to that made
under division (A).



   (C)   All hearing fees and publication costs shall be paid to the
village prior to any final action.



(Ord. 367-71, passed 7-20-71)



§ 35.02  SURETY BONDS.



   (A)   Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the village is required as
a pre-requisite to exercising the duties of any office or position, or to the
issuance of a license or permit or for the exercise of any special privilege,
the surety on such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do
business in this state as a surety company, in the absence of specific
provision to the contrary by ordinance.



   (B)   Whenever in its opinion additional sureties or an additional
surety may be needed on any bond to indemnify the village against loss or
liability because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties or for
any other reason, the village may order a new surety or sureties to be
secured for such bond.  If such new surety or sureties are not procured
within ten days from the time such order is transmitted to the principal on
the bond, or the principal's assignee, the Board shall declare the bond to be
void, and thereupon such principal or assignee shall be deemed to have
surrendered the privilege or position as condition of which bond was required.



('52 Code, Ch. 8, § 118)



§ 35.03  SMOKING POLICY FOR VILLAGE BUILDINGS.



   (A)   It is the policy of the village hereby established, that no
person shall carry any lighted cigarette, pipe, cigar or any other smoking
material into any building or structure owned or occupied by the village, or
to light, or cause to be lighted, any cigarette, pipe, cigar or other smoking
material inside any village building or structure.



   (B)   "No Smoking" signs should be prominently displayed at the
entrances to all such buildings, and receptacles placed for the proper
disposal of smoking materials.



   (C)   The penalties for violation of this section shall be
disciplinary measures respecting village employees, or the fines provided by
§ 10.99, respecting all other persons.



(Ord. 650-88, passed 5-3-88; Am. Ord. 933-96, passed 10-1-96)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 35.04  PREVAILING RATE OF WAGES FOR LABORERS, WORKMEN AND MECHANICS
EMPLOYED ON PUBLIC WORKS.



   (A)   To the extent and as required by "An Act regulating wages of
laborers, mechanics and other workers employed in any public works by the
state, county, city of any public body or any political subdivision or by any
one under contract for public works," approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the
general prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and
other workers engaged in construction of public works coming under the
jurisdiction of the village is hereby ascertained to be the same as the
prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the county area as
determined by the State Department of Labor as of June of the current year, a
copy of that determination being attached to Ord. 746-92 and incorporated
herein by reference.  The definition of any terms appearing in this section
which are also used in aforesaid Act shall be the same as in the Act.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply the
general prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or
employment except public works construction of the village to the extent
required by the aforesaid Act.



   (C)   The Village Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for
inspection by any interested party in the main office of the village this
determination or any revisions of such prevailing rate of wage.



   (D)   The Village Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to
any employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or
association of employees who have filed, or shall file their names and
addresses, requesting copies of any determination stating the particular
rates and the particular class of workers whose wages will be affected by
such rate.



   (E)   The Village Clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of this
ordinance with both the Secretary of State and the State Department of Labor.



   (F)   The Village Clerk shall cause to be published in a newspaper
of general circulation within the area a copy of this ordinance, and such
publication shall constitute notice that the determination is effective and
that this is the determination of this public body.



(Ord. 692-90, passed 5-15-90; Am. Ord. 746-92, passed 5-16-92; Am. Ord.
915-96, passed 5-28-96)



§ 35.05  STATE GIFT BAN ACT.



   (A)   The State Gift Ban Act (5 Ill. Comp. Stat. 425, et seq.) is
hereby adopted as required by Section 83 of the Act (5 Ill. Comp. Stat.
425/83).



   (B)   The solicitation or the acceptance of gifts prohibited to be
solicited or accepted under the Act is prohibited by any elected or appointed
official or any employee of the village.



   (C)   To the extent authorized by law and to the extent required by
Section 35 of the Act (5 Ill. Comp. Stat. 425/35), the Village Administrator
is appointed to serve as the "ethics officer" of the Village.  The ethics
officer's duties shall be as provided in Section 35.



   (D)   All complaints for violations of the Act and this ordinance
shall be filed with the State Legislative Ethics Commission (created by
Section 45 (a) (6) of the Act).



   (E)   Any amendment to the State Gift Ban Act (5 Ill. Comp. Stat.
425/1 et seq.) that becomes effective after the passage of this ordinance
shall be incorporated into this ordinance by reference and shall be
applicable to the solicitation and acceptance of gifts.  However, any
amendment that makes it's provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this ordinance by reference without formal
action by the corporate authorities of the Village.



   (F)   Future declaration of unconstitutionality of State Gift Ban
Act.



      (1)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the State Gift
Ban Act (5 Ill. Comp. Stat. 425/1 et seq.) unconstitutional in its entirety,
then this ordinance shall be repealed as of the date that the Supreme Court's
decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or
rehearings.  The ordinance shall be deemed repealed without further action
by the corporate authorities of the village if the act is found
unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.



      (2)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the State
Gift Ban Act (5 Ill. Comp. Stat. 425/1 et seq.) unconstitutional but upholds
the constitutionality of the remainder of the act or does not address the
remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by this
ordinance shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
ordinance relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be
deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the
village.



(Ord. 1030-99, passed 6-15-99)



CHAPTER 36:  OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT



Section



   36.01   Definitions



   36.02   Prohibited political activities



   36.03   Gift ban



   36.04   Ethics advisor



   36.05   Ethics Commission



   36.06   Complaints and hearings



 



   36.99   Penalty



§ 36.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:



   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any activity in furtherance of an effort
to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any
individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a
political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of
Presidential or Vice-Presidential electors, but does not include activities:
(1) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or
administrative action; (2) relating to collective bargaining; or (3) that are
otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.



   CANDIDATE. A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to
fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the
ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the Election Code
(ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 1-3).



   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.   Has the same meaning as that term is defined
in Section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (ILCS, Ch. 5, Act
315, § 3).



   COMPENSATED TIME.   With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.



   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF.   Authorized time off earned by or awarded to
an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of
the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.



   CONTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
9-1.4 of the Election Code (ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-1.4).



   EMPLOYEE.   A person employed by the village, whether on a full-time
or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the
direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of
how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent
contractor.



   EMPLOYER. The Village of Itasca.



   GIFT.   Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan,
forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value
including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for
speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or
the official position of an officer or employee.



   LEAVE OF ABSENCE.   Any period during which an employee does not
receive: (1) compensation for employment; (2) service credit towards pension
benefits; and (3) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.



   OFFICER.   A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office
created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity.



   POLITICAL ACTIVITY.   Any activity in support of or in connection with
any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: (1) relating to the support or opposition of any
executive, legislative, or administrative action; (2) relating to collective
bargaining; or (3) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official
duties.



   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION.  A party, committee, association, fund, or
other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a
statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a County Clerk
under Section 9-3 of the Election Code (ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-3), but only
with regard to those activities that require filing with the State Board of
Elections or a County Clerk.



   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.



      (1)   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any
political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event.



      (2)   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to
the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for
any political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.



      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing
any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign
contribution.



      (4)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public
opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf
of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any
referendum question.



      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or
actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection
with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization
for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.



      (6)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any
political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.



      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective
office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question
or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls.



      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating,
reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective
office or for or against any referendum question.



      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for
elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for
elective office.



      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate
questionnaires.



      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing
campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of
any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.



      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against
any referendum question.



      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office
or for or against any referendum question.



      (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a
political party convention.



      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the
outcome of any election.



   PROHIBITED SOURCE.   Any person or entity who:



      (1)   Is seeking official action:



         (a)   By an officer; or



         (b)   By an employee, or by the officer or another
employee directing that employee;



      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business:



         (a)   With the officer; or



         (b)   With an employee, or with the officer or another
employee directing that employee;



      (3)   Conducts activities regulated:



         (a)   By the officer; or



         (b)   By an employee, or by the officer or another
employee directing that employee;



      (4)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the
performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or
employee.



(Ord. 1205-04, passed 8-17-04)



§ 36.02  PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any
prohibited political activity during any compensated time, as defined
herein.  No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or
resources of the village in connection with any prohibited political activity.



   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require
any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity:
(1) as part of that officer or employee's duties; (2) as a condition of
employment; or (3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays,
vacation or personal time off).



   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to
participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that
officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit,
whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off,
continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be
awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or
her participation in any prohibited political activity.



   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are
permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her
official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee
on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this chapter.



   (E)   No person either in a position that is subject to recognized
merit principles of public employment or in a position the salary for which
is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the
Federal Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable
to grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure
solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee,
of a political party, or of a political organization or club.



(Ord. 1205-04, passed 8-17-04)  Penalty, see § 36.99



§ 36.03  GIFT BAN.



   (A)   Prohibited.  Except as permitted by this chapter, no officer
or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any
officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall
intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as
defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance.  No
prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this
section.



   (B)   Exceptions.



      (1)   Division (A) is not applicable to the following:



         (a)   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are
available on the same conditions as for the general public;



         (b)   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his
or her spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value;



         (c)   Any contribution that is lawfully made under the
Election Code or activities associated with a fundraising event in support of
a political organization or candidate;



         (d)   Educational materials and missions;



         (e)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business;



         (f)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people
related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister,
uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband,
wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,
stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half
brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or
grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fianc or fiancee.



         (g)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of
a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under
the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member
and not because of the personal friendship.  In determining whether a gift
is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider
the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) the history
of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient
of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those
individuals; (ii) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the
individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax
deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the
actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at
the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees,
or their spouses or immediate family members.



         (h)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person
in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments
are: (i) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared;
or (ii) catered.  For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food or
refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.



         (i)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and
other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or
outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of an
officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced
because of the official position or employment of the officer or employee,
and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.



         (j)   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. 
For the purpose of this chapter, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift
given to an officer or employee from another officer or employee, and
"inter-governmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by
an officer or employee of another governmental entity.



         (k)   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at
death.



         (l)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source
during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.



      (2)   Each of the exceptions listed in this section is
mutually exclusive and independent of every other.



   (C)   Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee, his or her
spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or employee,
does not violate this chapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable
action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the
gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt
from income taxation under Section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.



(Ord. 1205-04, passed 8-17-04)  Penalty, see § 36.99



§ 36.04  ETHICS ADVISOR.



   (A)   The President of the Board of Trustees, with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees shall designate an Ethics Advisor for the
Village of Itasca.  The duties of the Ethics Advisor may be delegated to an
officer or employee of the Village of Itasca unless the position has been
created as an office by the Village of Itasca.  The Village Administrator
shall be designated as Ethics Advisor for the Village of Itasca, unless and
until formal action is taken by the President and Board of Trustees to make
an alternate designation.



   (B)   The Ethics Advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and
employees of the Village of Itasca concerning the interpretation of and
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and state ethics laws, and
conduct preliminary investigations of complaints alleging violations of the
ordinance, as provided in § 36.06.  The Ethics Advisor shall perform such
other duties as may be delegated by the Board of Trustees.



   (C)   In the event that the Ethics Advisor is the subject of a
complaint alleging a violation of this Ordinance, as described in § 36.06,
the Village President shall assume the position of Ethics Advisor until
formal action is taken by the President and Board of Trustees to make an
alternate designation, or until the complaint against the Ethics Advisor has
been deemed to be unfounded.



(Ord. 1205-04, passed 8-17-04)



§ 36.05  ETHICS COMMISSION.



   The President and the Board of Trustees for the Village of Itasca are
hereby authorized, in their discretion, to create a commission to be known as
the Ethics Commission of the Village of Itasca, which shall have the power to
review, investigate and adjudicate, or refer for adjudication, complaints
that allege violations of the chapter.



(Ord. 1205-04, passed 8-17-04)



§ 36.06  COMPLAINTS AND HEARINGS.



   (A)   Complaints alleging a violation of this chapter shall be filed
with the Ethics Advisor, unless the village has exercised its authority to
create an Ethics Commission, in which case complaints shall be filed with the
Ethics Commission.  In the event that the Ethics Advisor is the subject of
the complaint, the complaint shall be filed with the Village President.



   (B)   Within three business days after the receipt of a complaint,
the Ethics Advisor shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a
notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her
and a copy of the complaint.  The Ethics Advisor shall send by certified
mail, return receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the
complaint to the complainant within three business days after receipt by the
Ethics Advisor.



   (C)   The Ethics Advisor is authorized to conduct any necessary
investigation, and to consult with an attorney designated by the corporate
authorities to prosecute such actions, to determine the sufficiency of the
complaint and to establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.



   (D)   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of
§ 36.02 or § 36.03 of this chapter and there is a determination of probable
cause by the Ethics Advisor, then the Ethics Advisor shall notify in writing
the attorney designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such
actions and shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional
documents in the custody of the Ethics Advisor concerning the alleged
violation.



   (E)   If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a
violation or if there is no determination of probable cause, then the Ethics
Advisor shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint.



   (F)   A complaint alleging a violation of this chapter must be filed
within one year after the alleged violation.



(Ord. 1205-04, passed 8-17-04)



§ 36.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of § 36.02
of this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days,
and maybe fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.



   (B)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of § 36.03
of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than $1,001 and
not more than $5,000.



   (C)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement
authorities, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may
be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an
amount not to exceed $2,500.



   (D)   A violation of § 36.02 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as
a criminal offense by an attorney for the village by filing in the circuit
court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The
prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. 
Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant
beyond a reasonable doubt.



   (E)   A violation of § 36.03 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a
quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the village, or, if an Ethics
Commission has been created, by the Commission through the designated
administrative procedure.



   (F)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable,
whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates
any provision of § 36.02 or § 36.03 of this chapter is subject to
discipline or discharge.



(Ord. 1205-04, passed 8-17-04)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   GARBAGE





         51.   INDUSTRIAL WASTE PRETREATMENT





         52.   WATER





         53.   SEWERS





         54.   COMBINED WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM





         55.   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL





         56.   CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES ON THE PUBLIC
RIGHTS-OF-WAY




CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE



Section



Disposal



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Unlawful to allow garbage to accumulate



   50.03   Throwing, depositing of garbage, trash, refuse and yard
waste prohibited; storage of containers



   50.04   Uncovered garbage



   50.05   Receptacle required; container specifications



   50.06   Accumulation of refuse



   50.07   Collection



   50.08   Use of yard waste program



   50.09   Scavenger service



   50.10   Business, commercial or industrial disposal



Scavengers



   50.15   Permit required; fee



   50.16   Application for permit



   50.17   Vehicle regulations



   50.18   Disposal within village limits unlawful



 



   50.99   Penalty



DISPOSAL



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE.   Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking,
and consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage, and sale of
produce.



   REFUSE.   Combustible refuse, including but not limited to paper,
cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, wood furniture, bedding;
noncombustible refuse, including, but not limited to metals, tin cans, metal
furniture, glass, crockery, other mineral waste, street rubbish and ashes,
residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings.  Refuse shall
not include earth and wastes from building operations, nor shall it include
solid wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations
such as food processing wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber, scraps and
shavings.



   YARD WASTE.   Accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves,
tree limbs, and other materials accumulated as the result of the maintenance
of lawns, gardens, shrubbery, vines and trees.



(Ord. 697, passed 6-5-90)



§ 50.02  UNLAWFUL TO ALLOW GARBAGE TO ACCUMULATE.



   It shall be unlawful to accumulate or keep garbage, trash, refuse or
yard wastes on any premises longer than one week, or to dispose of same other
than as provided herein.



(Ord. 697-90, passed 6-5-90)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.03  THROWING, DEPOSITING OF GARBAGE, TRASH, REFUSE AND YARD WASTE
PROHIBITED; STORAGE OF CONTAINERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit garbage, trash,
refuse, and yard waste on any public or private property within the village,
including retention/detention basins and creeks, whether occupied or
unoccupied, except that the owner or person in control of property may
maintain private receptacles for garbage, trash, refuse and yard waste, which
are waste products resulting from the occupancy of the property itself. 
Such receptacles shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and other
provisions of this code and shall be placed and maintained in such a manner
so that the garbage, trash, refuse and yard waste deposited within such
receptacles shall not be carried, deposited, or wind blown upon any street,
sidewalk, or other public place, or upon any private property.



(Ord. 697-90, passed 6-5-90)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit garbage or
refuse or garbage containers or boxes, or recycling containers, or paper or
plastic bags, or any metal container in any street, alley or public way
except for a period from 4:00 p.m. before the day designated for collection
and until 10:00 p.m. on the day of collection. At all other times garbage,
recycling, yard waste, or refuse of any kind or garbage containers,
recycling, yard waste, or metal containers of any kind shall be stored inside
the premises or in the rear or side yard. Garbage, recycling, yard waste of
any kind or their containers as outlined above stored in side yard shall be
screened from view from the street. 



('52 Code, Ch. 17, § 595)  (Ord. 464-77, passed 5-10-77; Am. Ord. 822-94,
passed 9-27-94; Am. Ord. 1691-14, passed 4-1-14) Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.04  UNCOVERED GARBAGE.



   It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the
municipality any garbage or other material subject to decay, other than yard
waste, or compostable materials, except in a tightly covered, waterproof
container.



(Ord. 697-90, passed 6-5-90) Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.05  RECEPTACLE REQUIRED; CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner or the owner's agent or
occupant of any house, building, flat or apartment, or tenement in the
village where people reside, board or lodge, or where animal or vegetable
matter is prepared or served, at all times to maintain in good order and
repair a separate can for garbage and a separate receptacle for tin cans,
bottles, ashes and similar refuse.  It shall be the duty of every such
occupant to deposit nothing but garbage or paper in the can provided for the
same, and nothing but tin cans or bottles in the receptacle provided for the
same.



('52 Code, Ch. 17, § 592)



   (B)   The can for garbage shall be water tight, and made of metal or
plastic with a close fitting cover.  Such can shall have a capacity of not
less than ten nor more than 30 gallons and shall be provided with suitable
handles.



('52 Code, Ch.17, § 593)



   (C)   A receptacle for ashes, tin cans, and bottles shall be either
of metal, wood, or cement, and such receptacle shall have a capacity of not
less than ten gallons nor more than 30 gallons.  No hot ashes shall be
placed in a wooden receptacle.



('52 Code, Ch. 17, § 594)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.06  ACCUMULATION OF REFUSE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any
dust, ashes, or refuse, or any material anywhere in the municipality except
in a covered container so that it cannot be wind blown, except that which may
be placed in a compost pile as specified herein.



   (B)   Compostable materials such as grass trimmings, wood wastes,
leaves, weeds, uncooked vegetable scraps, and other garden refuse may be
placed in a compost pile, provided it is placed in such a way so the material
will not be wind blown.  The depositing of garbage, pet waste, meat scraps,
or other materials that may attract animals or vermin to the compost pile, or
which may produce an obnoxious odor, shall be prohibited.  Compost piles
shall be placed in any required front yard as defined by the zoning code, and
shall not be closer than five feet to any side yard lot line, or closer than
five feet to any rear lot line, and in no case shall a compost pile be
located in any side yard or rear yard drainage or utility easement.



   (C)   Compost piles shall be not more than five feet in height, and
shall not have a maximum ground or base area of more than 100 square feet.



(Ord. 697-90, passed 6-5-90)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.07  COLLECTION.



   The occupants of each dwelling unit shall dispose of garbage, trash and
refuse by having same picked up not less than once a week from the public
street or parkway nearest the dwelling unit by a scavenger service which is
licensed and regulated by the village.



(Ord. 231-65, passed 7-20-65) Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.08  USE OF YARD WASTE PROGRAM.



   (A)   It is required of all owners of residential property, or
persons in possession, not using a composting method, or other legal means of
disposing of yard waste, to use the yard waste program adopted by the
village, which has engaged in a commercial waste hauler to dispose of same,
by which residents shall deposit the yard waste, separate from all other
garbage, trash and refuse, and place in appropriate compostable paper bags
(not to exceed 30-gallons capacity) and to which shall be affixed certain
stickers or identifier tags, and placed at or near the street curb of the
property for pick-up.  The Board of Trustees shall adopt procedures from
time to time to implement the yard waste program.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the owner of property
or person in possession from using a law service which collects and disposes
of yard waste, to a place outside of the village.



(Ord. 697-90, passed 6-5-90) Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.09  SCAVENGER SERVICE.



   (A)   The occupant of each dwelling unit shall pay to the village an
established fee per quarter per dwelling unit for scavenger service.  This
charge shall be added to the quarterly bill for water and sewer service and
shall be included as a part of such bill.



(Ord. 231-65, passed 7-20-65)



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall alter or affect the requirement
that the occupant of each dwelling unit shall pay the village an established
fee, on a regular basis, per dwelling unit, for scavenger circuit to pick-up
garbage, trash and refuse.



(Ord. 697-90, passed 6-5-90)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.10  BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL DISPOSAL.



   All operators or managers of business, commercial or industrial
establishments within the village shall dispose of their garbage, trash,
refuse and/or yard waste not less than on a weekly basis through scavenger
services approved by the village. 



(Ord. 697-90, passed 6-5-90) Penalty, see § 50.99



SCAVENGERS



§ 50.15  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in
the business of scavenger, or the collection or disposal of animal, human or
vegetable refuse, or offal, without having first secured a permit therefor. 
The fee for such license shall be $15 per year.



('52 Code, Ch. 13, § 432)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.16  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Clerk, and
shall be referred by the Clerk to the President and Board of Trustees.  No
such permit shall be issued except on order of the President and Board of
Trustees.



('52 Code, Ch. 13, § 433)



§ 50.17  VEHICLE REGULATIONS.



   Any vehicle used by a scavenger in such business shall be water tight
and equipped with air tight covers for such portions as are used for the
transportation of refuse.  It shall be unlawful for any such vehicle to be
driven on or through any street in the village during a Sunday.



('52 Code, Ch. 13, § 434)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.18  DISPOSAL WITHIN VILLAGE LIMITS UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or store any
refuse in any place within the village limits, excepting with the permission
of the President and Board of Trustees.



('52 Code, Ch. 13, § 435)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision
contained in §§ 50.02 through 50.10 shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $500 for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each and every day during on or which the violation occurs or
continues.



(Ord. 697-90, passed 6-5-90)



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 50.15, 50.17 and 50.18
shall be subject to the penalty provided in § 10.99



CHAPTER 51:  INDUSTRIAL WASTE PRETREATMENT



Section



   51.01   Adoption by reference



§ 51.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   Ordinance 802-94, passed 3-15-94, is hereby incorporated by reference,
as said Industrial Waste Pretreatment Ordinance has been and is amended from
time to time, as if fully set forth herein.  Copies shall be maintained on
file in the office of the Village Clerk for public inspection during normal
business hours.



(Ord. 802-94, passed 3-15-94; Am. Ord. 845-95, passed 5-30-95; Am. Ord.
1724-15, passed 1-20-15)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER



Section



Water Service



   52.01   Turning on water service



   52.02   Deposit



   52.03   Adequate plumbing required



   52.04   Resale prohibited



   52.05   Tampering unlawful



   52.06   Use of water supply during construction



   52.07   Connection to water supply system



Service Pipes



   52.15   Installation



   52.16   Specifications



   52.17   Repairs



   52.18   Excavations



   52.19   Shut-off boxes



Meters and Billing



   52.25   Water meters



   52.26   (Reserved)



   52.27   (Reserved)



   52.28   Bills



Conservation and Regulation



   52.40   Intent and effective dates



   52.41   Outside water use



   52.42   Exceptions



   52.43   Application for permitted uses



   52.44   Emergency periods



Use of Private Water Wells



   52.60   Private water wells shall be capped



   52.61   Use of private water well; restrictions



   52.62   Inspections of public or private water supply systems



   52.63   Use of groundwater as a potable water supply prohibited



 



   52.99   Penalty



WATER SERVICE



§ 52.01  TURNING ON WATER SERVICE.



   No water from the village water supply shall be turned on for service
into any premises by any person but the Superintendent of Public Utilities or
some person authorized by the Superintendent to perform this service. Each
application for water service shall state the owner of record of the property
to which water service is to be supplied, and the mailing address of the
owner of record.



(Ord. 1028-99, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 1553-10, passed 12-21-10) Penalty, see
§ 52.99



§ 52.02  DEPOSIT.



   (A)   A deposit of $100 shall be required as prescribed by this
section, or for any other reason deemed sufficient by the Utility Billing
Manager or the Village Administrator, this sum to be retained by the village
to ensure payment of all bills.  When service to the applicant is
discontinued permanently, this deposit, less any amount still due the village
for water service shall be refunded without interest.



   (B)   A deposit shall be required for any account held by the
following:



      (1)   A customer who has had water service discontinued due to
non-payment any time within the preceding three years;



      (2)   A customer who has received two or more delinquency
notices in the previous 12 months;



      (3)   A customer who has received four or more late notices in
the previous 12 months; or



      (4)   A customer who is not the owner of record of the
property to which water service is being supplied.



   (C)   A deposit may be required for continuation of water service if
any of the circumstances in division (B) above arise while the customer is
already receiving water service. A customer may request to have his or her
deposit refunded if and when the above conditions no longer apply to his or
her account.



('52 Code, Ch. 18, § 616)  (Am. Ord. 1553-10, passed 12-21-10; Am. Ord.
1805-16, passed 6-7-16) Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.03  ADEQUATE PLUMBING REQUIRED.



   No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the
plumbing does not comply with this code or the ordinances of the village. 
Water may be turned on for construction work in unfinished buildings, subject
to the provisions of this chapter.



('52 Code, Ch. 18, § 617) Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.04  RESALE PROHIBITED.



   No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from
the village supply to any premises other than for which application has been
made and the meter installed, except in case of emergency.



('52 Code, Ch. 18, § 619)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.05  TAMPERING UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the village to
tamper with, alter or injure any part of the village water works or supply
system, or any meter.



('52 Code, Ch. 18, § 620)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.06  USE OF WATER SUPPLY DURING CONSTRUCTION.



   During the constructions of any building and before any water is
installed as is herein provided the contractor so constructing such building
may be permitted to use the village water supply by making application
therefor, and paying the flat fee prescribed by the Board of Trustees.



('52 Code, Ch. 18, § 633)



§ 52.07  CONNECTION TO WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.



   (A)   All residential units, or living units, all commercial
buildings, all industrial plants and all other institutions and structures
located within the village which use water and generate wastewater, shall be
connected to the village public water supply system.



   (B)   If any of the above is not currently using village water and
is not connected to the village public water or sewer supply system, and any
of the buildings or structures are located on property the nearest point of
which is within 250 feet of either of such systems shall be made by the owner
of the property, at owner's expense, within six months of the date of this
section.



   (C)   When any of the properties lies more than 250 feet from the
point of the nearest village public water or sewer supply pipe, the mandatory
connection provisions of division (B) of this section shall be suspended. 
From the date that any of such properties is within 250 feet from the nearest
point of either village public water supply or sewer pipe, then the six
months connection requirement of division (B) of this section shall commence.



   (D)   The village recognizes that certain circumstances might be
present or arise so that strict enforcement of the provisions of this section
would operate as a distinct hardship.  To be exempted from the provisions of
this section, the owner of any such property shall apply to the Building
Commissioner, and submit evidences of the hardship.  The Building
Commissioner may find that such extraordinary hardship exists, but no such
finding shall be made unless the evidence discloses that:



      (1)   As a result of the particular physical surroundings,
shape, topography, or location with reference to the nearest connection to
the sanitary sewerage or waterworks system of the village, of the tract or
parcel of land on which the particular building or structure involved is
situated, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished
from mere inconvenience.



      (2)   The conditions upon which the request for the exemption
is based are unique to the tract or parcel of land on which the building or
structure involved is situated and are not generally applicable to other
tracts or parcels of land; and



      (3)   The granting of the exemption will not be detrimental to
the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property in the
neighborhood in which the particular building or structure is located.



   (E)   A denial of hardship found by the Building Commissioner may be
appealed to the Sewer and Water Appeals Board, if such appeal is filed with
the Village Clerk within 30 days following such denial. The reversal of a
denial of hardship shall require a vote in favor of reversal by at least two
members of the Appeals Board.



   (F)   All water users who are served by the village water system, as
defined by this section, and, who previously were served by private wells
shall, upon connection to the village water system, abandon and properly cap
the existing well.  Utilization of private wells as an alternative or
supplement to the village water delivery system shall be prohibited.



(Ord. 707-91, passed 2-12-91; Am. Ord. 801-94, passed 2-22-94; Am. Ord.
1274-05, passed 11-1-05)  Penalty, see § 52.99



SERVICE PIPES



§ 52.15  INSTALLATION.



   All service pipes from the main to the premises served shall be
installed by, and at the cost of, the owner of the property to be served or
the applicant for the service.  Such installation shall be under the
inspection of the Building Inspector.



('52 Code, Ch. 18, § 622)



§ 52.16  SPECIFICATIONS.



   No service shall be installed unless it conforms to specifications
drawn up by the Board of Trustees and approved thereby, a copy of which
specifications shall be kept on file by the Clerk and shall be open to
inspection by any person interested.



('52 Code, Ch. 18, § 623) Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.17  REPAIRS.



   All repairs for service pipes and plumbing systems of buildings shall
be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises served.  The
village may, in case of an emergency, repair any service pipes and if this is
done, the cost of such repair work shall be repaid to the village by the
owner of the premises served.



('52 Code, Ch. 18, § 624) Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.18  EXCAVATIONS.



   Excavations for installing service pipes or repairing the same shall be
made in compliance with the code provisions relating to making excavations in
streets.  It shall be unlawful to place any service pipe in the same
excavation with, or directly over, any drain pipe or sewer pipe.



('52 Code, Ch. 18, § 625)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.19  SHUT-OFF BOXES.



   Shut-off boxes or service boxes shall be placed on every service pipe,
and shall be located between the curb line and the sidewalk line where this
is practicable.  Such boxes shall be so located that they are easily
accessible and shall be protected from frost.



('52 Code, Ch. 18, § 626)



METERS AND BILLING



§ 52.25  WATER METERS.



   Each building shall have a water meter in compliance with § 54.02 of
the Village of Itasca Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 1553-10, passed 12-21-10)



§ 52.26  (RESERVED).



§ 52.27  (RESERVED).



§ 52.28  BILLS.



   Bills for water use shall be sent and collected in compliance with §
54.06 of the Village of Itasca Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 1553-10, passed 12-21-10)



CONSERVATION AND REGULATION



§ 52.40  INTENT AND EFFECTIVE DATES.



   It is the intent to discourage and prohibit wasteful and unnecessary
water use during summer months.  Therefore, this subchapter shall be in
effect from May 15 through September 15 of each year, and shall apply to all
uses connected to the village public water supply system.



(Ord. 700-90, passed 8-14-90)



§ 52.41  OUTSIDE WATER USE.



   (A)   All outside use of water from the village public water system
is prohibited from twelve noon through 6:00 p.m. of each day, seven days per
week, during the months this subchapter is in effect.



   (B)   Use of water for outside yard sprinkling, lawns, flowers,
bushes, or trees, is limited to four days per week, as follows:



      (1)   At all addresses, the last digit of which ends in an odd
number, the outside water use is allowed only during permitted hours on
Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays, and Sundays.



      (2)   At all addresses, the last digit of which ends in an
even number, the outside water use is allowed only during permitted hours on
Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays, and Sundays.



      (3)   Filling of swimming pools and other outside uses of
water such as washing of vehicles, filling fountains, spraying sidewalks and
driveways is limited to a combined total of two hours per week on permitted
hours and days, as provided in this division.



(Ord. 700-90, passed 8-14-90)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.42  EXCEPTIONS.



   It is recognized that there are circumstances necessitating relief from
the provisions of this subchapter.  If an owner or party in possession of
premises has installed newly seeded lawn or new sod or needs to fill a newly
purchased swimming pool, or for any other reasonable event requiring regular
use of water or an initial use of water not permitted hereunder, then an
exception will be granted.



(Ord. 700-90, passed 8-14-90)



§ 52.43  APPLICATION FOR PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   In exceptional cases, a written application shall be submitted
to the Village Clerk, signed by the owner or party in possession of premises,
giving:  name, address of premises, telephone number, and reason for the
exception.



   (B)   If the exception is within the purview of this section, then
the Village Clerk shall endorse on the application that the exception is
granted or denied.  All exceptions granted shall expire not later than 30
days after the date it was granted.



   (C)   If an exception is denied, the matter may be appealed to the
Sewer and Water Committee for further handling, with an informal hearing
being held, if requested.  A decision of the Committee shall be final.



   (D)   A photocopy of the application, showing the action taken,
shall be given to the Police Department and to the Building Department.



(Ord. 700-90, passed 8-14-90)



§ 52.44  EMERGENCY PERIODS.



   During periods of drought or other emergencies which have very adverse
effects on the village water supply, and is so declared by the Village
President, with prompt ratification by the Board of Trustees, and with a
general notification to the public, all of the permitted uses may be
temporarily banned and suspended.



(Ord. 700-90, passed 8-14-90)  Penalty, see § 52.99



USE OF PRIVATE WATER WELLS



§ 52.60  PRIVATE WATER WELLS SHALL BE CAPPED.



   Upon connection to the village's public water supply system by any
user, all existing private water wells located on or otherwise serving any
user's property shall be capped and rendered inoperable, unless otherwise
provided for in this subchapter.



(Ord. 953-97, passed 4-22-97)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.61  USE OF PRIVATE WATER WELL; RESTRICTIONS.



   Upon connection to the village's public water supply system, any user
desiring to maintain and use any existing private water well for landscaping,
irrigation or other similar outside uses shall be permitted to do so subject
to the following restrictions:



   (A)   Such private wells shall not be connected in any way to any
water supply system, including the village's public water supply system,
which provides water for domestic use including the filling or replenishing
of swimming pools or human consumption; and,



   (B)   In order to assure that water from private wells are not so
connected to any water supply system, a periodic bacteriological sampling may
be taken by the Village of Itasca Public Utility Supervisor, or his or her
designee, or other regulatory body, of the domestic water entering any
structure served by such wells, pursuant to the inspection procedures
outlined below in § 52.62 of this subchapter; and,



   (C)   In order to effectively enforce the regulations for water
conservation established by §§ 52.40 through 52.44, as amended, outside use
of water from such private wells allowed under this subchapter shall be
subject to the regulations established by §§ 52.40 through 52.44, provided
however that any water well owned and operated by a governmental entity or
agency for the irrigation of public property shall be exempt from such
regulations; and,



   (D)   No existing well may be drilled, redrilled or extended unless
such work is conducted in accordance with all state and local laws; and,



   (E)   No more than one private water well system shall be permitted
under this subchapter per lot, parcel or zoning lot, and no private water
supply system shall provide water under this subchapter to another lot,
parcel or zoning lot; and,



   (F)   No private water supply system shall be permitted which within
reasonable engineering standards could adversely affect the aquifer from
which the well receives water, or otherwise interfere with any public or
other private water supply system; and,



   (G)   No permit for a private water supply system shall be granted
if such system is improperly maintained or not used for its intended purpose
under this subchapter, or is in violation of any rule or regulation, or any
present or future agreements or amendments to agreements between the village
and the DuPage Water Commission; and,



   (H)   No person or entity shall establish or permit to be
established, or maintain or permit to be maintained, any connection whereby a
private auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the village may enter the village's public water supply
system of the village.



(Ord. 953-97, passed 4-22-97)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.62  INSPECTIONS OF PUBLIC OR PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS.



   Inspections of public or private water supply systems shall be
conducted under the following conditions:



   (A)   The Village Public Utility Supervisor shall enforce the
provisions of this section in accordance with such regulations for control of
cross connections as may be promulgated by the village Water Department from
time to time and shall cause surveys and investigations to be made of
commercial, industrial, residential and other property served by the
village’s water supply system to determine whether actual or potential
hazards to the village’s water supply exist.  Such surveys and
investigations shall be repeated at least every two years or as often as the
Public Utility Supervisor shall deem necessary.  Public records of such
surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least
five years.



   (B)   The Public Utility Supervisor or his or her designee shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time upon consent of the owner of
any property served by a connection to the village’s water system for the
purpose of determining whether there exists on the property any connection in
violation of this subchapter, and for the purpose of verifying any
information submitted by the customer concerning such connection.  On
demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall
furnish to the Superintendent of Water any information which he or she may
request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such
property.  The refusal of such information when demanded shall, within the
discretion of the Superintendent of Water, be deemed prima facie evidence of
improper connections as provided in this section.



   (C)   The Superintendent of Water is hereby authorized and directed
to discontinue the water service to any property after reasonable written
notice and hearing before the Superintendent of Water to any occupant thereof
if it is determined that any connection in violation of the provision of this
subchapter exists.  The Superintendent may take such other precautionary
measures as may be deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination
of the village’s water system.  Water service to such property shall not
be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and until a shut-off and
reconnection fee is paid to the village.  Immediate disconnection upon
verbal notice shall occur if the Superintendent of Water reasonably
determines that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water
supply system exists.  Such action shall be followed by written notification
of the cause of disconnection.  Immediate disconnection without notice to
any party shall occur if the Public Utility Supervisor reasonably determines
that such action is necessary to prevent actual or anticipated contamination
or pollution of the public water supply.  Neither the village, the Public
Utility Supervisor nor its officers or agents shall be liable to any customer
for any injury, damages, or loss of revenues which may result from
termination of a customer’s water supply in accordance with the terms of
this subchapter.



   (D)   Expenses incurred by the village to permit and inspect private
water wells and regulate and administer this subchapter, shall be paid by the
owners of such systems through an annual fee of $50.  The fee charged shall
be added to the water bill for the use of the village’s system.



   (E)   If contamination of the village’s water system occurs
through an illegal cross connection, the water customer or property owner or
occupant responsible for any such backflow must bear the cost of clean up of
the village’s water system.  In addition to any other legal remedy to
collect such costs, such costs shall constitute a lien on such property which
shall be filed with the Recorder of DuPage County.



(Ord. 953-97, passed 4-22-97)



§ 52.63  USE OF GROUNDWATER AS A POTABLE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Prohibition. Except for such uses or methods in existence
before December 31, 2010, the use or attempt to use groundwater from the area
described in the drawing attached to Ord. 1640-12 as Exhibit “B” and
incorporated herein by reference and within the village corporate limits, as
a potable water supply, by installation or drilling of wells or by any other
method is hereby prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes the Village
of Itasca, Illinois.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PERSON. An individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or
their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.



      POTABLE WATER. Any water used for human or domestic consumption,
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes, or preparing foods.



(Ord. 1555-10, passed 12-21-10; Am. Ord. 1640-12, passed 11-20-12)  Penalty,
see § 52.99



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined according to the
penalty set forth in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
§§ 52.40 through 52.44 is subject to a fine of $25 for a first offense, and
$50 for each succeeding violation thereafter during each calendar year.



   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of § 52.63 shall be
subject to a fine of up to $750 for each violation. Each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate violation.



(Ord. 700-90, passed 8-14-90; Am. Ord. 1555-10, passed 12-21-10)



CHAPTER 53:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   53.01   Definitions



   53.02   Connection to sewer required



   53.03   Treatment of discharged sewage



   53.04   Sewage disposal facilities; unlawful to construct or maintain



   53.05   Installation of suitable toilet facilities required



   53.06   Construction of facilities near water supply wells



   53.07   Protection of sewerage works from damage



   53.08   Powers and authority of inspectors



   53.09   Safety rules to be observed; liability disclaimed



Building Sewers and Connections



   53.20   Permit required



   53.21   Discharge of wastewater to public sanitary sewer



   53.22   Notice to village of material changes



   53.23   Installation costs; bond



   53.24   Separate sewer for each building required; exceptions



   53.25   Old building sewers



   53.26   Construction specifications



   53.27   Connecting source of surface runoff or groundwater to public
sanitary sewer prohibited



   53.28   Inspection



   53.29   Excavations



Use of Public Sewers



   53.35   Use of public sewer required



   53.36   Unlawful discharges



   53.37   Stormwater and unpolluted drainage



   53.38   Rejection, pretreatment or equalization of unacceptable
waters or wastes



   53.39   Interceptors shall be provided when necessary



   53.40   Maintenance of pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities



   53.41   Control manhole to be installed



   53.42   Analysis of water and wastes



   53.43   Pretreatment of industrial waste



Storm and Surface Water



   53.50   (Reserved)



   53.51   (Reserved)



   53.52   Inspection; correction of illegal connections



   53.53   Maintenance of connections and lines



   53.54   Discharge of storm and surface water into sanitary sewer
prohibited



   53.55   Use of downspouts, roof drains and sump pumps



   53.56   Violations; notice of lien



Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination



   53.65   Statutory authority



   53.66   Purposes of this subchapter



   53.67   Interpretation of terms and words



   53.68   Definitions



   53.69   Applicability



   53.70   Interpretation



   53.71   Participating communities



   53.72   Responsibility for administration



   53.73   Duties of Director



   53.74   Representative capacity



   53.75   Prohibition of illicit discharges



   53.76   Prohibition of illicit connections



   53.77   Submission of notice of intent (NOI) to the Department



   53.78   Notification of spills



   53.79   Enforcement: violations



   53.80   Notice to correct violations: Director may take action



   53.81   Emergency cease and desist orders



   53.82   Violations deemed a public nuisance



   53.83   Nuisance abatement



   53.84   Fines



   53.85   Remedies not exclusive



   53.86   Suspension of MS4 access due to detection of illicit
discharges



   53.87   Right to appeal



   53.88   Enforcement measures after appeal



   53.89   Severability



   53.90   Most restrictive provisions apply



   53.91   Ultimate responsibility



 



   53.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.   An owner (or owners) of premises who has made written
application to the President and Board of Trustees for permission to have a
sewer connection, a house connection, or a sewer extension installed.



   BOD.   Biochemical oxygen demand which is defined as the quantity of
oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at 20
degrees C., determined by standard laboratory test procedures and expressed
in mg/1.



   BUILDING DRAIN.   That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer or other
approved point of discharge, beginning five feet outside the inner face of
the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.   The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.



   CONTROL MANHOLE.   A structure specifically designed and constructed
for sampling and metering industrial wastes discharged to a public sewer.



   EASEMENT.   An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.



   FEDERAL ACT.   The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251
et seq) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972 (Public Law 92-500 and Public Law 93-243) and the Clean Water Act of
1977 (Public Law 95-217)



   GARBAGE.   Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE.   The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from
any non-domestic source which is regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the
Act; or, discharges industrial wastewater.



   INDUSTRIAL USER (IU).   A source of indirect discharge, including but
not limited to, a manufacturing or process facility or other facility engaged
in the purchase or sale of goods, transaction of business or who otherwise
renders services to the public.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.   The wastewater discharged, permitted to flow, or
escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business
establishment or process, or from the development, recovery or processing of
any natural resource as distinct from employees' wastes or wastewater from
sanitary conveniences.



   INTERFERENCE.   An inhibition or disruption of the sewage treatment
plant, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or
disposal which is a cause of or significantly contributes to either a
violation of any requirement of the sewage treatment plant's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or to the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the treatment plant in
accordance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits
issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405
of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title
II more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) and including state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air
Act, and the Toxic Substances Control Act.  A user significantly contributes
to such a violation or prevention of sludge use or disposal in accordance
with above-cited authorities whenever such user:



   (A)   Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed
by federal, state, or local law;



   (B)   Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature or
constituents from the user's average discharge;



   (C)   Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, would result in a sewage
treatment plant permit violation or prevent sewage sludge use or disposal in
accordance with the above-cited authorities as they apply to the village's
selected method of sludge management.



   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY.   An industrial user that has a flow of
50,000 gallons or more per average work day, or has a flow greater than 10%
of the flow carried by the sewerage works receiving the waste, or has in its
waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts and defined in standards issued
under § 307(a) of the Federal Act, or is found by the permit issuance
authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the
publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant
impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries,
on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment
works.



   mg/l.   Milligrams per liter.



   MULTIPLE USER.   Any additional number of residential, commercial, or
industrial units located on the same premises, or being served through a
single water meter such as apartment buildings, more than one commercial or
industrial unit in the same building, or residential and commercial units
located in the same building.



   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD.   Any pretreatment
standard specifying quantities or concentration of pollutants which may be
discharged to a POTW by industrial users in specific industrial subcategories
as established in regulations promulgated from time to time by the USEPA in
40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.



   NATURAL OUTLET.   Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface water.



   NON-REGULATED INDUSTRIAL USER.   Any industrial user that is not a
regulated industrial user as defined herein.



   NPDES PERMIT.   Any permit or equivalent document to regulate the
discharge of pollutants pursuant to § 402 of the Federal Act.



   PASS THROUGH.   The discharge of pollutants through the sewage
treatment plant into navigable waters in quantities or concentrations which
are a cause of or significantly contribute to a violation of any requirement
of the treatment plant's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation).  A user significantly contributes to such
permit violation whenever such user:



   (A)   Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed
by federal, state, or local law;



   (B)   Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature
and constituents from the user's average discharge;



   (C)   Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, along or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, would result in a permit
violation;



   (D)   Knows or has reason to know that the sewage treatment plant
is, for any reason, violating its final effluent limitations in its permit
and that such user's discharge either alone or in conjunction with discharges
from other sources, increases the magnitude or duration of the sewage
treatment plant's violations.



   pH.   The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed in gram molecular weight (moles) per liter.



   POPULATION EQUIVALENT.   A term used to evaluate the impact of
industrial or other wastes on a treatment works or stream.  One population
equivalent is 100 gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD
and 0.20 pounds of suspended solids.



   PRETREATMENT.   The treatment of wastewaters from sources before
discharge into the public sewer.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.   Garbage that has been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half
inch in any dimension.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW).   A treatment works as defined
by § 212 of the Act, owned by the village.  This definition includes any
devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation
of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature, that convey
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant regardless of ownership, but does not
include sewers, pipes, and other conveyances not connected to the village's
POTW treatment plant.



   PUBLIC SEWER.   A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights of connection and use, and is operated, maintained and
controlled by the village or other public agencies.



   REGULATED INDUSTRIAL USER.   Any userwho discharges to the POTW a
waste to which any national categorical pretreatment standards apply.



   RESIDENTIAL, or COMMERCIAL, or NON-INDUSTRIAL USER.   Any user of the
sewerage works not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an
industrial user.  Each dwelling unit of a residential building having two or
more dwelling units shall be considered a separate and individual
single-family residential user.



   SANITARY SEWER.   A sewer that conveys sewage and polluted industrial
wastes, and to which storm water, surface drainage, groundwater or unpolluted
wastewater are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE.   A combination of the wastewater from residential,
commercial, industrial and institutional buildings together with such
groundwater infiltration and surface water inflow that may be in the sewers.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.   An arrangement of devices, structures and
processes for the treating and disposing of sewage.



   SEWER.   A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other
wastewater, including stormwater, surface water and ground water drainage.



   SEWERAGE WORKS.   All facilities of the village for collecting,
pumping, treating and disposing of sewage and industrial wastes.



   SLUG.   Any discharge of sewage, industrial waste or other wastewater
which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow
exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five
times the average 24 hour concentration of flows during normal operation.



   STATE ACT.   The Illinois Environmental Protection Act effective July
1, 1970 (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 through 57.17)



   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN.   A sewer that conveys stormwater runoff
and surface water drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial
wastes.



   STORMWATER RUNOFF.   That portion of precipitation which is not
absorbed into the ground and which is drained from the ground surface to a
natural outlet or watercourse.



   SUPERINTENDENT.   The Superintendent of the wastewater treatment plant
or the Superintendent's duly authorized deputy or representative.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.   Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in water, sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastewaters; the
quantity of which is determined by standard laboratory filtering test
procedures and referred to as nonfilterable residue expressed in mg/1.



   UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER.   Wastewater that would not cause any violation
of water quality standards of the water pollution regulations of the state
when discharged to a natural outlet of watercourse.



   USER CLASS.   The type of user either "residential or commercial"
(non-industrial) or "industrial" as defined herein.



   WASTEWATER.   The wastewater from any domestic, commercial, industrial
and institutional uses.



   WATERCOURSE.   Any stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, slough, gulch, ditch, reservoir, lake, pond, or other natural or
man-made drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff and surface water
drainage flow either continuously or intermittently.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



§ 53.02  CONNECTION TO SEWER REQUIRED.



   (A)   All residential units, or living units, all commercial
buildings, all industrial plants and all other institutions and structures
located within the village which use water and generate wastewater, shall be
connected to the village public sewer system.



   (B)   If any of the above is not currently using village water and
is not connected to the village public water or sewer supply system, and any
of the buildings or structures are located on property the nearest point of
which is within 250 feet of either of such systems shall be made by the owner
of the property, at owner's expense, within six months of the date of this
section.



   (C)   When any of the properties lies more than 250 feet from the
point of the nearest village public water or sewer supply pipe, the mandatory
connection provisions of division (B) of this section shall be suspended. 
From the date that any of such properties is within 250 feet from the nearest
point of either village public water supply or sewer pipe, then the six
months connection requirement of division (B) of this section shall commence.



   (D)   The village recognizes that certain circumstances might be
present or arise so that strict enforcement of the provisions of this section
would operate as a distinct hardship.  To be exempted from the provisions of
this section, the owner of any such property shall apply to the Building
Commissioner, and submit evidences of the hardship.  The Building
Commissioner may find that such extraordinary hardship exists, but no such
finding shall be made unless the evidence discloses that:



      (1)   As a result of the particular physical surroundings,
shape, topography, or location with reference to the nearest connection to
the sanitary sewerage or waterworks system of the village, of the tract or
parcel of land on which the particular building or structure involved is
situated, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished
from mere inconvenience.



      (2)   The conditions upon which the request for the exemption
is based are unique to the tract or parcel of land on which the building or
structure involved is situated and are not generally applicable to other
tracts or parcels of land; and



      (3)   The granting of the exemption will not be detrimental to
the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property in the
neighborhood in which the particular building or structure is located.



   (E)   A denial of hardship found by the Building Commissioner may be
appealed to the Sewer and Water Appeals Board, if such appeal is filed with
the Village Clerk within 30 days following such denial.  The reversal of a
denial of hardship shall require a vote in favor of reversal by at least two
members of the Appeals Board.



   (F)   All water users who are served by the village water system, as
defined by this section, and, who previously were served by private wells
shall, upon connection to the village water system, abandon and properly cap
the existing well.  Utilization of private wells as an alternative or
supplement to the village water delivery system shall be prohibited.



(Ord. 707-91, passed 2-12-91; Am. Ord. 801-94, passed 2-22-94; Am. Ord.
1274-05, passed 11-1-05)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.03  TREATMENT OF DISCHARGED SEWAGE.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or watercourse
within any area under the jurisdiction of the village any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85) Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.04  SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES; UNLAWFUL TO CONSTRUCT OR MAINTAIN.



   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.05  INSTALLATION OF SUITABLE TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED.



   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the
village and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is
now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the
village, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the public
sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90
days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said sewer is
within 400 feet of the property line; however, no connections shall be made
to the public sanitary sewer unless the sewage treatment plant has sufficient
available capacity for such connections in accordance with allowable loads
and effluent limitations of the NPDES permit for the treatment works.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85) Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.06  CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES NEAR WATER SUPPLY WELLS.



   All sewage facilities within a distance of 150 feet radially from all
municipal water supply wells shall be constructed and shall be located in
conformity with the minimum requirements of the State Department of Public
Health.



(Ord. 232-65, passed  -  - )  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.07  PROTECTION OF SEWERAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the sewerage works.  Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct and damaging public property.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.08  POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes
of photocopying of records required to be kept by this chapter, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The Superintendent or the Superintendent's
representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes,
including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other
industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source
of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.



   (B)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the village holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurements, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion
of the sewerage works lying within said easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



§ 53.09  SAFETY RULES TO BE OBSERVED; LIABILITY DISCLAIMED.



   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in § 53.08 (A), the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the
village shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established
by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to
the village employees and the village shall indemnify the company against
loss or damage to its property by village employees and against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against
the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as
such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe
conditions as required in § 53.31.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



§ 53.20  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to uncover,
make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public
sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit
therefor from the Superintendent of Public Works.



   (B)   There shall be two separate classes of building sewer permits:
for residential or commercial service, and for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes.  In either case, the owner or the owner's agent
shall make application on a special form furnished by the village.  The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or
other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Superintendent.  Each industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must
also provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics, and type of activity.  A permit and inspection fee of $100
shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed.  Further,
if any street must be opened to reach the public sewer, an additional fee of
$10 per foot will be charged for breaking open any improved street; and a
flat fee of $50 will be charged for breaking open any unimproved street.



   (C)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer
connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the
downstream sewerage works, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater
treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and
efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85) Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.21  DISCHARGE OF WASTEWATER TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge wastewater to any
public sanitary sewer except those wastewaters in compliance with standards
promulgated pursuant to the federal act or the state act, this code and any
rules, regulations, ordinances or standards of the village.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.22  NOTICE TO VILLAGE OF MATERIAL CHANGES.



   In the event the type, quality, or volume of wastewater from the
property for which a sewer permit was previously granted is expected to
change materially and substantially as reasonably determined by the user or
village, the user previously granted such permit shall give 30 days notice in
writing to the village and shall make a new application to the village prior
to said change, provided that information previously submitted and unchanged
need not be resubmitted by the user.  No user shall materially or
substantially change the type, quality or volume of its wastewater without
prior approval of the village.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.23  INSTALLATION COSTS; BOND.



   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.  The person installing the
building sewer for said owner shall be a plumber or sewer contractor and
shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by said installation.  Before a building sewer
permit is issued, the plumber or sewer contractor shall file with the Village
Clerk an indemnity bond in the amount of $10,000, with corporate surety
licensed to do business in the state, on bond form supplied by the village. 
In addition thereto, the plumber or sewer contractor shall file with the
Village Clerk a certificate of insurance covering public liability insurance
in the amount of $100,000/$300,000 for bodily injury and $50,000 covering
property damage.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



§ 53.24  SEPARATE SEWER FOR EACH BUILDING REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85) Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.25  OLD BUILDING SEWERS.



   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found on examination and test by the Superintendent to meet
requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



§ 53.26  CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Building sewers shall not be less than six inch diameter size
pipe installed at a minimum invert slope of one-eighth inch per foot, or not
less than four inch diameter size pipe in lengths of not less than ten feet
installed at a minimum invert slope of one-fourth inch per foot.  Building
sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
Superintendent as to trench excavation and backfilling, installation of pipe
and fittings and testing.



   (B)   Building sewers shall be constructed using one of the
following listed materials:



      (1)   Extra strength vitrified clay pipe and fittings
conforming to the latest revision of ASTM Specification C700 with compression
type joints conforming to the latest revision of ASTM Specification C425,
installed in accordance with the latest revision of ASTM Standard C12.



      (2)   Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) sewer pipe and
fittings with solvent welded joints or compression type rubber ring gasket
joints conforming to the latest revision of ASTM Specification D2751
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.



      (3)   Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) Type PSM sewer pipe and
fittings, SDR 35, with compression type rubber ring gaskets and coupling
joints conforming to the latest revision of ASTM Specification D3034,
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.



      (4)   Cast iron soil pipe and fittings conforming to the
latest revision of CISPI Specification HS-67 with compression type rubber
ring gasket joints, conforming to the latest revision of ASTM Specifications
C564, installed in accordance with the latest revision of the State Plumbing
Code.



   (C)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall be made at the branch fitting, if such is available at a suitable
location.  If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no
properly located branch fitting is available, the owner shall, at his
expense, install a branch fitting in the public sewer at the location
specified and installation approved by the Superintendent.



   (D)   All building sewers shall be bedded on a layer of gravel or
crushed stone, Size #67, conforming to the latest revision of ASTM
Specifications D448, to provide a minimum thickness of four inches under and
supporting the full bottom quadrant of the pipe.  Backfill materials shall
be placed and tamped by hand in six inch layers around the pipe to a height
of 12 inches over the top of pipe.



   (E)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor.  No building sewer shall
be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might
thereby be weakened.  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection
from frost.  In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sewage carried by such drains shall
be lifted by approved pumping devices and discharged to the building sewer.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



§ 53.27  CONNECTING SOURCE OF SURFACE RUNOFF OR GROUNDWATER TO PUBLIC
SANITARY SEWER PROHIBITED.



   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85) Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.28  INSPECTION.



   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is read for inspection and connection
to the public sewer.  The connection shall be made under the supervision of
the Superintendent or the Superintendent's representative.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



§ 53.29  EXCAVATIONS.



   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. 
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.  Prior
to any excavation, the plumber or sewer contractor shall notify all public
and private utility companies.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS



§ 53.35  USE OF PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within any
area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or animal excrement,
garbage or other objectionable waste.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



§ 53.36  UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
public sanitary sewer.



   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.



      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant.



      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or
higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewerage works.



      (4)   Solid, liquid or viscous substances in quantities or of
such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, interference
with the proper operation of the sewerage works, or pass through such as, but
not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and
the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.



      (5)   Any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with
the operation or performance of the POTW or will pass through the POTW.



   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a
public sanitary sewer the following described substances, materials, waters,
or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Superintendent that such
waters or wastes, singly or by interaction with other wastes, can harm either
the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; can cause an adverse
effect on the receiving stream in violation of Title 35, Ill. Adm. Code,
parts 301 through 312 adopted by the Illinois Pollution Control Board
pursuant to § 13 of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, or in
violation of the effluent limitations of the NPDES permit, cause interference
with sewage treatment operations, pass through or can otherwise endanger
life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.  In forming an
opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of such waters or wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials or construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment
plant and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies.  The substances
prohibited are:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F. (65°C.), or heat in such quantities that the temperature at the
sewage treatment plant exceeds 104°F. (40°C).



      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
materials; or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/1 or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32°F and 150°F. (0°C and 65°C).



      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.  The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
3/4 horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Superintendent.



      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron
pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.



      (5)   Any water or wastes containing more than 50 mg/l of
fats, oils or grease (hexane solubles).



      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing substances exceeding the
following maximum concentrations of pollutants:



 

Pollutant
 
Maximum Concentration (mg/l)




5-day BOD
 
300


Total Suspended Solids
 
350


Total Dissolved Solids
 
1000


Chemical Oxygen Demand
 
500


Ammonia
 
50


Arsenic
 
0.1


Borate (Boron)
 
1.0


Cadmium
 
1.2


Chromium (Hexavalent)
 
0.25


Chromium (Total)
 
7.0


Copper   
 
4.5


Cyanide
 
1.9


Iron
 
10.0


Lead
 
0.7


Manganese
 
1.0


Mercury
 
0.0005


Nickel
 
4.1


Oil (Hexane Soluble)
 
50.0


Phenols
 
0.5


Phosphorus
 
25.0


Selenium
 
1.0


Silver
 
1.0


Zinc
 
4.2




 



      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the village in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.



      (8)   Materials which exert or cause:



         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids
such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues
or of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate;



         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works;



         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting "slug" as defined herein.



      (9)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



   (D)   No person, firm, corporation or other entity within the
village shall discharge any sanitary waste or industrial waste water into any
storm sewer or drainage facility constructed as part of the Illinois Route
53/Rohlwing Road improvement, the limits of improvement being between Army
Trail Road and the Elgin O’Hare Expressway, and a portion of which passes
through the village.



   (E)   No person, firm, corporation or other entity within the
village shall discharge any sanitary waste or industrial waste water into any
storm sewer or drainage facility constructed as part of the Illinois Route
390 and Interstate 290 Interchange State Contract Number 60Y95 Improvement,
said limits of improvement as previously described, which is being
constructed within the village.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85; Am. Ord. 1583-11, passed 6-21-11; Am. Ord.
1725-15, passed 3-3-15)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.37  STORMWATER AND UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.



   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. 
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon
approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



§ 53.38  REJECTION, PRETREATMENT OR EQUALIZATION OF UNACCEPTABLE WATERS OR
WASTES.



   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sanitary sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 53.37(C), or which are in
violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in Chapter 1, EPA Rules
and Regulations, Subchapter D, Water Programs, Part 403 - "General
Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution,"
published in Federal Register Volume 46, No. 18, Wednesday, January 28, 1981,
and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the village, may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the Superintendent may reject the wastes, require
pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sanitary
sewer, or require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.  If
the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of wastewater
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



§ 53.39  INTERCEPTORS SHALL BE PROVIDED WHEN NECESSARY.



   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.  All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent,
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.



(Ord 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



§ 53.40  MAINTENANCE OF PRETREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZING FACILITIES.



   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by
the owner at the owner's expense.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



§ 53.41  CONTROL MANHOLE TO BE INSTALLED.



   Each regulated industrial user shall be required to install a control
manhole and, when required by the village, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances
in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of
the wastes.  Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
village.  The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and
shall be maintained by the owner, so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



§ 53.42  ANALYSIS OF WATER AND WASTES.



   (A)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and
analyses of waters and wastes to demonstrate compliance with this chapter and
any special conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.  The number, type, and
frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as
stipulated by the village, but no less than once per year the industrial user
must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater
discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and local
standards are being met.  The owner shall report the results of measurements
and laboratory analyses to the village at such times and in such manner as
prescribed by the village.  The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the village.  At such
times as seems necessary, the village reserves the right to take measurements
and samples for analysis.



   (B)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health
Association and "USEPA Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis
of Pollutants" pursuant to 40 CFR Part 136, and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole.  In the event that no special manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the
effect of constituents upon the sewerage works and to determine the existence
of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved
will determine whether 24-hour composite sample or whether a grab sample or
samples should be taken.  Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from 24-hour composite samples, whereas pH's are
determined from periodic grab samples.)



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85) Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.43  PRETREATMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE.



   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any
industrial user whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to the conditions of
the village's general pretreatment program and § 53.37(B) and (C).



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



STORM AND SURFACE WATER



§ 53.50  (RESERVED)



§ 53.51  (RESERVED)



§ 53.52  INSPECTION; CORRECTION OF ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The Superintendent of Public Utilities shall cause to be made
periodic visual outside, inside and underground inspections of all properties
within the village, with specific attention to downspouts, roof drains, and
other inside, outside and underground connections and shall request the
property owner of property occupant to permit entry into the premises for the
making of additional inspection of the premises to ascertain if illegal
connections are present.



   (B)   Upon completion of the visual inside, outside and underground
inspections, the Superintendent of Public Utilities will advise the property
owner, in writing, if any illegal connections are observed, and will advise
on the matter of corrections for compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (C)   If corrections are to be made, the village will, at no expense
to the owner, make further inspection of the corrections to insure compliance
with this subchapter.



   (D)   If entrance to property is denied an employee or agent of the
village, the superintendent of public works shall serve notice upon the owner
or resident requiring, within a period of 30 days, a written affidavit by a
licensed professional engineer that the sewage system of the subject property
complies in all respects to the requirements and specifications of this
subchapter.  In the event the property owner fails to provide the
aforementioned affidavit within 30 days, the property shall be deemed to be
in noncompliance.



   (E)   After 60 days following the above notice, any property in
noncompliance with the provisions of this section is hereby declared a public
nuisance and the owner and resident are subject to the penalty hereinafter
set forth.



   (F)   In addition to the visual inside, outside and underground
inspections of the premises, the Superintendent of Public Utilities shall
cause other lawful tests and inspections of the sewer system to be made as
the Superintendent deems necessary in order to locate such illegal
connections and sources of extraneous flows as may exist.  The village may
also invoke other legal powers vested in it by the Illinois Compiled Statutes
for the protection of the health and welfare of the public, and institute
such legal action as it deems necessary to discover and order the
disconnection of any illegal connections that may exist.



(Ord. 560-84, passed 4-17-84; Am. Ord. 1028-99, passed 7-6-99) Penalty, see
§ 53.99



§ 53.53  MAINTENANCE OF CONNECTIONS AND LINES.



   The proper maintenance and operation of a building service sewer, house
connection or sanitary sewer line to the point of connection to the village
sanitary sewer system shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
premises served by said sanitary sewer.  "Maintenance and operation" as used
herein means keeping the sanitary sewer connection, sewer lines and other
sewer facilities in satisfactory working condition and a good state or repair
(including but not limited to preventing any obstruction or extraneous
material or flows from entering said facilities, protecting said facilities
from any damage and keeping same free from defects or malfunctions), and
making necessary provisions and taking necessary precautions to assure that
said sewer facilities are at all times capable of satisfactorily performing
the services and adequately discharging the functions and producing the final
results and purposes said facilities are intended to perform, discharge, or
produce.



(Ord. 560-84, passed 4-17-84) Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.54  DISCHARGE OF STORM AND SURFACE WATER INTO SANITARY SEWER
PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to discharge or
cause to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff water, sub-surface drainage, run-off
water from ground or paved areas, cistern overflow, or industrial cooling
operations.



(Ord. 560-84, passed 4-17-84)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.55  USE OF DOWNSPOUTS, ROOF DRAINS AND SUMP PUMPS.



   (A)   All downspouts or roof drains shall discharge onto the ground,
drainage ditches or storm drainage systems.  Footing drains shall be
connected to sump pumps and discharge shall be made into storm sewers,
drainage ditches or storm drainage systems.  Sump pumps installed to receive
and discharge ground waters or other storm waters shall be connected to storm
sewer or discharge onto the ground or into a drainage ditch or storm drainage
system.



   (B)   Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge floor drain
flow, laundry tubs or other sanitary sewage shall be connected to the
sanitary sewers pursuant to this subchapter.



   (C)   Any given sump pump shall be used for one function only,
either the discharge of storm waters or the discharge of sanitary sewage, but
not both.



(Ord. 560-84, passed 4-17-84)



§ 53.56  VIOLATIONS; NOTICE OF LIEN.



   (A)   If any person refuses to remedy a violation of the provisions
of this subchapter and said violations are remedied by the village, a notice
of lien for the cost and expenses incurred shall be recorded in the following
manner:  The village, or the person performing the service by authority of
the village, may file notice of lien in the office of the County Recorder of
Deeds.



   (B)   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
forth:



      (1)   A description of the real estate involved sufficient for
identification;



      (2)   An amount of money representing the cost and expense
incurred or payable for the service; and



      (3)   The date or dates when the expense was incurred.



   (C)   The notice of lien shall be filed within 60 days after the
cost and expense is incurred.



   (D)   If payment of the cost and expense is made after notice of
lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the village, and the
release filed in the same manner as the notice of lien.



ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION



§ 53.65  STATUTORY AUTHORITY.



   (A)   This subchapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the
Village of Itasca Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Ordinance.



   (B)   The Village Board of Trustees adopts this subchapter pursuant
to their authority to adopt ordinances regulating the quality of all
stormwater runoff channels, streams, and basins in the village.



   (C)   As applicable, the municipalities within DuPage County may
promulgate and enforce the subchapter pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§
1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-2, 11-30-8, and 11-31-2 and such other authority as
applicable to communities.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.66  PURPOSES OF THIS SUBCHAPTER.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to ensure the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the village, and protect and
enhance water quality in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) through the
regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system.  This
subchapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of discharges
other than those occurring as a direct result of precipitation and or
snowmelt into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and the storm
drainage system in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II permit process. Other
purposes of this subchapter include:



      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4
and the storm drainage system by non-stormwater discharges; and



      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the
MS4 and the storm drainage system.



   (B)   The purposes of this subchapter shall be implemented by its
provisions.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.67  INTERPRETATION OF TERMS AND WORDS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:



   (A)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense;



   (B)   Words used in the singular number include the plural number
and words used in the plural number include the singular number;



   (C)   The words "shall", "will", and "must" are mandatory, not
permissive; and



   (D)   The phrase "Director" refers to the individual responsible for
the enforcement.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.68  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings set forth except where otherwise specifically
indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have the meanings indicated by
common dictionary definition.



   BOARD.  The Village of Itasca Board.



   BUILDING.  A structure that is constructed or erected partially or
wholly above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof.  The term BUILDING
includes manufactured homes and includes both the above-ground and the
below-ground portions of the structure.



   CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA).  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   COMMITTEE.  The Stormwater Management Committee of the DuPage County
Board, authorized by ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1062.



   COMMUNITY.  Any municipality, or the unincorporated county, within
DuPage County acting as a unit of local government.



   COUNTY.  The County of DuPage, Illinois.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Village of Itasca Department of Public Works or
successor agency.



   DIRECTOR.  The Village of Itasca Director of Public Works or successor
position or his or her designee.



   DRAIN.  Piping and appurtenances for conveying a fluid.



   FACILITY.  Something that is built, installed, or established to serve
a particular purpose.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Any material, which may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial hazard to human health, safety, property, or the
environment.



   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.  An illicit connection is defined as either of
the following:



      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface that allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage
system including but not limited to any conveyances that allow any
non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water
to enter the storm  drainage system and any connections to the storm
drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said
drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by
the community; or



      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the storm drainage system that has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the community.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE.  Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to
the storm drainage system, except as exempted in § 53.75.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY.  Activities subject to an industrial NPDES
stormwater permit, as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).



   LINE.  A hollow conduit through which fluids are transported between
two or more points.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4).  A conveyance or system
of conveyances (including but not limited to sidewalks, roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, and storm sewers) owned or operated by a governmental entity and
designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used
for collecting or conveying sewage.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT.  A
permit issued by Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to Waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general
area-wide basis.



   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to the storm drainage system
that is not the direct result of precipitation and/or snow melt in the
tributary drainage basin.



   NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI).  Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
Notice of Intent to participate in coverage under the general permit to
discharge storm water associated with industrial activity.



   PARCEL.  Contiguous land under single ownership or control.



   PERSON.  Any individual, association, partnership, public or private
corporation, municipality, political subdivision, government agency, or any
other legal entity, including heirs, successors, agents, officers, and
assigns of such entity.



   pH NEUTRAL.  pH value between 6.5 and 9.0 standard units.



   PLAN.  The DuPage County Stormwater Management Plan, adopted by the
DuPage County Board in September 1989, as amended from time to time.



   POLLUTANT.  Anything that causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute
to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, wastewater, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.



   PREMISES.  Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.



   RUNOFF.  The waters derived from precipitation and or melting snow
within a tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of
that basin.



   SEWAGE.  Polluted stormwater, wastewater, or other refuse liquids
usually conveyed by sewers.



   SEWER.  An artificial conduit to carry off sewage and/or surface water
(as from rainfall), including sanitation, stormwater, and/or combined sewers.



   SEWERAGE.  A system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, pumping, and treatment of sewage.



   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM.  A facility by which stormwater is collected
and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains,
pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or
altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.



   STORMWATER.  Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage from any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything that is erected or constructed. The term
STRUCTURE includes, without limitation: buildings, manufactured homes, tanks,
dams, sewers, constructed channels, outfalls, parking lots, driveways, roads,
sidewalks, and concrete patios.



   VILLAGE.  The Village of Itasca, Illinois.



   WASTEWATER.  Water that has been used and is not for reuse unless
treated by a wastewater treatment facility.



   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES.  As defined in the CWA, WATERS OF THE
UNITED STATES applies only to surface waters, rivers, lakes, estuaries,
coastal waters, and wetlands. Not all surface waters are legally Waters of
the United States.  Generally, those waters include the following:



      (1)   All interstate waters;



      (2)   Intrastate waters used in interstate and/or foreign
commerce;



      (3)   Tributaries of the above;



      (4)   Territorial seas at the cyclical high tide mark; and



      (5)   Wetlands adjacent to all the above.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.69  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage
system from any developed or undeveloped lands within the jurisdiction of the
village, unless explicitly exempted by § 53.75, including any amendments or
revisions thereto.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.70  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity, and general welfare and the environment of the
residents of the village, and to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter
and enabling legislation.



   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this
subchapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other applicable statute, law, ordinance,
regulation, or rule, the provision that is most restrictive or imposes the
higher standards or requirements shall apply.



   (C)   The provisions of this subchapter shall be interpreted to be
cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other
ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations, in existence or which may be passed
governing any subject matter of this chapter. To the greatest extent
possible, the provisions of this subchapter shall be construed to be
consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other
ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations, and with each other, to the end
that all such provisions may be given their fullest application.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.71  PARTICIPATING COMMUNITIES.



   (A)   Participating communities within DuPage County shall
promulgate and enforce this subchapter in accordance with the following
participation levels. Participation levels shall be established through the
adoption of inter-governmental agreements.



   (B)   Duties of a full participant community include:



      (1)   Completion of an intergovernmental agreement for full
participation in the illicit discharge detection and elimination program.



      (2)   Provide the Department with a current storm sewer atlas.
An updated storm sewer atlas shall be provided to the Department annually.



      (3)   Provide assistance to the Department in acquiring access
to the storm drainage system as mutually deemed necessary.



      (4)   Provide timely prosecution of persons found to be in
violation of the subchapter when necessary per §§ 53.79 through 53.85.



      (5)   Provide the Department with documentation of any
enforcement action or prosecution from the previous one year for inclusion in
the IEPA Annual Facility Inspection Report.



   (C)   Duties of a partial participant community include:



      (1)   Completion of an intergovernmental agreement for partial
participation in the illicit discharge detection and elimination program.



      (2)   Provide the Department with a current storm sewer atlas.
An updated storm sewer atlas shall be provided to the Department annually.



      (3)   Tracing discharges to their source when the Department
determines that an illicit discharge has been located within the jurisdiction
of the community.



      (4)   Provide timely prosecution of persons found to be in
violation of the subchapter when necessary per §§ 53.79 through 53.85.



      (5)   Provide the Department with documentation of any
enforcement action or prosecution from the previous one year for inclusion in
the IEPA Annual Facility Inspection Report.



   (D)   Duties of a non-participant community include:



      (1)   Responsible for developing and implementing an illicit
discharge detection and elimination program to ensure compliance with the
IEPA NPDES regulations within municipal limits on its own behalf.



   (E)   If an intergovernmental agreement is not submitted to the
county for partial or full participation, the community will be designated as
a non-participant.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.72  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   The Department shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions
of this subchapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Department
may be delegated in writing by the Director to persons or entities acting in
the beneficial interest of, or in the employ of, the Department as
representatives, contractors, designees and/or assigns.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.73  DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.



   The duties and functions of the Director shall include:



   (A)   Determining policy related to and directing the enforcement of
this subchapter, as applicable;



   (B)   Supervising the execution of this subchapter; and



   (C)   Notifying the communities, and the IEPA, of any amendments to
this subchapter.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.74  REPRESENTATIVE CAPACITY.



   In all cases when any action is taken by the Director, or his or her
duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, such
action shall be taken in the name of and on behalf of the village, and
neither the Director nor his or her designee, in so acting for the village
shall be rendered personally liable.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.75  PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES.



   No person shall place, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow
others under their control to place, drain, or otherwise discharge into the
storm drainage system or MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants, other than normal stormwater unless specifically exempted in this
section.



   (A)   The following discharges into the MS4 or the storm drainage
system shall be prohibited:



      (1)   Discharges that are not a direct result of precipitation
and or snow melt within the drainage area of the MS4.



      (2)   Discharges from an illicit connection.



   (B)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established herein provided they do not cause an adverse effect
on water quality as determined by the Director:



      (1)   Discharges caused by governmental public works and
stormwater management units as part of their standard operations in
compliance with all applicable regulations.



      (2)   Discharges required by law or authorized by permit,
including any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit,
waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by
the USEPA and/or IEPA.



      (3)   Water line and fire hydrant flushing.



      (4)   Landscape irrigation water.



      (5)   Rising ground waters.



      (6)   Ground water infiltration.



      (7)   Pumped ground water.



      (8)   Discharges from potable water sources.



      (9)   Foundation drains.



      (10)   Air conditioning condensate.



      (11)   Irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation).



      (12)   Springs.



      (13)   Water from crawl space pumps.



      (14)   Footing drains.



      (15)   Storm sewer cleaning water.



      (16)   Water from individual residential car washing.



      (17)   Routine external building washdown, which does not use
detergents.



      (18)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.



      (19)   Dechlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges.



      (20)   Residual street wash water.



      (21)   Discharges or flows from fire fighting activities.



      (22)   Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges.



      (23)   Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been
removed).



      (24)   Discharges associated with dye testing of water line,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, private drains or septic systems; however,
this activity shall not take place until the discharger, or tester, has
provided notification to the Department at least two full business days prior
to the test date, unless an emergency situation does not allow time for such
notification.



      (25)   Other discharges approved by the Department as being
substantially like any of the discharge types enumerated in this section.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.76  PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drainage system or MS4 is prohibited.



   (B)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



   (C)   A person is considered to be in violation of this subchapter
if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drainage system
or MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.



   (D)   Connections in violation of this subchapter must be
disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved wastewater
management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the
Department and the appropriate sanitary treatment facility.



   (E)   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans,
maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system or
MS4, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt
of written notice of violation from the Department requiring that such
locating be completed. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time period
within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined,
that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or
other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm
sewer system, MS4, sanitary sewer system, or other discharge point be
identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided
to the Department.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.77  SUBMISSION OF NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI) TO THE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   Any person operating a facility subject to the IEPA's General
Permit to Discharge Storm Water Associated with Industrial Activity shall
submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the Department at the same
time the operator submits the original notice of intent to the IEPA as
applicable.



   (B)   The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the
Department either in person or by mailing it to:



      Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater



      Department of Public Works



      411 North Prospect



      Itasca, IL 60143



   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility
that is discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without
having submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the Department.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.78  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   (A)   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any
person owning, leasing or exercising control over a property, or responsible
for emergency response for a property, has information of any known or
suspected spill of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4 or the storm drainage
system, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such spill.



   (B)   In the event of such a spill, said person shall immediately
notify local emergency dispatch services and act in accordance with Illinois
Emergency Management Agency (IEMA) and IEPA regulations.



   (C)   Said person shall notify the Department of the spill in person
or by phone, facsimile, or email no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Department within three business days of the
phone notice.



   (D)   If the spill emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the spill and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five years.



   (E)   Proper notice, including containment and cleanup as outlined
in this section, shall exempt the notifying parties from applicable fines set
forth in § 53.84.



   (F)   Failure to provide notification of a spill as provided above
is a violation of this subchapter.



   (G)   Additionally, the person owning, leasing, or exercising
control of a property shall indemnify the County of DuPage and the village on
the line of the spill for any contamination or harm caused to a user of the
storm sewer system.



   (H)   Notwithstanding the language of division (B) of this section,
a party causing a spill that contaminates or harms a storm sewer system shall
not be relieved of liability for damages resulting from such act.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.79  ENFORCEMENT: VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The Director shall have primary responsibility for the
enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter.  The village may enter
into agreements with other governmental units for the purpose of implementing
this subchapter.



   (B)   A person violates this subchapter when that person:



      (1)   Performs any act expressly prohibited by any provision
of this subchapter;



      (2)   Disobeys, neglects, or fails to carry out or comply with
any provision of this subchapter or of any order or notice issued by the
Director;



      (3)   Allows any condition or act that violates any provision
of this subchapter to continue unabated on property owned, leased, managed,
or under the control of such person; or



      (4)   Directs, orders, permits, or allows a second person to
do any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this subchapter, or to
maintain or continue unabated any condition or act that violates any
provision of this subchapter on property owned, leased, managed or under the
control of the first person.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.80  NOTICE TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS: DIRECTOR MAY TAKE ACTION.



   (A)   The Director may issue a notice of violation ordering a person
to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this subchapter
and/or to cease and desist from any action conducted in violation of this
subchapter. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a notice of
violation and order to comply shall constitute a violation of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Director shall set forth the form and content of any
notices issued under this subchapter.



   (C)   The Director may issue a warning of violation ordering a
person to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter. If a person fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a
warning, the Director may, thereafter, issue a notice of violation.



   (D)   The Director may issue a warning of violation and disburse
educational materials outlining appropriate measures to minimize the
discharge of pollutants.



   (E)   If a person fails to comply with an order issued under this
section, the Director may direct the appropriate legal counsel to commence
any legal proceeding authorized by this subchapter, under the law or equity,
necessary to enforce any provision of this subchapter and/or to protect
public health and safety. Any legal action brought under this subchapter
shall be in the name of the village.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.81  EMERGENCY CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.



   (A)   The Department may obtain an emergency order in the event of
the following:



      (1)   Any person has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this subchapter or any order issued hereunder, or that the
person's past violations are likely to recur; and



      (2)   That the person's violation has caused or contributed to
an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or storm drainage system and an
imminent threat of violation is present.



      (3)   The Department may issue the emergency order to the
violator directing that the violator:



         (a)   Immediately cease and desist all such violations;



         (b)   Immediately comply with all ordinance
requirements; and



         (c)   Take such appropriate preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.



   (B)   Any person notified of an emergency order under this section
shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In
the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with
the emergency order, the Department may take such steps as deemed necessary
to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4, storm drainage system, or Waters of
the United States and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment,
including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer
connection, or other municipal utility services. The Department may allow the
person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Department that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger
under this subchapter. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for
any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed
written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Department within 15
days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and
desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the violator.



   (C)   The Department may also seek any appropriate judicial orders
to enforce its emergency orders.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.82  VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any
provision of this subchapter shall constitute a threat to public health and
safety and is declared and deemed a public nuisance.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.83  NUISANCE ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Whenever a nuisance shall be found to exist on any premise,
the Director may order such nuisance to be abated upon determination that the
nuisance constitutes a threat to public health or safety.



   (B)   In the event of an emergency situation, as determined by the
Director, involving an immediate threat to public health and safety, the
Director may direct legal counsel to immediately commence any legal or
equitable proceeding necessary to restrain, abate, and/or remedy said
situation. The Director may take such action without having to first issue a
notice of violation to the person(s) having control of, or acting as agent
for, such premise where the nuisance is located, or, waiting for such
person(s) to abate or remove such nuisance as previously ordered by the
Director.



   (C)   In all other cases, the Director may notify, in writing, the
person(s) having control of, or acting as agent for, such premise where the
nuisance is located and directing such person(s) to abate or remove such
nuisance within such time as is stated on the notice. Upon the failure or
refusal of such person(s) to comply with the notice, the Director may direct
that appropriate proceeding commence to compel the abatement, or removal, of
such a nuisance in any manner allowed by law, equity, or this subchapter
and/or authorizing the Department to act to abate, or remove, such nuisance.
The person(s) having control of such premises, in addition to the other
remedies provided by this subchapter, shall be liable to the Department for
any costs incurred by the Department to effect such abatement, or removal,
including reasonable attorney's fees and other costs of enforcement, to be
recovered by a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.84  FINES.



   Any person violating any provision of this subchapter shall be guilty
of a petty offense. Such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000 each day, or any portion of a day, during which such violation is
committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.85  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies listed in this subchapter are not exclusive of any other
remedy available under this subchapter or under any applicable federal,
state, or local law and do not supersede or limit, any and all other
penalties provided by law. The Director may seek, at his discretion,
cumulative remedies.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.86  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS DUE TO DETECTION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this
subchapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would
abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The Department shall notify a violator
of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the
Department for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if
the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this
section, without the prior approval of the Department.



   (B)   In emergency situations, the Department may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which presents or may
present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health
or welfare of persons, or to the MS4, storm drainage system, or Waters of the
United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued
in an emergency, the Department may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4, storm drainage system, or Waters of
the United States, or to minimize danger to public health and safety. The
Department shall obtain an emergency court order authorizing such termination.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.87  RIGHT TO APPEAL.



   Every request for an appeal shall be made, in writing, to the
Director.  The Director may delegate the hearing of appeals to the Village
Stormwater Oversight Committee of the Village Board in the manner provided
for below.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling, or determination
by the Director, or by any interpretation or application of any provision of
this subchapter may appeal such matter. An appeal of any decision made by the
Director shall be made within seven days of the decision contested, excepting
an appeal involving the assessment charge or calculation of any fine or
penalty in which cases an appeal shall be brought before said amount becomes
30 days past due.



   (B)   The appeal procedure shall commence when the person aggrieved
notifies the Director, in writing, of the intent to appeal the decision of
the Director. Such notice shall contain a short, clear, statement stating the
following:



      (1)   Identifying the decision of the Director which such
person is appealing and how the subchapter has been misread, misinterpreted,
or misapplied in this instance and/or any mistakes of fact the aggrieved
believes the Director to have relied upon; and



      (2)   The name and both a mailing address and a telephone
number of the person making the request, which contact information shall be
used for giving notices related to the appeal. The person making the request
shall attach all written materials on which he or she intends to rely upon in
support of the request.



   (C)   The Director may, without conducting a hearing, grant relief
sought by the appeal, or may set the matter over for a hearing in the manner
provided in this section.



   (D)   Upon receipt of such notice of appeal, if relief is not
granted by the Director in accordance with this section, the Director shall
set a date for a hearing. Such hearing shall take place no fewer than 14 days
nor more than 30 days from the date that the Director receives such notice of
appeal unless the Director and party requesting the hearing agree to a
different schedule. The Director shall notify the person making the appeal of
the date of such hearing.



   (E)   At the hearing the person making the appeal may appear in
person or represented by counsel, or submit his case in writing. The decision
concerning the appeal shall be in writing, shall be communicated to the
person making the appeal, and shall state a finding upon which the decision
is based.



   (F)   The Village Stormwater Oversight Committee shall have the
authority to reverse, modify, or affirm any decision, ruling, or
determination by the Director made pursuant to this subchapter upon appeal.
The Stormwater Oversight Committee shall not act in a manner that would
violate or in any way conflict with any federal or state standard or
requirement. The Committee or County Board may adopt such additional rules
and procedures, as it deems appropriate for performing such matters.



   (G)   The decision of the Oversight Committee may be appealed to the
Village Board in accord with the Village Board Rules.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.88  ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.



   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements
set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within
seven days of the decision of the Director or Committee upholding the
decision of the Department, then representatives of the Department are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property. In no case shall an appeal stay or bar the
village from commencing a legal action seeking emergency relief.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.89  SEVERABILITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter are hereby declared to be severable.
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this subchapter or the
application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be
held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or
application of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.90  MOST RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS APPLY.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall be interpreted to be
cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other
ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations in existence or which may be passed
governing any subject matter of this subchapter. To the greatest extent
possible, the provisions of this subchapter shall be construed to be
consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other
ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations, and with each other, to the end
that all such provisions may be given their fullest application.



   (B)   This subchapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other
ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. Where any provision
of this subchapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any
other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever
provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for
human health or the environment shall control.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.91  ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.



   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this
subchapter are minimum standards; therefore, this subchapter does not intend
or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no
contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.



(Ord. 1537-10, passed 8-17-10)



§ 53.99 PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this
chapter, except § 53.07, shall be served by the village with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender shall, within the period
of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.  The
village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any
violation of any provision of this chapter.



   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided for in division (A), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on
conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not less than $25 nor more
than $500 for each violation.  Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation.



(Ord. 583-85, passed 5-14-85)



CHAPTER 54:  COMBINED WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM



Section



   54.01   Definitions



   54.02   Water meters



   54.03   Water user service charges



   54.04   Sewer user service charges



   54.05   Review of water and sewer rates



   54.06   Bills and liability for payment



   54.07   System of accounts and audit



   54.08   Notice of rates



   54.09   Effective date of rates



   54.10   Powers and authority of inspectors



   54.11   Violations



 



   54.99   Penalty



§ 54.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions given in Section 1 of the Sewage and Waste Control
Ordinance of the Village of Itasca, as amended by Ordinance No. 583-85,
(Chapter 53) shall be applicable to this chapter the same as if written
herein.  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:



   BASIC USER CHARGE.   The amount to be paid each billing period by all
public waterworks and sewerage works users for payment of operation and
maintenance costs plus replacement of the waterworks and sewerage works of
the village.



   CONNECTION FEE.   The amount to be paid by all new users for
connecting to the waterworks and sewerage works of the village.



   REPLACEMENT COSTS.   Expenditures for purchasing and installing
equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the
useful life of the waterworks and sewerage works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed.  The term
"operation and maintenance" includes replacement.



   SEWER USER SERVICE CHARGE.   The total amount to be paid each billing
period by public sewer users including the basic user charge, and a surcharge
if applicable.



   SURCHARGE.   The amount to be paid each billing period by certain
public waterworks and sewerage works users in addition to the basic user
charge and the debt service charge.



   USEFUL LIFE.  The estimated period during which the sewerage works
will be operated from the date of start-up of any facilities constructed with
a federal grant.



   WATER USER SERVICE CHARGE.  The total amount to be paid each billing
period by public waterworks users including the basic user charge, the debt
service charge, and a surcharge if applicable.



   WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE REVENUE FUND.  The principal accounting
designation for all revenues received for the operation of the waterworks and
sewerage works of the village.



(Ord. 695, passed 5-22-90)



§ 54.02  WATER METERS.



   (A)   All buildings using the public waterworks and sewerage works
shall have a water meter furnished by the village installed in a location
that has easy access for reading, maintenance and replacement.



   (B)   Before any premises are occupied a water meter shall be
installed therein as herein required after final inspection by the Plumbing
Inspector.



   (C)   The Superintendent or his or her authorized representative
shall be permitted entry to buildings using the public waterworks and
sewerage works to read all water meters used in the village at such
reasonable times as necessary to determine billing charges for water and
sewer service.



(Ord. 695, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 1553-10, passed 12-21-10) Penalty, see §
54.99



§ 54.03  WATER USER SERVICE CHARGES.



   Rates and charges for the use of and for the service supplied by the
village waterworks, are based on water meter readings of the amount of water
consumed and the size of the service pipe providing water to the user.  The
rates and charges are as follows:



 


WATER RATES & CHARGES




Calendar Year

 
2016
 
2017
 
2018




Monthly Minimum Charges



up to 1" service

 
$11.50
 
$12.36
 
$13.29



1.25-1.5" service

 
$14.38
 
$17.00
 
$19.94



2" service

 
$17.25
 
$21.63
 
$26.58



3" service

 
$31.05
 
$35.23
 
$39.87



4" service

 
$40.83
 
$46.66
 
$53.16



6" service

 
$60.38
 
$69.53
 
$79.74



8" service

 
$79.93
 
$92.39
 
$106.32



10" service

 
$99.48
 
$115.26
 
$132.90



12" service

 
$119.03
 
$138.12
 
$159.48


Combined Water Usage


   Rate (per 1,000 gallons)
 
$9.41
 
$10.13
 
$10.90




 



   (A)   The rates listed above take effect on January 1 of each
respective year and are effective until December 31 of each respective
year.  Effective January 1, 2019, rates will be charged at an amount 5%
greater than the rates charged for 2018, and rates will continue to increase
5% effective January 1 of each subsequent year.



   (B)   The user shall pay the listed monthly minimum charge for the
service diameter  specified plus the product of the water used during that
month at the rate per 1,000 gallons.



   (C)   Non-residents.  Wherever any facility, dwelling or building
uses either sewer or water, or both, and such facility, dwelling or building
is located outside the village limits, then the user or same shall pay a rate
150% of the residential rates and charges provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 695, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 733, passed 10-22-91; Am. Ord. 791-93,
passed 7-20-93; Am. Ord. 1550-10, passed 11-2-10; Am. Ord. 1570-11, passed
4-19-11; Am. Ord. 1596-11, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 1709-14, passed
10-21-14; Am. Ord. 1784-15, passed 12-15-15; Am. Ord. 1805-16, passed 6-7-16;
Am. Ord. 1815-16, passed 9-6-16) Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.04  SEWER USER SERVICE CHARGES.



   Rates and charges for the use of the village sewer system are based on
water meter readings of the amount of water consumed by a user.  The rates
and charges are as follows:



 


SEWER RATES & CHARGES




Calendar Year

 
2016
 
2017
 
2018




Monthly Minimum Charges



up to 1" service

 
$13.50
 
$14.51
 
$15.60



1.25-1.5" service

 
$16.88
 
$19.95
 
$23.40



2" service

 
$20.25
 
$25.39
 
$31.20



3" service

 
$36.45
 
$41.35
 
$46.80



4" service

 
$47.93
 
$54.78
 
$62.40



6" service

 
$70.88
 
$81.62
 
$93.60



8" service

 
$93.83
 
$108.46
 
$124.80



10" service

 
$116.78
 
$135.31
 
$156.00



12" service

 
$139.73
 
$162.15
 
$187.20


Combined Water Usage


   Rate (per 1,000 gallons)
 
$8.99
 
$9.68
 
$10.42




 



   (A)   The rates listed above take effect on January 1 of each
respective year and are effective until December 31 of each respective year.
Effective January 1, 2019, rates will be charged at an amount 5% greater than
the rates charged for 2018, and rates will continue to increase 5% effective
January 1 of each subsequent year.



   (B)   The user shall pay the listed monthly minimum charge plus the
product of the water used during that month at the specified rate per 1,000
gallons. Charges are applicable in the fiscal year which the water was
consumed.



   (C)   Non-residents.  Wherever any facility, dwelling, or building
uses either sewer or water, or both, and such facility, dwelling, or building
is located outside the village limits, then the user or same shall pay a rate
150% of the residential rates and charges provided in this chapter.



   (D)   The sewer rates and charges are based on the water usage as
recorded by approved water meters and/or sewage meters for waste-water having
concentrations of 250 mg/l of BOD and 300 mg/l of total suspended solids.



      (1)   Metered usage shall be read to the lowest even increment
of 100 gallons.



      (2)   Sewer users who obtain any portion of their water
service from other than the village water supply shall install and maintain,
at no expense to the village, water meters of a type approved by the
Superintendent for the purpose of metering the water usage obtained from such
other sources.



      (3)   Wherever required by the Superintendent, sewage metering
devices shall be installed and maintained, at no expense to the village, when
the volume of wastewater discharged to the public sewer cannot be otherwise
determined by use of water meters.



      (4)   Metering devices shall not be removed without the
consent of the Superintendent unless sewer use service is cancelled.



   (E)   The sewer rates and charges to be paid by all non-metered
sewer users shall be equal to consumption of 10,000 gallons per month.



   (F)   Whenever the Superintendent determines that a non-metered
sewer user is discharging more than 10,000 gallons per month, the
Superintendent may require such non-metered user to install metering devices
on the building water supply or building sewer to measure the volume of
wastewater discharged to the public sewer.



   (G)   Surcharge program.



      (1)   A treatment service surcharge shall be levied to all
non-residential users whose wastewater contains a concentration of a
pollutant which exceeds a surcharge pollutant concentration threshold listed
in the Village of Itasca Surcharge Policy (surcharge policy). Surchargeable
pollutants include, but are not limited to:



         (a)   Ammonia-nitrogen;



         (b)   Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD);



         (c)   Fats, oils, and grease (FOG);



         (d)   Phosphorus; and/or



         (e)   Total suspended solids (TSS).



      (2)   A surcharge is applicable to the mass of pollutant
discharged above the surcharge pollutant concentration threshold.



      (3)   The village retains the ability to waive the surcharge
fee for one or more pollutants.



      (4)   Pollutant concentrations in a non-residential user's
wastewater shall be determined by wastewater sampling performed in accordance
with techniques prescribed in the Code of Federal Regulations Title 40 Part
136. Sampling and analysis shall be conducted as often as deemed necessary by
the Superintendent and shall be binding as the basis for calculating the
surcharge.



      (5)   The appropriate flow measurement devices and methods
consistent with approved scientific practices shall be selected and used to
ensure the accuracy and reliability of measurements of the volume of
monitored discharges. The devices used to monitor flow are subject to the
approval of the village and shall be installed, calibrated, and maintained to
ensure that the accuracy of the measurements is consistent with the accepted
capability of that type of device.  Devices selected shall be capable of
measuring flows with a maximum deviation of less than 10% from true discharge
rates throughout the range of expected discharge volumes.



      (6)   The surcharge rates are contained in the surcharge
policy and shall be reviewed at the discretion of the village. Proposed
modifications to surcharge rates shall be approved by the Director,
Superintendent, and the Village Finance Director.



      (7)   The village shall make a written or digital copy of the
current version of the surcharge policy available, within a reasonable amount
of time, upon the request of a non-residential user of the village water
supply and POTW who is, or in the opinion of the village has the possibility
to be, subject to the surcharge program.  A user desiring a copy of the
surcharge policy should contact Village Hall.



(Ord. 695, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 1550-10, passed 11-2-10; Am. Ord.
1570-11, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord. 1596-11, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 1709-14,
passed 10-21-14; Am. Ord. 1784-15, passed 12-15-15; Am. Ord. 1805-16, passed
6-7-16; Am. Ord. 1815-16, passed 9-6-16) Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.05  REVIEW OF WATER AND SEWER RATES.



   The adequacy of the water and sewer user service rates and charges
shall be reviewed annually by the certified public accountants for the
village in their annual audit report. If, at any time, the rates and charges
are not sufficient to pay the costs of operation and maintenance, to provide
adequate funds for replacement, and to pay the principal and interest of
outstanding bonds and provide bond reserve funds required by bond ordinances,
the Board of Trustees shall forthwith increase the rates and charges so that
the same are sufficient to provide adequate revenues for said purposes.



(Ord. 695, passed 5-22-90)



§ 54.06  BILLS AND LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT.



   (A)   Bills and payment.  All property upon which any building has
been or may hereafter be erected having a connection with any mains or pipes
which may be hereafter constructed and used in connection with the village
water and sewer systems shall pay monthly rates as are from time to time
regularly adopted by the Village Board.



      (1)   Notices and late fees.



         (a)   First notice.  A notice stating the amount due
will be sent to each user on or before the first business day of each
month.  The amount indicated is due on the twenty-first day of the month. If
the twenty-first day of the month falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or state or
federal holiday, the amount shall be due on the first following business day.



         (b)   Second (late) notice.  If the amount due is not
paid on or before the twenty-first day of the month, a second notice will be
sent to the user, and a late fee of 10% of the total amount owed will be
added to the amount due.



         (c)   Notice of delinquency.  If the amount due is not
paid within seven business days after the second (late) notice is sent, the
user and the owner of record of the property served will be sent a letter
stating the amount owed, and a $10 delinquency fee will be applied to the
customer's account.



      (2)   Payment plans and fee waivers.



         (a)   If a user has not had a fee waived or entered a
water bill payment plan within the previous 24 months, and the total amount
he or she owes is less than $100, the user may contact the Utility Billing
Manager in writing to request a fee waiver and/or payment plan. The Utility
Billing Manager is authorized to grant or deny fee waivers and enter water
bill payment plans for less than $100 where the user has not had a fee waived
or entered a water bill payment plan within the previous 24 months. A user
may appeal the Utility Billing Manager's decision to the Finance Director by
a letter to the Finance Director stating his or her reasons for appeal. The
Finance Director may waive up to a one month period's late fees. A user may
appeal the Finance Director's decision to the Village Administrator by letter
to the Village Administrator stating his or her reasons for appeal. A user
may appeal the Village Administrator's decision to the Village Board of
Trustees by a letter to the Village President stating his or her reasons for
appeal. The decision of the Village Board of Trustees shall be final.



         (b)   If a user has had a fee waived or entered a water
bill payment plan within the previous 24 months, and the total amount he or
she owes is $100 or greater, he or she may contact the Finance Director in
writing to request a fee waiver and/or payment plan. The Finance Director is
authorized to grant or deny fee waivers and enter water bill payment plans.
The Finance Director may waive up to a one month period's late fees. A user
may appeal the Finance Director's decision to the Village Administrator by
letter to the Village Administrator stating his or her reasons for appeal. A
user may appeal the Village Administrator's decision to the Village Board of
Trustees by a letter to the Village President stating his or her reasons for
appeal. The decision of the Village Board of Trustees shall be final.



         (c)   Water bill payment plans.  All water bill payment
plans shall be written and shall be signed by the user. An interest rate of
1.5% a month may apply to amounts discharged by water bill payment plan, at
the discretion of the Utility Billing Manager or the Finance Director.  The
village will not shut off the water of a user who has a written water bill
payment plan, unless that user breaches the water bill payment plan.



   (B)   Non-payment of bills.



      (1)   Shut-off notice. If the full amount owed by a user is
not paid within seven business days after a notice of delinquency is sent,
the user will be sent a shut-off notice, certified and return receipt
requested, by United States Postal Service. The owner of record of the
property served, if different than the user, will be sent a copy of the
shut-off notice by First Class Mail by the United States Postal Service.



         (a)   A $15 delinquency fee will be applied to that
user's account.



         (b)   The notice will state the amount owed, and inform
the user that his or her water will be shut off if payment in full is not
received within five business days.



         (c)   The notice will provide that the user may contact
the Village Administrator to request a waiver of one month of late fees
and/or request a water bill payment plan agreement, and that the user may
appeal the Village Administrator's decision to grant or deny such request to
the Village Board of Trustees. Appeals must be made in writing to the Village
President.



      (2)   Water service may be disconnected the fifth business day
after a shut-off notice is sent if payment of the amount owed and delinquent
is not received or for other good cause necessitating disconnection. Service
may not be resumed until all past-due charges and a turn-on fee is paid.
Turn-on fees are as follows: If the water is turned on between 7:30 a.m. and
2:45 p.m., the fee is $75. If the water is turned on between 2:46 p.m. and
7:29 a.m., the fee is $150.  In no case shall water service be restored
unless the turn-on fee is paid and 100% of the balance owed is received.
Turn-on fees and past due payments may be made in cash, cashier's check, or
credit card only; no personal or business checks will be accepted.



      (3)   No person owing a past-due bill and moving to other
premises within the village shall be supplied with water until the past-due
charges are paid in full.



   (C)   Liens and foreclosure.



      (1)   Charges for water shall be a lien upon the premises as
provided by statute. Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid 60 days
after it has been rendered, the Village Clerk may file with the County
Recorder a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal
description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a
notice that the village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all
charges for water served subsequent to the period covered by the bill.



      (2)   If the consumer of water whose bill is unpaid is not the
owner of the premises and the Clerk has notice of this, then notice shall be
mailed to the owner of the premises, if the owner's address is known to the
Clerk, whenever such bills remain unpaid for a period of 60 days after it has
been rendered.



      (3)   The failure of the Clerk to record such lien claim or to
mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall
not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid water bills as is
mentioned in division (C)(4) below.



      (4)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid water charges
shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall
be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity
in the name of the village.



      (5)   The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed
to institute such proceedings, in the name of the village, in any court
having jurisdiction over such matters, against any property for which water
bill has remained unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered.



   (D)   Civil actions.



      (1)   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the
user of the water and/or sewer service shall be jointly and severally liable
to pay for such service to such premises, and such service is furnished to
the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the
premises, occupant and user of such service are jointly and severally liable
therefor to the village.



      (2)   In the alternative, the village may, at its discretion,
file suit to collect such amounts as are delinquent and due against the
property owner, the real estate, the user, or any combination thereof in a
civil action and shall collect as well all attorney fees incurred by the
village in such suit, the same to be fixed by order of the court.



(Ord. 695, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 1553-10, passed 12-21-10; Am. Ord.
1805-16, passed 6-7-16) Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.07  SYSTEM OF ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT.



   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall receive all revenues from the
combined waterworks and sewerage system and all other funds and monies
incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered to
him/her and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the "Village of
Itasca Waterworks and Sewerage Fund," and the Treasurer shall administer such
funds in every respect in the manner provided by the provisions of Article 62
of the "Revised Cities and Villages Act" effective January 1, 1942, and all
laws amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto.



(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-139-1 et seq.)



   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall keep or cause to be kept full and
complete books of accounts separate and apart from any other records of the
village showing in detail all monies received with data and sources and all
matters pertaining to his/her office in a clear and methodical manner. He/she
shall also keep such other books as the Board of Trustees may from time to
time direct. All such books, accounts and papers pertaining to said office
shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of the Board of
Trustees, any member thereof, the holder of any outstanding water-works and
sewerage revenue bonds, or any duly authorized agent or agents of such
holder. The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks
and sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he/she shall cause to be
made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the
receipts and disbursements of the combined waterworks and sewerage system.
The books and records of the combined waterworks and sewerage system shall be
maintained in segregated accounts for the separate auditability of the
waterworks, sewer system and wastewater treatment works.



   (C)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual
audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the
sewerage works including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer user
service charges do in fact comply with this chapter.  In this regard, the
financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the
following:



      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons of wastewater flow for
the fiscal year.



      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.



      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.



      (4)   Number of users connected to the sewerage works.



      (5)   Number of non-metered users.



      (6)   A list of users discharging industrial wastes and volume
of waste discharged.



   (D)   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized
representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records
of the village which are applicable to the village system of user charges for
the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof
to insure compliance with the terms of the federal grant.



(Ord. 695, passed 5-22-90)



§ 54.08  NOTICE OF RATES.



   A copy of the ordinance, upon which this chapter is based, properly
certified by the Village Clerk, shall be filed in the office of the Recorder
of Deeds of DuPage County, Illinois, and shall be deemed public notice to all
persons of the rates and charges of the village for water and sewer service
and industrial cost recovery.



(Ord. 695, passed 5-22-90)



§ 54.09  EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES.



   The rates and charges established for water and sewer user service
shall be effective as of May 1, 1990, and on bills to be rendered for each
bi-monthly period thereafter.



(Ord. 695, passed 5-22-90)



§ 54.10  POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. The Superintendent or his representative
shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge
to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in division (A) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the village shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the village employees and the village shall indemnify
the company against loss or damage to its property by village employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
company to maintain safe conditions as required in § 53.52. 



   (C)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
Village bearing proper credentials and identifications shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the village holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurements, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion
of the sewerage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the
terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.



(Ord. 695, passed 5-22-90)



§ 54.11  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, shall
be served by the village with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations. The village may revoke any
permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of
this chapter.



(Ord. 695, passed 5-22-90)



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in § 54.11, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction
thereof shall be fined in the amount not less than $25 nor more than $500 for
each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.  Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation.



(Ord. 695, passed 5-22-90)



CHAPTER 55:  CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL



Section



   55.01   Purpose



   55.02   Application



   55.03   Policy



   55.04   Definitions



   55.05   Water system



   55.06   Cross-connection prohibited



   55.07   Survey and investigations



   55.08   Where protection is required



   55.09   Type of protection required



   55.10   Backflow prevention devices



   55.11   Inspection and maintenance



   55.12   Booster pumps



   55.13   Violations



 



   55.99   Penalty



§ 55.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is:



   (A)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination
or pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the
public water supply system.



   (B)   To promote the elimination or control of existing
cross-connections, actual or potential, between the public or customer's
potable water system and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and
sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety.



   (C)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of
cross-connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of
the public and customer's potable water system.



(Ord. 1219-04, passed 9-7-04)



§ 55.02  APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall apply to all premises served by the public potable
water supply system of the village.



(Ord. 1219-04, passed 9-7-04)



§ 55.03  POLICY.



   The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of
the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or
back-siphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service
connection.  If, in the judgment of the Public Utilities Superintendent or
his or her authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device
is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the Public
Utilities Superintendent shall give notice to the customer to install such
approve backflow prevention device at each service connection to the
premises.  The customer shall immediately install such approved device or
devices at his own expense; failure, refusal or inability on the part of the
customer to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute
grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or
devices have been installed.  The customer shall retain records of
installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in § 55.07(D)(4)
for a period of at least five years.  The Public Utilities Superintendent
may require the customer to submit a cross-connection inspection report to
the village to assist in determining whether or not service line protection
will be required.



(Ord. 1219-04, passed 9-7-04)



§ 55.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGENCY. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



   APPROVED.  Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the
Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of
Southern California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water
Works Association, American National Standards Institute or by the National
Sanitation Foundation.



   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM.  Any water source or system on or available to
the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system.  These auxiliary waters may include water from
another purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a course such as
wells, lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water.  These waters
may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water course
or system over which the water purveyor does not have control.



   BACKFLOW.  The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other
than the intended source of the potable water supply.



   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.  Any device, method, or type of
construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system.  All
devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of
the Illinois Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



   CONSUMER or CUSTOMER.  Owner, official custodian or person in control
of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water
system.



   CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer's
premises.  A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water
system.



   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of
any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.



   CROSS-CONNECTION.  Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and
the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby
there may be a flow from one system into the other.



      (1)    DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION.  A cross-connection formed
when a water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe
substance.



      (2)   INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION.  A cross-connection through
which an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise
introduced into a safe potable water system.



   CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE.  A safety device installed in a
potable water line to prevent potable water and fluids of any kind from being
mixed.  Cross-connection control devices include, but are not limited to:
atmospheric vacuum breaker, double check valve backflow preventer, double
detector check valve backflow preventer, dual check valve backflow preventer,
and reduced pressure principle backflow preventer.



   CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTOR (CCCDI).  A person who is a
licensed plumber in the state of Illinois and who has been certified by the
Agency in accordance with 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653.802 to inspect, test,
maintain and repair cross-connection control devices.



   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY.  An assembly composed of single,
independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015.  A
double check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each
end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness
of each check valve.



   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of
the receptacle.



   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or
its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and
well-being of customers.  The word "severe" as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD
means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in
death or significant reduction in the quality of life.



   INSPECTION.  A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically
all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and
installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the
Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.



   NON-POTABLE WATER.  Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary
use as determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604.



   PLUMBING.  The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person.  Plumbing includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all
purposes, including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the
source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in the
street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work or assemble.  Plumbing includes all
piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in
water supply systems. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances,
and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related
ventilation system of any building or buildings where a person or persons
live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to
the sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet beyond the foundation
walls.



   POLLUTION.  The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.



   POTABLE WATER.  Water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm.
Code 604 for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.



   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION.  A fixture or appurtenance with threaded
hose connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate
extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.



   PROCESS FLUID(S).  Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a customer's potable water system.  This includes but is
not limited to:



      (1)   Polluted or contaminated waters;



      (2)   Process waters;



      (3)   Used waters originating from the water supply system
which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;



      (4)   Cooling waters;



      (5)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from
wells, lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;



      (6)   Chemicals in solution or suspension;



      (7)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous
fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for fire fighting purposes.



   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY.  All mains, pipes and structures through which
water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well
structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants,
reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally,
actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water from
drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least 15 service
connections or which regularly serve at least 25 persons at least 60 days per
year.  A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a
"non-community water supply."



   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.  A device
containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with
an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between
the two check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal
flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two
checks shall be less than the supply pressure.  In case of leakage of either
valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall
operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the
supply pressure.  The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves
located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with
properly located test cocks.



   SERVICE CONNECTION.  The opening, including all fittings and
appurtenances, at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.



   SURVEY.  The collection of information pertaining to a customer's
piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water
supply system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection
and testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located
within that customer's piping system.  The survey must be in written form,
and should not be an actual plumbing inspection.



   SYSTEM HAZARD.  A condition through which an aesthetically
objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the
public water supply system or a customer's potable water system.



   USED WATER.  Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
customer's water system after it has passed through the service connection
and is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.



   WATER PURVEYOR.  The owner or official custodian of a public water
system.



(Ord. 1219-04, passed 9-7-04)



§ 55.05  WATER SYSTEM.



   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up to two parts:
the public water supply system and the customer's water system.



   (B)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source
facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those
facilities of the potable water system under the control of the Public
Utilities Superintendent up to the point where the customer's water system
begins.



   (C)   The source shall include all components of the facilities
utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the
public water supply distribution system.



   (D)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the
network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the customer's
water system.



   (E)   The customer's water system shall include all parts of the
facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public
water supply distribution system to points of use.



(Ord. 1219-04, passed 9-7-04)



§ 55.06  CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection
control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure
proper operation on a continuing basis.



   (B)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the agency or the village.



   (C)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.



(Ord. 1219-04, passed 9-7-04)  Penalty, see § 55.99



§ 55.07  SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   The customer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times
to the approved cross-connection control device inspector for the inspection
of the presence or absence of cross-connections within the customer's
premises, and testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection control
devices within the customer's premises.



   (B)   On request of the Public Utilities Superintendent, or his
authorized representative, the customer shall furnish information regarding
the piping system or systems or water use within the customer's premises. 
The customer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the Public
Utilities Superintendent for the verification of information submitted b the
inspection customer to the public water supply custodian regarding
cross-connection inspection results.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water customer to
arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on his premise to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system
through which contamination or pollutants could backflow into his or the
public potable water system.  All cross-connection control or other plumbing
inspections must be conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch. 225, Act 320 § 3.1.



   (D)   It is the responsibility of the water customer to prevent
backflow into the public water system by ensuring that:



      (1)   All cross-connections are removed, or approved
cross-connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and
back-siphonage;



      (2)   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions;



      (3)   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at
the time of installation and at least annually by a person approved by the
agency as a cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection
of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions; and



      (4)   Testing and records.



         (a)   Each device shall be testing at the time of
installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the
manufacturer.



         (b)   Records submitted to the community public water
supply shall be available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance
with ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5 § 4.



         (c)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the
date of most recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.



         (d)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:



            1.   Date of each test;



            2.   Name and approval number of person performing
the test;



            3.   Test results;



            4.   Repairs or servicing required;



            5.   Repairs and date completed; and



            6.   Servicing performed and date completed.



(Ord. 1219-04, passed 9-7-04)



§ 55.08  WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.



   (A)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all
connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680.  In
addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a customer's water system serving premises, where in the
judgment of the Public Utilities Superintendent, actual or potential hazards
to the public water supply system exist.  The installation shall be done at
the sole expense of the customer being served, and shall comply with all
applicable village codes, regulations and ordinances.



   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on
each service line to a customer's water system serving premises where the
following conditions exist:



      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such
auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the Public Utilities
Superintendent and the source is approved by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency.



      (2)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can
create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. 
This shall include premises having sources or systems containing process
fluids or waters originating from the public water supply system which are no
longer under the sanitary control of the Public Utilities Superintendent.



      (3)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the
judgment of the Public Utilities Superintendent and/or the Cross-Connection
Control Device Inspector, are not correctable or intricate plumbing
arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not
cross-connections exist.



      (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or
other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey.



      (5)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections
being established or re-established.



   (C)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all
connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653.  In
addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to customer's water system serving, but no necessarily limited
to, the following types of facilities unless the Public Utilities
Superintendent determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public
water supply system exists:



      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;



      (2)   Laboratories;



      (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;



      (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or
storm water pumping stations;



      (5)   Food or beverage processing plants;



      (6)   Chemical plants;



      (7)   Metal plating industries;



      (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;



      (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear
reactors;



      (10)   Car washes;



      (11)   Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and
trucks;



      (12)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks;



      (13)   Horticultural nurseries;



      (14)   Commercial laundry/dry cleaning facilities.



(Ord. 1219-04, passed 9-7-04)



§ 55.09  TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   The type of protection required under § 55.08 of this chapter
shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:



      (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be
installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with
substances that could cause a severe health hazard.



      (2)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with a
substance that could cause a system or health hazard.



      (3)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double
check value assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system
may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not
dangerous to health.



   (B)   The type of protection required under § 55.08 of this chapter
shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device.



   (C)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is
used for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow
presenters shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public
water supply when:



      (1)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire
retardant or other chemicals;



      (2)   Water is pumped into the system from another source;



      (3)   Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source; or
water can be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; or



      (4)   There is a connection whereby another source can be
introduced into the fire safety system.



   (D)   All other safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.



(Ord. 1219-04, passed 9-7-04)



§ 55.10  BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.



   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by this
chapter shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works
Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National
Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be
in compliance with applicable industry specification.



   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.  Maintenance as recommended by the
manufacturer of the device shall be performed.  The manufacturer's
maintenance manual shall be available on-site.



(Ord. 1219-04, passed 9-7-04)



§ 55.11  INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the customer at any premises on which
backflow prevention devices required by this chapter are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the
following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are
specified in manufacturer's instructions.



      (1)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to
document that a 12 proper vertical distance is maintained between the
discharge point of the service line and the flood level of the receptacle at
the time of installation and at least annually thereafter.  Corrections to
improper or bypassed air gaps shall be made within 24 hours.



      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and
tested at time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required
service performed within five days.



      (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually
or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer, and required service
performed within five days.



   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved
by the agency as competent to service the device.  Proof of approval shall
be in writing.



   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of
repairs.



   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:



      (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection;



      (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test
or visual inspection;



      (3)   Test results;



      (4)   Repairs or servicing required;



      (5)   Repairs and date completed; and



      (6)   Servicing performed and date completed.



   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this chapter
are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense
of the customer without delay in accordance with § 55.10.



   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made
inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific
authorization by the Public Utilities Superintendent.



   (G)   Records and/or reports of all required inspections and tests
of backflow prevention devices shall be provided to the village through the
third party inspection reporting system, Backflow Solutions, Inc., at a fee
of $14.95 per record or report.



(Ord. 1219-04, passed 9-7-04; Am. Ord. 1602-11, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord.
1604-12, passed 1-17-12)  Penalty, see § 55.99



§ 55.12  BOOSTER PUMPS.



   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to
or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure
cut-off device designed to shut-off the booster pump when the pressure in the
service line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water customer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the Public
Utilities Superintendent, at least once a year, that the device is operable.



(Ord. 1219-04, passed 9-7-04)



§ 55.13  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The Public Utilities Superintendent shall deny or discontinue,
after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any
premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by these regulations
is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to
the Public Utilities Superintendent, or if it is found that the backflow
prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected
cross-connection exists on the premise, or if a low pressure cut-off required
by these regulations is not installed and maintained in working order.



   (B)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
customer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in
conformance with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Public
Utilities Superintendent, and all costs and applicable fees associated with
the reconnection of the property or restoration of water service are paid.



   (C)   Neither the village, the Public Utilities Superintendent or
their agents or assigns shall be liable to any customers for any injury,
damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of the
customer’s water supply in accordance with the terms of this chapter,
whether or not the termination of the water supply was with or without notice.



   (D)   The customer responsible for back-siphoned material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system.



   (E)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of this
chapter, shall be served with written notice stating the notice of the
violation and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory correction
thereof.  The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such
notice, permanently cease all violations.



   (F)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter in
addition to the fine provided, shall become liable to the village for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned by the village by reason of such
violations, whether the same as caused before or after notice.



   (G)   The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, shall have
the authority to enter into compliance agreements with any person or entity
that is believed to be in violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 1219-04, passed 9-7-04; Am. Ord. 1776-15, passed 12-1-15)  Penalty,
see § 55.99



§ 55.99  PENALTY.



   In addition to any other costs or fees provided for in this chapter,
any person, firm, corporation, partnership or entity who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $750 for each offense.  Each day such offense occurs or continues
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.



(Ord. 1219-04, passed 9-7-04)



CHAPTER 56:  CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES ON THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



Section



   56.01   Purposes and scope



   56.02   Definitions



   56.03   Annual registration required



   56.04   Permit required; applications and fees



   56.05   Action on permit applications



   56.06   Effect of permit



   56.07   Revised permit drawings



   56.08   Insurance



   56.09   Indemnification



   56.10   Security



   56.11   Conflicts



   56.12   Permit suspension and revocation



   56.13   Change of ownership or owner's identity or legal status



   56.14   General construction standards



   56.15   Traffic control



   56.16   Location of facilities



   56.17   Construction methods and materials



   56.18   Vegetation control



   56.19   Removal, relocation or modifications of facilities



   56.20   Cleanup and restoration



   56.21   Maintenance and emergency maintenance



   56.22   Variances



   56.23   Penalties



   56.24   Appeals of withholding permits



   56.25   Enforcement



§ 56.01  PURPOSES AND SCOPE.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies
and procedures for constructing certain types of facilities on rights-of-way
within the village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit
consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual
qualities of the village rights-of-way and the village as a whole.



   (B)   Intent. In enacting this chapter, the village intends to
exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the village, and in
particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by
establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility
facilities, including, without limitation:



      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks,
alleys, parkways, and other public ways and places;



      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions
and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;



      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations
of the village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in
rights-of-way or public property;



      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage
to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;



      (5)   Protect against increased storm water run-off due to
structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;



      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which
facilities are installed;



      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined
parkways that characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;



      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of
facilities in the rights-of-way; and



      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private
properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.



   (C)   Facilities subject to this chapter. This chapter applies to
all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the
public rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue
to be maintained, repaired and operated by the entity as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any
applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.



   (D)   Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The village, in
its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities or service
providers having a legal right to use a right-of-way to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such
an agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent
with this chapter.



   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements.



      (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In
the event that an entity other than a telecommunications provider has a
franchise, license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof to the extent that the
franchise, license or similar agreement sets forth standards and conditions
pertaining to the use of the right-of-way or where a clear, consistent and
long term course of dealing has been established with an in force franchise.
Where an existing franchise agreement is silent with regard to standards and
conditions or a long term course of dealing does not exist for an in force
franchise this chapter shall apply.



      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any
conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the
village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the
term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



   (F)   Conflicts with other chapters. This chapter supersedes all
chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that
applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this chapter, the entity shall comply with the requirements
of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or
state laws or regulations.



   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound
engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the
standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the
village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability
of the village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.02  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this Section. Any term not defined in this Section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



   AASHTO.   American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.



   ABOVE GROUND SERVICE FACILITY.   See LARGE ABOVE GROUND SERVICE
FACILITY and SMALL ABOVE GROUND SERVICE FACILITY .



   ANSI.   American National Standards Institute.



   APPLICANT.   A person applying for a permit under this chapter.



   ASTM.   American Society for Testing and Materials.



   BACKFILL.   The methods or materials for replacing excavated material
in a trench or pit.



   BORE or BORING .  To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for
the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.



   CABLE AND VIDEO COMPETITION LAW OF 2007 .  ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, §
21-100 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time.



   CABLE OPERATOR.  That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5).



   CABLE SERVICE.  That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).



   CABLE SYSTEM.   That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).



   CAMER PIPE.   The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.



   CASING.   A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices
such as carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber-optic devices.



   CLEAR ZONE.   The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of
the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may
consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a
clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes
and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the
AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.



   COATING .  Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe
for protection against external corrosion.



   CODE.   The Code of Ordinances of the Village of Itasca.



   COMPETITIVE CABLE SERVICE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.   The meaning as
defined in the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, ILCS Chapter 220, Act
5, § 21-201(h).



   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.



   CONDUIT.   A casing or encasement for wires or cables.



   CONSTRUCT OR CONSTRUCTION.   The installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.



   COVER.   The depth of earth or backfill over buried pipe or conductor.



   CROSSING FACILITY.   A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way
lines of a right-of-way.



   DIRECTOR or DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Village Director of Public
Works or his or her designee.



   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.   For the purposes of this chapter, any work
that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the
use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures;
damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not
include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not
materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.



   EMERGENCY.   Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for
the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the entity.



   ENCASEMENT.   Provision of a protective casing.



   ENGINEER.   The Village Engineer or his or her designee.



   ENTITY.   Any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability
company or other legal entity owning, controlling or operating any facility
regulated by this chapter.



   EQUIPMENT.   Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other
items used to facilitate construction of facilities.



   EXCAVATION.   The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or
laying bare by digging.



   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE.   Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe
designation.



   FACILITY . All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including,
but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable,
antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles,
conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under
this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term FACILITY shall not
include any facility owned or operated by the village.



   FREESTANDING FACILITY .  A facility that is not a crossing facility or
a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump or meter station.



   FRONTAGE ROAD.   Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land
adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS .  Any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is
determined by the Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and
imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the
ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any
substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law,
statute or regulation.



   HIGHWAY.   A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all HIGHWAY land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.



   HIGHWAY CODE.   The Illinois Highway Code, ILCS Ch. 605, Act § 5, §
1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.



   IDOT .  Illinois Department of Transportation.



   ILCC.   Illinois Commerce Commission.



   JACKING .  Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means, with or without boring.



   JETTING.   Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure
to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.



   JOINT USE .  The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by
two or more utilities.



   J.U.L.I.E.   The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators
utility notification program.



   LARGE ABOVE GROUND SERVICE FACILITY .  A ground service structure used
by a service entity to provide service to the public which has a volume above
ground of greater than 24 cubic feet, or a linear size in any single above
ground dimension of greater than four feet, or a footprint in square feet
greater than 5% of the maximum lot coverage for any contiguous zoning lot
adjacent to the right-of-way proposed for installation of a LARGE ABOVE
GROUND SERVICE FACILITY .



   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.



   OCCUPANCY.   The presence of facilities on, over or under a
right-of-way.



   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or
longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.



   PARKWAY.   Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
sidewalk.



   PAVEMENT CUT .  The removal of an area of pavement for access to
facility or for the construction of a facility.



   PERMITTEE.   That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
§§ 56.04 and 56.05 of this chapter.



   PRACTICABLE.   That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.



   PRESSURE.   The internal force acting radially against the walls of a
carrier pipe, expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).



   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES . Pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane or coal-slurry.



   PROMPT.   That which is done within a period of time specified by the
village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.



   PUBLIC ENTITY .  A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.



   RESTORATION.   The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or
other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any highway, street, alley, parkway,
other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or
vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility easements in
which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or
permit the location of facilities, other than those of the village.
RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal village
property that is not specifically described in the previous two sentences and
shall not include village buildings, fixtures, and other structures or
improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.



   ROADWAY .  That part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL.   The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SECURITY FUND.   That amount of security required pursuant to § 56.10.



   SERVICE ENTITY.   Any individual or entity owning or operating or
proposing the installation of a Large Above Ground Service Facility or a
Small Above Ground Service Facility in the village right-of-way.



   SHOULDER.   A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.



   SMALL ABOVE GROUND SERVICE FACILITY .  An above ground service
structure used by a service entity to provide service to the public that has
a volume above ground of less than 24 cubic feet, a linear size in any single
above ground dimension of less than four feet, and a footprint in square feet
less than 5% of the maximum lot coverage for any contiguous zoning lot
adjacent to the right-of-way proposed for installation of a Small Above
Ground Service Facility.



   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT.   A decision(s) consistent with generally
accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.



   STATE-ISSUED AUTHORIZATION.  The authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to Section 21-401 of the
Competitive Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.



      (1)   This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services,
cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging
service and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic
or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics,
laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context
clearly requires otherwise, TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also include wireless
telecommunications as defined in the Illinois Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax Act, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 636, § 5-1 et seq.  "Private
line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer
that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to
one or more specified locations.



      (2)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value-added
services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission.



      (3)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of
TELECOMMUNICATIONS by a TELECOMMUNICATIONS service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.



      (4)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following) as now or hereafter
amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video
system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in
the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. 76. 1500 and
following) as now or hereafter amended.



      (5)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include a CATV provider
under ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-1 et seq.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.   Any person that installs, owns,
operates or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be
used to transmit telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER.   Every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.



   TRENCH.   A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of
an underground facility.



   VENT.   A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases
or vapors from an underground casing.



   VIDEO SERVICE.  That term as defined in the Illinois Cable Video
Competition Law of 2007, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(v).



   VILLAGE.   The Village of Itasca.



   WATER LINES.   Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.



   WET BORING.   Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger
to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.03  ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every entity that occupies right-of-way within the village
shall register on January 1 of each year with the Community Development
Director, providing the entity's name, address and regular business telephone
and telecopy numbers, the name and e-mail address of one or more contact
persons who can act on behalf of the entity in connection with emergencies
involving the entity's facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone
number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in §
56.08 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance.



   (B)   Any entity not doing business within the village as of January
1 of any year shall be required to provide the information required by this
section prior to commencing work in the right-of-way in that year, and on
January 1 of each year thereafter regardless of its initial registration date.



   (C)   There shall be an annual, non-refundable registration fee of
$100, to be paid at the time of the entity's registration. If an entity
registers after the last day of June in a given calendar year, then the
registration fee shall be one-half of the annual fee.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.04  PERMIT REQUIRED: APPLICATIONS AND FEES.



   (A)   Permit Required. No entity, including contractors of an
entity, shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any permitted facility
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village
right-of-way, including but not limited to construction which (1) changes the
location of the facility, (2) adds a new facility or replaces an existing
facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this chapter), or (4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first
filing an application with the Community Development Director and obtaining a
permit from the village therefore, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption
of the right-of-way.



   (B)   Permit Application.



      (1)   All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter
shall be on a form acceptable to the village and shall be filed in such
number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.



      (2)   An applicant for a permit acknowledges that the
village's records are subject to disclosure upon request pursuant to the
Illinois Freedom of Information Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, § 1 et seq.
Therefore, if in the applicant's opinion such plans contain information which
the applicant considers to be trade secrets or otherwise confidential, the
applicant shall specify in writing to the village at the time such plans,
maps, or other documents are provided, the information which is so regarded.
If the village receives a request for disclosure of such information, the
village shall timely notify the applicant of such request and give the
applicant the opportunity to either provide copies of such plans, maps, or
documents in which such information has been deleted or to seek an
appropriate protective order for the submitted plans, maps, or documents in
the Circuit Court of DuPage County.



   (C)   Minimum General Application Requirements. The application
shall be made by the entity or its duly authorized representative and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   The entity's name and address, telephone and telecopy
numbers and e-mail address:



      (2)   The applicant's name and address, if different than the
entity, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in
the work;



      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers
and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the
applicant with respect to the application;



      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the
purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will
be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the
nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on
those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the proposed work.



      (5)   Evidence that the entity has placed on file with the
village:



         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and



         (b)   Where an application indicates that an applicant's
use of the right-of-way may involve situations that pose a potential risk to
public health and safety, the applicant shall submit an emergency contingency
plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including,
without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the
intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include
notification to the village and shall promote protection of the safety and
convenience of the public and shall be subject to review by the village's
Emergency Management Coordinator and the local Fire Protection District.
Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes
compliance with this section unless the village finds that additional
information or assurances are needed;



      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work
proposed, including the certification of an Illinois licensed professional
engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable
codes, rules, and regulations;



      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in § 56.08 of this
chapter;



      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in
§ 56.10 of this chapter;



      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions
of this chapter (See § 56.22); and



      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably
required by the village.



   (D)   Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of
Utilities. In addition to the requirements of division (C) of this section,
the permit application shall include the following items as applicable to the
specific entity that is the subject of the permit application:



      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service
or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the
applicant is required by law to obtain, or has elected, to obtain has been
issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;



      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed
pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;



      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of
Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;



      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that
the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District or any other local or state entities with
jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or



      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the
type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and
the design standard to be followed.



      (6)   A statement as to whether the right-of-way or contiguous
private property is the subject of a recorded Highway Authority Agreement.



   (E)   Applicant's Duty to Update Information. Throughout the entire
permit application review period and the construction period authorized by
the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application
shall be submitted by the entity in writing to the village within 14 days
after the change necessitating the amendment.



   (F)   Application Fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount specified in village fees
schedules by any electricity entity that is paying the municipal electricity
infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act.



   (G)   Permit Prohibitions.



      (1)   No large above ground service facility shall be
permitted in any right-of-way contiguous to and having a physical border with
the front yard or the corner side yard of any private property unless the
zoning district containing the private property permits the installation of
above ground service facilities in front yards or corner side yards.



      (2)   No large above ground service facility shall be
permitted in a right-of-way contiguous to a transition yard as defined by the
zoning ordinance without a variation granted by the corporate authorities.



      (3)   No large above ground service facility shall be
permitted to be installed above or on a potable water line, sanitary sewer
line, gas lines or storm water sewer line, or within 50 feet of any fire
hydrant.



      (4)   No facilities shall be permitted underground where there
is inadequate space in the underground right of way to permit access
maintenance and replacement of existing underground utilities or where the
placement of an above ground facility threatens the pedestrian or vehicular
safety.



      (5)   No large above ground service facility shall be located
within 250 feet of any other large above ground facility that was installed
or constructed after January 1, 2006.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.05  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Village Review of Permit Applications. Completed permit
applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
Community Development Director within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application does not conform to the requirements of all applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Community Development
Director shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefor. If the Community Development Director is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and all applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Community Development
Director shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Community Development Director, that the construction
proposed under the application shall be in compliance with the requirements
of this chapter.



   (B)   Additional Village Review of Applications of
Telecommunications Retailers.



      (1)   Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 65, § 4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days
prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Community
Development Director shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which
the facility may be placed, used and constructed.



      (2)   In the event that the Community Development Director
fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications
retailer within either ten days after service of notice to the village by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction or 25 days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit
under this chapter.



      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village,
where a permit is required for work pursuant to § 56.04 of this chapter, the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a
permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject
to the requirements of division (A) of this section.



   (C)   Additional Village Review of Applications of Holders of State
Authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after
submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village
provided the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances,
and regulations.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.06  EFFECT OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest
Created. A permit from the village authorizes a entity to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights-of-way,
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the entity to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public
rights-of-way.



   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid
for a period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun
within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.



   (C)   Pre-Construction Meeting Required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time, and place designated by the village
with such village representatives in attendance as the village deems
necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under
the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where
work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other
utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid
disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during
construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.



   (D)   Compliance with All Laws Required. The issuance of a permit by
the village does not excuse the entity from complying with other requirements
of the village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.07  REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.



   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the entity shall submit
a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after the
completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate
from the locations approved in the permit. No deviations whatsoever shall be
allowed in violation of § 56.04(B) of this chapter. Any deviation not in
violation of § 56.04(B) of this chapter shall constitute a variation
application. Minor deviations may be reviewed and approved by the Village
Engineer. If the Village Engineer deems a deviation to be major or material
it shall be subject to approval or rejection by the Corporate Authorities of
the village. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the
entity shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the
facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefore. Any reasonable out of pocket costs, including outside
engineering fees, attorneys fees, document preparation fees, court reporter
fees, and notice or publication fees incurred by the village as a result of
the installation of a facility in violation of this chapter, and for which no
variation is granted, shall be paid to the village prior to the issuance of
any other permits to the person or entity in violation of the chapter.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.08  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Required Coverages and Limits. Unless otherwise provided by
franchise, license, or similar agreement, each entity occupying right-of-way
or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain
the following liability insurance policies insuring the entity as named
insured and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers,
officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies
listed in divisions (1) and (2) below:



      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance, including
premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations
coverage with limits not less than:



         (a)   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to
each person;



         (b)   Five million dollars for property damage resulting
from any one accident; and



         (c)   Five million dollars for all other types of
liability;



      (2)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired
vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;



      (3)   Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and,



      (4)   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less
than one million dollars per employee and per accident.



   (B)   Excess or Umbrella Policies. The coverages required by this
section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies.
Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying
insurance on a folio wing-form basis such that when any loss covered by the
primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or
umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.



   (C)   Copies Required. The entity shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village within ten days following
receipt of a written request from the village.



   (D)   Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages. The insurance
policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:



"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the
village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the village Administrator of such intent to
cancel or not to renew."



   Within ten days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no
event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the entity shall obtain
and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting
the requirements of this section.



   (E)   Self-Insurance. An entity may self-insure all or a portion of
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) of
this section. An entity that self-insures is not required, to the extent of
such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of
additional insureds under division (A), or the requirements of divisions (B),
(C) and (D) of this section. An entity that elects to self-insure shall
provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial
ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required
under division (A) of this section, such as evidence that the entity is a
"private self insurer" under the Workers Compensation Act.



   (F)   Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Entity's Liability.
The legal liability of the entity to the village and any person for any of
the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.



   (G)   Insurance of Contractors and Subcontractors. The entity shall
provide evidence that all contractors and subcontractors are insured and
registered with the Village of Itasca.  If the utility is not providing such
insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work,
then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section.



   (H)   Insurance Companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this
section shall be affected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by
insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of
Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated
"A-" or better and of a class size of "X" or better by A.M. Best Company.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.09  INDEMNIFICATION.



   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, an entity
shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from
or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the entity or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the
entity's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the
village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.10  SECURITY.



   (A)   Purpose. The entity shall establish a security fund in a form
and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the entity's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the
permit. The security fund shall serve as security for:



      (1)   The faithful performance by the entity of all the
requirements of this chapter; and,



      (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village
occasioned by the entity's failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the village issued
pursuant to this chapter; and,



      (3)   The payment by entity of all liens and all damages,
claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by entity in violation of this chapter including,
without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the
entity is required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform
itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the entity's failure to
perform or complete, and all other payments due the village from the entity
pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law.



   (B)   Form. The entity shall provide the security fund to the
village at the entity's election, of cash, an unconditional letter of credit
or a surety bond from a surety licensed to do business in Illinois. Any
letter of credit provided pursuant to this division (B) shall, at a minimum:



      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior
notice to the village and the entity; and,



      (2)   Not require the consent of the entity prior to the
collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and,



      (3)   Provide a location convenient to the village and within
the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.



   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the
right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the Community Development
Director, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the
village estimates are likely to be incurred if the entity fails to perform
such restoration. In no event shall the amount of the security fund be less
than $2,500. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit
will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each
phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related
group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be
undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous
phase or phases, the Community Development Director may, in the exercise of
sound discretion, allow the entity to post a single amount of security which
shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The
amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the
greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this
division (C) for any single phase.



   (D)   Withdrawals. The village, upon 14 days advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this division, may withdraw an amount from the security fund,
provided that the entity has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the 14 day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the entity:



      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the
entity hereunder;



      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that
are due and unpaid;



      (3)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims,
costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by
reason of any action or nonperformance by the entity; or



      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that
the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
security fund.



   (E)   Appeal. An entity that receives a notice of withdrawal under
division (D) of this section may appeal the determination that the village is
entitled to withdraw said funds in accordance with the procedures of § 56.24
of this chapter.



   (F)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice
from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund,
the entity shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
division (C) of this section.



   (G)   Interest. The entity may request that any and all interest
accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the entity by the
village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided
that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum
balance required in division (C) of this section.



   (H)   Closing and Return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the
work authorized under the permit, the entity shall be entitled to the return
of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the village for failure by the entity to comply with any
provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest
therein, shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to
cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a
result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs,
loss or damage shall be refunded to the entity.



   (I)   Rights Not Limited. The rights reserved to the village with
respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the
village, whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund
shall affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery
with respect to any of its rights that may be infringed or otherwise violated.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.11  CONFLICTS.



   Where any facilities subject to this chapter physically conflict with
the repair or maintenance of a municipal potable water line, sanitary sewer
line or stormwater sewer line, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of
the facility, at the owner's sole cost and expense to temporarily relocate,
protect, or otherwise ameliorate the conflict in a reasonably engineered
manner during the municipal repair or maintenance and within a reasonable
time after written notice from the Director of Public Works or the Village
Engineer to relocate, protect or otherwise ameliorate the conflict in a
reasonably engineered manner. In an emergency the Director of Public Works or
the Village Engineer may orally direct relocation, protection or
amelioration. Any owner failing to relocate, protect, or otherwise ameliorate
in conformance with this section shall reimburse the village all reasonable
costs and expenses actually incurred by the village's relocation, protection
or amelioration of the affected owner's facilities.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.12  PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Village Right to Revoke Permit. The village may revoke,
suspend a permit issued, or refuse to issue new permits pursuant to this
chapter for one or more of the following reasons:



      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially
incomplete statements in the permit application;



      (2)   Non-compliance with this chapter or other applicable
village ordinances or regulations;



      (3)   Entity's physical presence or presence of entity's
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health,
safety, or welfare;



      (4)   Entity's failure to construct the facilities in
accordance with the permit and approved plans, or the provisions of this
chapter;



      (5)   Entity's failure to pay fees as required under this
chapter;



      (6)   Entity's failure to complete the work in a timely manner.



   (B)   Notice of Revocation or Suspension. The village shall send
written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension
and the alternatives available to entity under this § 56.12.



   (C)   Entity Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or
Suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the entity shall have the following options:



      (1)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no
cause exists for the revocation or suspension;



      (2)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village,
the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of
such correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or



      (3)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore
the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof
of such removal to the village within ten days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation.



   The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time periods provided in this division (C).



   (D)   Stop Work Order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division
(A) of this section.



   (E)   Failure or Refusal of the Entity to Comply. If the entity
fails to comply with the provisions of division (C) of this section, the
village or its designee may, at the option of the village: (1) correct the
deficiencies; (2) upon not less than 20 days notice to the entity, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than 30 days notice to
the entity of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the village. The entity shall be liable in all events to the
village for all costs of removal.



   (F)   Appeal. An entity may appeal the revocation or suspension of a
permit under this § 56.12 in accordance with the procedures of § 56.24 of
this chapter.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.13  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.



   (A)   Notification of Change. An entity shall notify the village no
less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the entity. The new owner of the entity
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.



   (B)   Amended Permit. A new owner shall request that any current
permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a
new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to
have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the
village's right-of-way.



   (C)   Insurance and Security. All required insurance coverage along
with any bonds or letter(s) of credit shall be changed to reflect the name of
the new owner upon transfer.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.14  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Standards and Principles. All construction in the right-of-way
shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic-control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable,
the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications and
related materials as amended from time to time:



      (1)   IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction;



      (2)   IDOT Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions;



      (3)   Highway Design Manual;



      (4)   IDOT Highway Standards Manual; and



      (5)   IDOT Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;



      (6)   IDOT Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545);



      (7)   IDOT Flagger's Handbook;



      (8)   IDOT Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight
Maintenance Operations;



      (9)   Village Design Standards.



   (B)   Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principles. If a
discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards
required by this chapter, the Director of Public Works shall determine, in
the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such
decision shall be final. If requested, the Director of Public Works shall
state which standard or principle will apply to the construction,
maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.15  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   (A)   Minimum Requirements. The village's minimum requirements for
traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and this code.



   (B)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, and Flaggers. The entity is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices
and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and
local requirements for protection of the public and the entity's workers when
performing any work on the public rights-of-way.



   (C)   Interference with Traffic. All work shall be phased so that
there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



   (D)   Notice When Access is Blocked. At least 48 hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the entity shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of
such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs
pursuant to § 56.21 of this chapter, the entity shall provide such notice as
is practicable under the circumstances.



   (E)   Compliance. The entity shall take immediate action to correct
any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
entity's attention by the village.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.16  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   General Requirements. In addition to location requirements
applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities,
regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of
this subsection.



      (1)   No Interference with Village Facilities. No utility
facilities shall be placed in any location if the Community Development
Director determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the village's utility
facilities.



      (2)   Minimum Interference and Impact. The proposed location
shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the
right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners
who adjoin said right-of-way.



      (3)   No Interference with Travel. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such
right-of-way.



      (4)   No Limitations on Visibility. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the
right-of-way.



      (5)   Size of Utility Facilities. The proposed installation
shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power
pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of
location, for the particular application.



   (B)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways.



      (1)   Overhead Parallel Facilities. An overhead parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the
right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as
reasonable pole alignment will permit;



         (b)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote
from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m)
outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear
zone;



         (c)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway;
and,



         (d)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within
one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the
right-of-way line.



      (2)   Underground Parallel Facilities. An underground parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to
the right-of-way line;



         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved
portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and



         (c)   In the case of an underground power or
communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way
line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.



   (C)   Facilities Crossing Highways.



      (1)   No Future Disruption. The construction and design of
crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of
village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections
(such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future
repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing
facilities.



      (2)   Culverts or Drainage Facilities. Crossing facilities
shall not be located in culverts, or drainage facilities.



      (3)   90 Degree Crossing Required. Crossing facilities shall
cross at or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as practicable.



      (4)   Overhead Power or Communication Facility. An overhead
power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as
required by ICC's rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305);



         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and



         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are
avoided.



      (5)   Underground Power or Communication Facility. An
underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will
provide maximum maintenance-free service life;



         (b)   Capacity for the entity's foreseeable future
expansion needs is provided in the initial installation; and,



         (c)   Such power or communications facilities are
installed in conduit at the time of burial.



      (6)   Markers. The village may require the entity to provide a
marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a
power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify
the type of facility, the entity, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations. (49 C.F.R.
192.707 (1989)).



   (D)   Facilities to be Located Within Particular Rights-of-Way. The
village may require that facilities be located within particular
rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.



   (E)   Freestanding Facilities.



      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way.



      (2)   The village may require any freestanding facility
located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.



   (F)   Facilities Installed Above Ground. Above ground service
facilities may be installed only if:



      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located
underground;



      (2)   New underground installation is not technically
feasible; and,



      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location,
and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest
protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without
adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to,
self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration
of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be
used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is
strongly discouraged.



   (G)   Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures.



      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or
roadway structures only where the entity has demonstrated that all other
means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall
include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles,
cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from
the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.



      (2)   An entity shall include in its request to accommodate a
facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:



         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the
commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to
persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;



         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance
of the highway structure in the transportation system;



         (c)   The alternative routings available to the entity
and their comparative practicability;



         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;



         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased
load of the proposed facility;



         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance
and painting;



         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure;
and



         (h)   The public benefit expected from the entity
service as compared to the risk involved.



   (H)   Appearance Standards.



      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities
in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.



      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction
does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property
owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being
traversed.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.17  CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.



   (A)   Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of
Construction Methods.



      (1)   Boring or Jacking.



         (a)   Pits and Shoring. Boring or jacking under
rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance
specified by the Director of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits
for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly
marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.



         (b)   Wet Boring or Jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall
not be permitted under the roadway.



         (c)   Borings with Diameters Greater Than Six Inches.
Borings over six inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an
auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the
outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).



         (d)   Borings with Diameters Six Inches or Less. Borings
of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking,
guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.



         (e)   Tree Preservation. Any facility located within the
drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected
shall be bored under or around the root system.



      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair,
or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of Section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction."



         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to
the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing.
Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Director of Public Works.



         (b)   Open Trench and Excavated Material. Open trench
and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6
of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable,
the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench
as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the
paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for
windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated
material shall be hauled to an off-road location.



         (c)   Drip Line of Trees. The entity shall not trench
within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.



      (3)   Backfilling.



         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the
installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and
length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is
hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall
be used.



         (b)   For a period of three years from the date
construction of a facility is completed, the entity shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction
of the facility. If so ordered by the Director of Public Works, the entity,
at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of
the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and
restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as
determined by the Director of Public Works.



      (4)   Pavement Cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation
or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway
is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this
division (4) is permitted under § 56.22, the following requirements shall
apply:



         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled
and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10
gradation, as designated by the Director of Public Works.



         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be
accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous
mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the
temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
village.



         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.



         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been
reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or
resurfaced in the last three years, permits shall not be issued unless such
work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered
necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a
pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.



      (5)   Encasement.



         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the
load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be
continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed
installation approved by the village.



         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall
extend within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent
pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that
particular section of the highway.



         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing,
encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or
village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be
omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier
pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the
village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of
installation method.



         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.



         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products
pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if: (1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future
maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.



         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum
products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that
construction does not disrupt the right-of-way.



      (6)   Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities. Cover shall be
provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following
table for minimum cover for the type of facility:



 

TYPE OF FACILITY
 
MINIMUM COVER


Electric Lines
 
30 inches (0.8m)


Communication Line Installed by the Plowed Method
 
24 inches (0.6m)


Gas or Petroleum Products
 
30 inches (0.8m)


Cable or Video Service Lines
 
18 - 24 inches (0.6m) determined by village


Water Line
 
Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection


Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or Drainage Line
 
Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection



 



   (B)   Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities.



      (1)   Electric Power or Communication Lines.



         (a)   Code Compliance. Electric power or communications
facilities within village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and
maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305
(formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled
"Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the
National Electrical Safety Code.



         (b)   Overhead Facilities. Overhead power or
communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where
practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be
needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.



         (c)   Underground Facilities.



            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or
plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to
minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.



            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or
jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.
Encasement may be eliminated only if:



               a.   The crossing is installed by the use of
"moles," "whip augers," or other approved method which compress the earth to
make the opening for cable installation or



               b.   The installation is by the open trench
method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.



            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with
the National Electrical Safety Code.



         (d)   Burial of Drops. All temporary service drops
placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year,
also known as snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year,
weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather
permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops
within ten business days after placement.



      (2)   Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or
Communication Lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:



         (a)   The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other
approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;



         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided
between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;



         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between
ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or,



         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if
installation is not possible by other means.



      (3)   Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service. Gas
pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated
in a village approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the
Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192
- Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 C.F.R. 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction," and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.



      (4)   Petroleum Products Pipelines. Petroleum products
pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of
ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation
Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).



      (5)   Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer
Lines or Drainage Lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer
lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the
recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois or village ordinance whichever is most
restrictive.



      (6)   Ground Mounted Appurtenances and Above Ground Mounted
Facilities. Ground mounted appurtenances, including large and small above
ground mounted facilities to overhead or underground facilities, when
permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free
area extending three feet (915 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all
directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the
mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the
Community Development Director. With the approval of the Community
Development Director shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in
place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances
shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.



   (C)   Materials.



      (1)   General Standards. The materials used in constructing
facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards
of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.



      (2)   Material Storage on Right-of-Way. No materials shall be
stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the
Community Development Director. When such storage is permitted, all pipe,
conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed
along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to
minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or
damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on
right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the village.



      (3)   Hazardous Materials. The plans submitted by the entity
to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in
the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.



   (D)   Operational Restrictions.



      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the
discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such
operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and
welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or
restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in
extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.



      (2)   Hours of construction shall be those set forth in the
applicable village ordinance except in cases of emergency when work is
required to restore vital services.



   (E)   Location of Existing Facilities. Any entity proposing to
construct facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain
the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities
within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The
village will make its permit records available to a entity for the purpose of
identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when
requested by the village or by J.U.L.I.E., an entity shall locate and
physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding
weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities
Damage Prevention Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 50, § 1 et seq.)



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.18  VEGETATION CONTROL.



   (A)   Electric Utilities - Compliance with State Laws and
Regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and
vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with
applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local
franchise or other agreement with the village as permitted by law.



   (B)   Other Utilities - Tree Trimming Permit Required. Tree trimming
that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and
that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.



      (1)   Application for Tree Trimming Permit. Applications for
tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be
accomplished by competent workers that are experienced in accepted tree
pruning practices and under the supervision of a certified arborist. Tree
trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of
assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.



      (2)   Damage to Trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in
damaged or misshapen trees shall be grounds for cancellation of the
tree-trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village shall receive
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.



      (3)   Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance. The
village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees
or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher
poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.



      (4)   Chemical Use.



         (a)   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no
utility shall spray, inject, or pour any chemicals on or near any trees,
shrubs, or vegetation in the village for any purpose, including the control
of growth, insects, or disease.



         (b)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals
will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the entity demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.19  REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the
village, an entity shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily
or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of
any entity facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate
authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair,
maintenance, or installation of any village improvement in or upon, or the
operations of the village in or upon, the rights-of-way.



   (B)   Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within 30 days following
written notice from the village, any entity that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the public rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:



      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the entity's license
or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;



      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;



      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without
prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or



      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the entity's license or franchise.



   (C)   Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The village
retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within
the rights-of-way of the village, as the village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify
the entity, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall
notify the entity, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.



   (D)   Abandonment of Facilities.



      (1)   In the event the use of a facility has been discontinued
for a period of 180 consecutive days, within the public rights-of-way of the
village, the facility shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the
date of abandonment shall be made by the Community Development Director, who
shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits from the
entity regarding the issue of the facility's use. Upon the Director's
determination and written notification to the entity of such abandonment, the
entity shall notify the village within 90 days, within which to:



         (a)   Reactivate the actual use of the facility or
transfer the facility to another entity which makes actual use of the
facility; or



         (b)   Dismantle and remove the facility and notify the
Director in writing of the completion of such removal.



      (2)   Following the end of the 90-day period from the date of
receipt of such notice, and no action has been taken under divisions (a) or
(b) hereinabove, the Community Development Director may direct the entity to
remove all or any portion of the facility if it is determined that such
removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and
welfare. At the earlier date of either 270 days from the date of
discontinuance without reactivation, or upon completion of dismantling or
removal, any special exception or variance approval for the facility shall
automatically expire without further action by the village. In the event that
the village does not direct the entity that abandoned the facility to remove
it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning entity
shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion
of the facility by another entity or person.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.20  CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.



   The entity shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the
rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged, or destroyed due to construction or
maintenance by the entity, all to the satisfaction of the village. This
includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway
surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Director
of Public Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of
backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to
restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that
which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period
provided in this section may be extended by the Community Development
Director for good cause shown.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.21  MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the entity in
a manner satisfactory to the village and at the entity's expense.



   (B)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures. Emergencies may justify
non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:



      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion
of the right-of-way, the entity shall take immediate steps to provide all
necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the
right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a
hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is
such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in
repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on
the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means
of access to the facility is available.



      (2)   In an emergency, the entity shall, as soon as possible,
notify the Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized agent of
the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for
protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere
with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified
immediately.



      (3)   In an emergency, the entity shall use all means at hand
to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.



   (C)   Emergency Repairs. The entity must file in writing with the
village of a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within
48 hours after an emergency repair.



   (D)   Landscape Maintenance. All landscaping installed pursuant to
this chapter shall be maintained by the person or entity owning, controlling,
or maintaining the adjacent facility in good and reasonable condition. Any
person or entity failing to maintain any such landscaping after receiving
written notice from the Community Development Director that the landscaping
is in need of maintenance shall not be issued any permits for the
installation of new facilities until the deficient landscaping has been
restored to good and reasonable condition.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.22  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Request for Variance. An entity requesting a variance from one
or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the
Community Development Director as a part of the permit application or as
otherwise specified in this chapter. The request shall identify each
provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons
why a variance should be granted.



   (B)   Authority to Grant Variances. The Community Development
Director shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of
this chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.



   (C)   Conditions for Granting of Variance. The Community Development
Director may authorize a variance only if the entity requesting the variance
has demonstrated that:



      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the
entity (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and



      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or
facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.



   (D)   Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance. As a
condition for authorizing a variance, the Community Development Director may
require the entity requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and
conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but
which carry out the purposes of this chapter.



   (E)   If the Community Development Director determines that the
variance request is a major variance, the variation request shall be
determined by the Corporate Authorities of the village in conformance with
division (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section and the variation standards set
forth in the Itasca Zoning Code.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 55.23  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses
to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine
not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each day that the entity remains in
violation of this chapter. Each day of a violation shall be considered a
separate offense. There may be times when the village will incur delay or
other costs, including third party claims, because the entity will not or
cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter.



   (B)   Unless the entity shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the entity shall bear the
village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining,
modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the
permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a
permit related cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed
upon an entity that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.24  APPEALS OF WITHHOLDING PERMITS.



   Should the Community Development Director determine that an entity is
in violation of any provision of this chapter and refuses to issue other
permits under this chapter pending the entity bringing itself into
compliance, the owner may appeal in conformance with this section. Any denial
of a permit under this section shall set forth in writing the reason(s) for
the denial. The appeal the denial of a permit under this section shall be
filed with the Village Administrator who shall conduct an evidentiary hearing
and issue a ruling within fourteen days of receipt of a notice of appeal from
the entity. The burden of presentation and proof, which shall be by clear and
convincing evidence shall be on the owner. The Administrator's ruling shall
be in writing setting forth the reasons for the ruling. Denials of an appeal
by the Village Administrator shall be appealable to the corporate authorities
who shall rule based on the record before the Village Administrator. The
corporate authorities shall rule in writing setting forth the reasons for the
ruling.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.25  ENFORCEMENT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 56.26  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.



(Ord. 1420-07, passed 12-18-07)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         71.   RULES OF OPERATION





         72.   PARKING REGULATIONS





         73.   MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES





         74.   PEDESTRIANS





         75.   EQUIPMENT; LOADS





         76.   MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES





         77.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES





         78.   PARKING SCHEDULES





         79.   SIZE AND WEIGHT OF VEHICLES




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



In General



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Adoption of the Illinois Vehicle Code



Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws



   70.10   Obedience to police officers



   70.11   Public officers and employees to obey traffic code;
exceptions



   70.12   Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving
animal-drawn vehicles



   70.13   Fleeing or attempting to elude police officer



Traffic Signs, Signals, and Markings



   70.30   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   70.31   Traffic-control signal legend



   70.32   Pedestrian-control signals



   70.33   Lane-control signals



   70.34   Flashing signals



   70.35   Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings, or
advertising signs



   70.36   Interference with official traffic control devices or
railroad signs or signals



   70.37   Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances, and
structures



   70.38   Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker



   70.39   Zones of quiet



   70.40   No-turning signs and turning markers



   70.41   Stop and yield signs



   70.42   Advisory warning signs in areas near residence of disabled
individuals



 



   70.99   Penalty



IN GENERAL



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   ALLEY.  A public way within a block, generally giving access to the
rear of lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102)



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  Emergency vehicles of village
departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by
proper local authorities; police vehicles; vehicles of the Fire Department;
vehicles of a HazMat or technical rescue team authorized by a county board
under § 5-1127 of the Counties Code; ambulances; vehicles of the Illinois
Department of Corrections; vehicles of the Illinois Department of Juvenile
Justice; vehicles of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency; vehicles of
the Office of the Illinois State Fire Marshal; mine rescue and explosives
emergency response vehicles of the Department of Natural Resources; vehicles
of the Illinois Department of Public Health; vehicles of the Illinois State
Toll Highway Authority identified as Highway Emergency Lane Patrol; vehicles
of the Illinois Department of Transportation identified as Emergency Traffic
Patrol; and vehicles of a municipal or county emergency services and disaster
agency, as defined by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-105)



   BICYCLE.  Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two tandem wheels except scooters and similar devices.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-106)



   BUS.  Every motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for
carrying more than ten persons.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-107)



   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including a
highway when within 600 feet along the highway there are buildings in use for
business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks,
or office buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at
least 300 feet of frontage on one side, or 300 feet collectively on both
sides of the highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-108)



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.  Any vehicle operated for the transportation of
persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial
enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire, but not including, a commuter van, a
arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational vehicle not
being used commercially.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-111.8)



   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.  Every highway, street, or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have
no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and
in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over the highway, street, or roadway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-112)



   CROSSWALK.



      (1)   That part of a roadway at an intersection included
within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite
sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs,
from the edges of the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk
on one side of a highway, that part of the highway included within the
extension of the lateral line of the existing sidewalk to the side of the
highway without the sidewalk, with the extension forming a right angle to the
centerline of the highway;



      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on
the surface, placed in accordance with the provisions in the manual adopted
by the Department of Transportation as authorized in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-301.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-113)



   DRIVER.  Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-116)



   FARM TRACTOR.  Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a
farm implement for drawing wagons, plows, mowing machines, and other
implements of husbandry, and every implement of husbandry which is
self-propelled.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-120)



   GROSS WEIGHT.  The weight of a vehicle, whether operated singly or in
combination, without load, plus the weight of load thereon.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-125)



   HIGHWAY.  The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or located on public school property.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-126)



   IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY.  Every vehicle designed and adapted
exclusively for agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising operations,
including farm wagons, wagon trailers, or like vehicles used in connection
therewith, or for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry, provided
that no farm wagon, wagon trailer, or like vehicle having a gross weight of
more than 36,000 pounds, shall be included hereunder.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-130)



   IMPROVED HIGHWAY.  Any roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam
and crushed stone, or gravel.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-131)



   INTERSECTION.



      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection
of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of
the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
roadways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.



      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 40 feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of the divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.



      (3)   The junction of an alley with a street or highway does
not constitute an intersection.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-132)



   LANE-CONTROL SIGNAL.  An official traffic-control device consisting of
an electrically controlled and illuminated signal of a square or rectangular
design, and employing distinctive colors or symbols used to control the
direction of vehicular flow on the particular lane to which the indication
applies.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-135)



   LANED ROADWAY.  A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly
marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-136)



   LEASE.  A written document vesting exclusive possession, use, control,
and responsibility of the lessee during the periods the vehicle is operated
by or for the lessee for a specific period of time.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-137)



   LICENSE TO DRIVE.  Any driver's license or any other license or permit
to operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of this state including:



      (1)   Any temporary license or instruction permit;



      (2)   The privilege of any person to drive a motor vehicle,
whether or not the person holds a valid license or permit;



      (3)   Any nonresident's driving privilege as defined herein.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-138)



   LIMOUSINE .  Any privately owned first division vehicle intended to be
used for the transportation of persons for-hire when the payment is not based
on a meter charge but is prearranged for a designated destination.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-139.1)



   LOCAL AUTHORITIES.  Every county, village, and other local board or
body having authority to enact laws relating to traffic under the
constitution and laws of this state and every road district highway
commissioner having that authority.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140)



   LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE.   Has the same meaning ascribed to it by
Section 38 of the consumer Product Safety Act (15 U.S.C. Sec. 2085).



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 140.10)



   LOW-SPEED GAS BICYCLE.   A two or three-wheeled device with fully
operable pedals and a gasoline motor of less than one horsepower, whose
maximum speed on a paved level surface, when powered solely by such a motor
while ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds, is less than 20 miles per
hour.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 140.15)



   LOW-SPEED VEHICLE.  Any 4-wheeled vehicle with a maximum speed greater
than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour that conforms
with the federal motor vehicle safety standards set forth in 49 C.F.R. Part
571.500.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.7)



   MAIL.  To deposit in the United States mail properly addressed and
with postage prepaid.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-141)



   MOPED.  A motor-driven cycle, with or without optional power derived
from manually operated pedals, whose speed attainable in one mile is at least
20 m.p.h. but not greater than 30 m.p.h., and is equipped with a motor that
produces two brake horsepower or less.  If an internal combustion engine is
used, the displacement shall not exceed 50 cubic centimeter displacement and
the power drive system shall not require the operator to shift gears.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.2)



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle which is self-propelled, except for
vehicles moved solely by human power, motorized wheelchairs, low-speed
electric bicycles, and low-speed gas bicycles. For this section, motor
vehicles are divided into two divisions:



      (1)   First division:  motor vehicles designed for carrying
not more than ten persons.



      (2)   Second division:  motor vehicles designed for carrying
more than ten persons, those designed or used for living quarters, and those
motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or cargo,
and those motor vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as
motor vehicles of the second division.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146)



   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE.  Every motorcycle and every motor scooter with
less than 150 cubic centimeter piston displacement, including motorized
pedalcycles.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-145.001)



   MOTORCYCLE.  Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use
of the rider, and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-147)



   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR.  Any self-propelled vehicle, including a
three-wheeled vehicle, designed for and used by a person with disabilities,
that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight m.p.h. on level ground.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3)



   MULTIFUNCTION SCHOOL ACTIVITY BUS (MFSAB).   A school bus manufactured
for the purpose of transporting 11 or more persons, including the driver,
whose purposes do not include transporting students to and from home or
school bus stops.  A MFSAB is prohibited from meeting the special
requirements for school buses in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-801, 12-803,
and 12-805 and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-802(a).  (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
1-148.3a-5)



   NONCOMMERCIAL VEHICLE.  Any vehicle that is not a commercial vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.6)



   NOT-FOR-HIRE.  Operation of a commercial vehicle in furtherance of any
commercial or industrial enterprise, but not-for-hire.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-153)



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.  All signs, signals, markings, and
devices which conform with the state manual, and not inconsistent with this
title, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-154)



   OWNER.  A person who holds legal title of a motor vehicle, or in the
event a motor vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale
or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the
conditions stated in the agreement, and with an immediate right of possession
vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of
the motor vehicle is entitled to possession, then the conditional vendee or
lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this title.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-155)



   PARK or PARKING.  The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-156)



   PASSENGER CAR.  A motor vehicle of the first division, including a
multipurpose passenger vehicle, that is designed for carrying not more than
ten persons.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-157)



   PEDESTRIAN.   Any person afoot or wearing in-line speed skates,
including a person with a physical, hearing, or visual disability. (ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 1-158)



   PERSON WITH DISABILITIES.  A natural person who, as determined by a
licensed physician, by a licensed physician assistant, or by a licensed
advanced practice nurse:



      (1)   Cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a
brace, cane, crutch, another person, prosthetic device, wheelchair, or other
assistive device;



      (2)   Is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that his
or her forced (respiratory) expiratory volume for one second, when measured
by spirometry, is less than one liter, or the arterial oxygen tension is less
than 60 mm/hg on room air at rest;



      (3)   Uses portable oxygen;



      (4)   Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's
functional limitations are classified in severity as Class III or Class IV,
according to standards set by the American Heart Association;



      (5)   Is severely limited in the person's ability to walk due
to an arthritic, neurological, oncological, or orthopedic condition;



      (6)   Cannot walk 200 feet without stopping to rest because of
one of the above five conditions; or



      (7)   Is missing a hand or arm or has permanently lost the use
of a hand or arm. 



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-159.1)



   POLICE OFFICER.  Every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic, or to make arrests and issue citations for violations of traffic
regulations.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162)



   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS.  The place where any person transacts his
principal business, or where he makes up and approves his payroll, maintains
a central file of records, and maintains his principal executive offices. 
In the event that not all of these functions are performed in one place, then
that place where a majority of these functions are performed, or the place
where the person does in fact principally transact and control his business
affairs shall be considered as the principal place of business.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162.5)



   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.  Every way or place in private ownership,
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-163)



   RAILROAD.  A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than
streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166)



   RAILROAD-HIGHWAY GRADE CROSSING.  The intersection of stationary rails
owned or used in the operation of a railroad corporation across a highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166.1)



   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL.  Any sign, signal, or device, other than an
official traffic-control signal or device, erected in accordance with the
laws governing the same, and intended to give notice of the presence of
railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167)



   RAILROAD TRAIN.  A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168)



   RAILROAD TRACK EQUIPMENT.  All vehicles operated upon rails for the
purpose of the maintenance of railroads including, but not limited to, all
hi-rail vehicles and on-track roadway maintenance machines, as defined in 49
CFR, Part 214.7.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167.5)



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  Every camping trailer, motor home, mini motor
home, travel trailer, truck camper, or van camper used primarily for
recreational purposes, and not used commercially nor owned by a commercial
business.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-169)



   REGISTRATION.  The registration certificate or certificates and
registration plates issued under the laws of this state pertaining to the
registration of vehicles.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171)



   REGISTRATION STICKER.  A device to be attached to a registration plate
that will renew the registration and registration plate or plates for a
predetermined period, not to exceed one registration year.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171)



   REMOVE.  Includes removing, defacing, covering, or destroying.



   RESCUE SQUAD.  A voluntary association of individuals, or a fire
department, dedicated to saving lives through the rescue of persons entrapped
in wrecked vehicles or other hazardous circumstances, and associated with
some unit of government.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.6)



   RESCUE VEHICLE.  Any publicly or privately owned vehicle which is
specifically designed, configured, and equipped for the performance of access
and extrication of persons from hazardous or life-endangering situations, as
well as for the emergency transportation of persons who are sick, injured,
wounded, or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.8)



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including a
highway, not comprising a business district, when the property on the highway
for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.  For purposes of establishing
maximum speed limits, a RESIDENCE DISTRICT shall be at least a quarter of a
mile long with residences or residences and buildings in use for businesses
spaced no more than 500 feet apart.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-172)



   RETAIL SALE.  The act or attempted act of selling vehicles or
otherwise disposing of a vehicle to a person for use as a consumer.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-174)



   REVOCATION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE.  The termination by formal action of
the secretary, of a person's license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle
on the public highways, which termination shall not be subject to renewal or
restoration, except that an application for a new license may be presented
and acted upon by the secretary after the expiration of at least one year
after the date of revocation.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-176)



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching
under such circumstances of direction, speed, and proximity as to give rise
to danger of collision, unless one grants precedence to the other.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-177)



   ROAD TRACTOR.  Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-178)



   ROADWAY.  That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.  In the event
a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used
herein shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such
roadways collectively.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-179)



   SAFETY ZONE.  The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while
set apart as a safety zone.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-181)



   SCHOOL BUS.



      (1)   Every motor vehicle, except as provided in division (2)
below, owned or operated by or for any of the following entities for the
transportation of persons regularly enrolled as students in grade 12 or below
in connection with any activity of the entity:



         (a)   A public or private primary or secondary school;



         (b)   A primary or secondary school operated by a
religious institution; or



         (c)   Any public, private, or religious nursery school.



      (2)   This definition does not include the following:



         (a)   A bus operated by a public utility, village
corporation, or common carrier authorized to conduct local or interurban
transportation of passengers when the bus is not traveling a specific school
bus route but is:



            1.  On a regularly scheduled route for the
transportation of other fare-paying passengers;



            2.  Furnishing charter service for the
transportation of groups on field trips or other special trips or in
connection with special events; or



            3.  Being used for shuttle service between
attendance centers or other educational facilities.



         (b)   A motor vehicle of the First Division.



         (c)   A multifunction school-activity bus.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-182)



   SEMITRAILER.  Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle, and so constructed its weight and that of its load rests upon
or is carried by another vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187)



   SHOULDER.  That portion of the highway adjacent to the roadway for
accommodating stopped vehicles or for emergency use.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187.1)



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188)



   SPEED-CHANGE LANE.  An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas,
primarily for the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or
leaving the through traffic lanes.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-193)



   STAND or STANDING.  The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-194)



   STATE.  A state, territory, or possession of the United States, the
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or a province of the
Dominion of Canada.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-195)



   STATE HIGHWAYS.  Defined in the Illinois Highway Code as the same may
from time to time be amended.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-196)



   STATE POLICE.  The Illinois state police.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-197)



   STOP.  The complete cessation from movement.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-199)



   STOP or STOPPING.  Any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic-control sign or signal.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-200)



   STREET.  The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-201)



   SUBURBAN DISTRICT.  That portion of any city, village, or incorporated
town, other than the business and residence districts.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-203)



   THROUGH HIGHWAY.  Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular
traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which
vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the
right-of-way to vehicles on the through highway in obedience to either a stop
sign or a yield sign, when those signs are erected as provided in this title.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205)



   TOW TRUCK.  Every truck designed or altered and equipped for and used
to push, tow, carry upon, or draw vehicles by means of a crane, hoist,
towbar, towline, or auxiliary axle, or carried upon to render assistance to
disabled vehicles, except for any truck tractor temporarily converted to a
tow truck by means of a portable wrecker unit attached to the fifth wheel of
the truck tractor and used only by the owner to tow a disabled vehicle also
owned by him or her and never used for hire.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205.1)



   TRAFFIC.  Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars,
and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-207)



   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL.  Any official traffic-control device other
than a railroad sign or signal, whether manually, electrically, or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
permitted to proceed.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-208)



   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.  Any provision of this code or other regulatory
ordinance the purpose of which is to directly control or improve traffic and
safety of both vehicles and pedestrians.



   TRAILER.  Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than
a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property, and for being
drawn by a motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests
upon the towing vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-209)



   TRAVEL TRAILER.  A trailer, not used commercially, designed to provide
living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, and of a size or
weight not requiring an over-dimension permit when towed on a highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-210.01)



   TRUCK.  Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily
for the transportation of property.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211)



   TRUCK CAMPER.  A truck, not used commercially, when equipped with a
portable unit designed to be loaded onto the bed which is construed to
provide temporary living quarters for recreational, travel, or camping use.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211.01)



   TRUCK TRACTOR.  Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry a load other than
a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn, or a power unit that
carries as property motor vehicles when operating in combination with a
semitrailer in transporting motor vehicles or any other commodity, including
cargo or general freight, on a backhaul.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-212)



   URBAN DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including any street
which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling
houses, and situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of 1/4
mile or more.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214)



   URBAN AREA.  An urban area is any incorporated or unincorporated area
developed primarily for residential or business purposes.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214.1)



   VEHICLE.



      (1)   Every device, in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or requiring a
certificate of title under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-101(d), except devices
moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks, and snowmobiles as defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety
Act.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, unless otherwise
prescribed, a device shall be considered to be a vehicle until such time it
either comes within the definition of a "junk vehicle," as defined under this
section, or a junking certificate is issued for it.



      (3)   For this section vehicles are divided into two divisions:



         (a)   First division:  those motor vehicles which are
designed for the carrying of not more than ten persons;



         (b)   Second division:  those vehicles which are
designed for carrying more than ten persons; those designed or used for
living quarters; those which are designed for pulling or carrying property,
freight, or cargo; those vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and
used as vehicles of the second division; and those vehicles of the first
division used and registered as school buses.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-217)



§ 70.02  ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE.



   (A)   The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/1-100 et seq., as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference
to be applied within the corporate limits of the village to the extent
permitted by law and to the extent that its subject matter is not regulated
by the Village Code of Ordinances or inconsistent with any lawful provisions
of the Village Code of Ordinances. All actions or failure to act made
unlawful in the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be made unlawful under the
provisions of the Village Code of Ordinances.



   (B)   All references in sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code to
"this Code" shall be to sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code and shall not
refer to sections of the Village Code of Ordinances. References to "state
employee" or "official" may be to a corresponding village employee or
official where such reference is applicable or necessary.



   (C)   Citations for violations of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted
by the reference herein may be issued by authorized personnel of the village,
using appropriate Illinois Vehicle Code section which shall, by the effect of
this section, represent identically and specially numbered sections of the
Village Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 1376-07, passed 4-17-07)



OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS



§ 70.10  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.



   No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order
or direction of any police officer, fireman, person authorized by a local
authority to direct traffic, or school crossing guard invested by law with
authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. Any person convicted of
violating this section is guilty of a petty offense and shall be subject to a
mandatory fine of $150.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-203)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.11  PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC CODE; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers
of vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles
owned or operated by the United States, the state, or any county, city, town,
district, or any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided
in this section, and subject to specific exceptions as set forth in this
title with reference to authorized emergency vehicles.



   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding
to an emergency call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to
the conditions herein stated.



   (C)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:



      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this
traffic code;



      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only
after slowing down as may be required and necessary for safe operation;



      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not
endanger life or property;



      (4)   Disregard regulations governing the direction of
movement or turning in specified directions.



   (D)   The exceptions herein granted to an authorized emergency
vehicle, other than a police vehicle, shall apply only when the vehicle is
making use of either an audible signal when in motion, or visual signals
meeting the requirements of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215.



   (E)   The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor do these provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.



   (F)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this
traffic code shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles, and equipment while
actually engaged in work upon the highway, but shall apply to such persons
and vehicles when traveling to or from such work.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-205)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.12  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING
ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.



   Every person riding an animal or driving an animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights, and shall be subject to all of
the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except
those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no
application.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-206)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.13  FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE POLICE OFFICER.



   It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who,
having been given a visual or audible signal by a police officer directing
the driver or operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, willfully fails or
refuses to obey that direction, increases his speed, extinguishes his lights,
or otherwise flees or attempts to elude the officer.  The signal given by
the police officer may be by hand, voice, siren, or a red or blue light. 
However, the officer giving the signal shall be in police uniform and, if
driving a vehicle, the vehicle shall be marked showing it to be an official
police vehicle.



Penalty, see § 70.99



TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND MARKINGS



§ 70.30  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic-control accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of
an authorized emergency vehicle in this traffic code.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel
across private property to avoid an official traffic-control device.



   (C)   No provision of this traffic code, for which official
traffic-control devices are required, shall be enforced against an alleged
violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device
is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state
that official traffic-control devices are required, the section shall be
effective even though no devices are erected or in place.



   (D)   Whenever any official traffic-control device is placed or held
in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this traffic
code, the device shall be presumed to have been so placed or held by the
official act or direction of lawful authority, and comply with the
requirements of this traffic code, unless the contrary shall be established
by competent evidence.



   (E)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a traffic-control signal
on which no signal light facing the vehicle is illuminated shall stop before
entering the intersection, in accordance with rules applicable in making a
stop at a stop sign.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-305) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.31  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.



   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or color lighted arrows, successively one at a time
or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used,
except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and the lights
shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:



   (A)   Green indication.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn.  Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning
right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the
time such signal is exhibited.



      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown
alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other
movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such
vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within
an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.



      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control
signal, as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307, pedestrians facing any
green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed
across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.



   (B)   Steady yellow indication.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or
yellow arrow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is
being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately
thereafter.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow
arrow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as
provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307, are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and
no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.



   (B-5)   Flashing yellow arrow indication.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a flashing yellow arrow
indication may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement
indicated by the arrow and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the
time the signal is exhibited.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing a flashing yellow arrow indication,
unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307, may proceed across the roadway within any marked
or unmarked crosswalk that crosses the lane or lanes used to depart the
intersection by traffic controlled by the flashing yellow arrow indication.
Pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the
intersection at the time that the flashing yellow signal indication is first
displayed.



   (C)   Steady red indication.



      (1)   Except as provided in divisions (C)(3) and (C)(3.5) of
this section, vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone
shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such stop line,
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if
there is no such crosswalk, then before entering the intersection, and shall
remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown.



      (2)   Except as provided in divisions (C)(3) and (C)(3.5) of
this section, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal shall not
enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and,
unless entering the intersection to make a movement permitted by another
signal, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such
stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if there is no such crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication permitting the
movement indicated by such red arrow is shown.



      (3)   Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn and
local authorities by ordinance or state authorities by rule or regulation
prohibit any such turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may
cautiously enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a
one-way street into a one-way street, after stopping as required by division
(C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section. After stopping, the driver shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another
roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such
driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction or roadways.
Such driver shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk.



      (3.5)   In municipalities with less than 2,000,000
inhabitants, after stopping as required by division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this
section, the driver of a motorcycle or bicycle, facing a steady red signal
which fails to change to a green signal within a reasonable period of time
not less than 120 seconds because of a signal malfunction or because the
signal has failed to detect the arrival of the motorcycle or bicycle due to
the vehicle's size or weight, shall have the right to proceed, after yielding
the right-of- way to oncoming traffic facing a green signal, subject to the
rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign as required by ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 11-1204.



      (4)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal
as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307, pedestrians facing a steady
circular red or red arrow signal alone shall not enter the roadway.



   (D)   In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can
have no application. Any stop required shall be at a traffic sign or a
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made or, in the
absence of such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.



   (E)   The motorman of any streetcar shall obey the above signals as
applicable to vehicles.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.32  PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk"
or "Don't Walk" or the illuminated symbols of a walking person or an upraised
palm are in place, these signals shall indicate as follows:



   (A)   "Walk" or walking person symbol.  Pedestrians facing this
signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal, and
shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.



   (B)   "Don't Walk" or upraised palm signal.  No pedestrian shall
start to cross the roadway in the direction of this signal, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed his crossing on the "Walk" signal or
upraised palm symbol shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the
"Don't Walk" signal or upraised palm symbol is illuminated, steady, or
flashing.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.33  LANE-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   Whenever lane-control signals are used in conjunction with official
signs, they shall have the following meanings:



   (A)   Downward-pointing green arrow.  A driver facing this
indication is permitted to drive in the lane over which the arrow signal is
located.  Otherwise, he shall obey all other traffic controls present and
follow normal safe driving practices.



   (B)   Red X symbol.  A driver facing this indication shall not
drive in the lane over which the signal is located, and this indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of all other traffic controls present. 
Otherwise he shall obey all other traffic controls, and follow normal safe
driving practices.



   (C)   Yellow X (steady).  A driver facing this indication should
prepare to vacate the lane over which the signal is located, in a safe manner
to avoid, if possible, occupying that lane when a steady red X is displayed.



   (D)   Flashing yellow arrow.  A driver facing this indication may
use the lane only for the purpose of approaching and making a left turn.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-308)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.34  FLASHING SIGNALS.



   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in
conjunction with a traffic-control device, it shall require obedience by
vehicular traffic as follows:



   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal).  When a red lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection, or if none, then at a point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection, and the right to
proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.



   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal).  When a yellow lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past the signal only with caution.



   (C)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-309)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.35  DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS, OR ADVERTISING
SIGNS.



   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports
to be, or is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic-control device
or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic
or the effectiveness of an official traffic-control device or any railroad
sign or signal.



   (B)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public
authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon
any commercial advertising.



   (C)   Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over
the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed
without notice.



   (D)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any traffic-control
device to be used on any street or highway in this village which does not
conform to the requirements of this chapter.



   (E)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information, and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.



   (F)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection of
Illinois Adopt-A-Highway signs by the village as provided in the Illinois
Adopt-A-Highway Act, ILCS Ch. 605, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-310)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.36  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD
SIGNS OR SIGNALS.



   (A)   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in
fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official
traffic-control device, or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription,
shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.



   (B)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section
shall be punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other
penalties which may be imposed.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-311)



§ 70.37  UNLAWFUL USE OR DAMAGE TO HIGHWAYS, APPURTENANCES, AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure or
damage any public highway or street, or any bridge or culvert, or to
willfully damage, injure, or remove any sign, signpost, or structure upon or
used or constructed in connection with any public highway or street for the
protection thereof, or for the protection or regulation of traffic thereon,
by any willfully unusual, improper, or unreasonable use thereof, or by
willfully careless driving or use of any vehicle thereon, or by willful
mutilation, defacing, destruction, or removal thereof.



   (B)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section
shall be punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other penalty
which may be imposed.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-312)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.38  UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF HIGHWAY SIGN OR MARKER.



   The Village Street Department, with reference to traffic-control signs,
signals, or markers owned by the village, is authorized to indicate the
ownership of the signs, signals, or markers on the back of the devices in
letters not less than 3/8 inch, or more than 3/4 inch in height, by use of a
metal stamp, etching, or other permanent means.  Except for employees of the
Village Street Department, police officers, contractors and their employees
engaged in a highway construction contract or work on the highway approved by
the village, it is unlawful for any person to possess a sign, signal, or
marker so identified.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-313)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.39  ZONES OF QUIET.



   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no
person operating a motor vehicle within the zone shall sound the horn or
other warning device except in an emergency.



§ 70.40  NO-TURNING SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.



   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
the sign.  When authorized marks, buttons, or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be travelled by vehicles, no
driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications.



§ 70.41  STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.



   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated
by stop signs or yield signs as authorized in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-302.



   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or
traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle and every motorman of a
streetcar approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the
event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if
none, then at the point nearest the intersection roadway where the driver has
a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection.



   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required
for safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1204)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.42  ADVISORY WARNING SIGNS IN AREAS NEAR RESIDENCE OF DISABLED
INDIVIDUALS.



   (A)   Upon recommendation of the Chief of Police and approval by the
Village President, a motorist warning sign may be placed in the immediate
area of the residence of a disabled individual.



   (B)   Upon any such recommendation by the Chief of Police and
approval by the Village President, the Public Works Department is authorized
to erect an appropriate motorist warning sign.



(Ord. 958-97, passed 6-17-97)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A violation of any provision of this title, unless otherwise
specified, or of any offenses classified as "petty" offenses under the
provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than $35 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. Offenses classified as
"business" offenses under the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted
by reference herein shall be punishable as set forth herein.



   (B)   Offenses classified as "misdemeanors" under the provisions of
the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted by reference herein shall be subject to a
fine and/or imprisonment for a determinate term according to the following
limitation:



      (1)   For a Class A misdemeanor, imprisonment for any term
less than six months and/or a fine of not less than $200 and not to exceed
$2,500 except as provided in subdivision (4) below.



      (2)   For a Class B misdemeanor, imprisonment for any term
less than six months and/or a fine of not less than $100 and not to exceed
$1,500.



      (3)   For a Class C misdemeanor, imprisonment for not more
than 30 days and/or a fine of not less than $50 and not to exceed $1, 500.



      (4)   The court, upon making a finding of guilty for any
offense under § 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted herein, in
addition to any sentencing alternative elected by the court, shall impose a
fine of not less than $750 and no more than $2,500.



   (C)   For a violation of any provision hereof in a street
construction or maintenance work zone (stationary or moving), the minimum
fine shall be not less than $75.



   (D)   Except for penalties under §§ 3-701, 3-702, 3-703, 6-303 and
11-501 of the Vehicle Code adopted herein, the penalty for any violation
hereof shall be a fine only, according to the schedule in division (B) above.
Where state law requires both a fine and imprisonment for misdemeanor
violations to confer jurisdiction on the court, the penalties of both fine
and imprisonment in division (B) above shall apply.



   (E)   Parking violations.  Whoever violates any provision of
Chapter 72 of the Village Code of Ordinances, for which a specific penalty
has not been designated, shall be fined and pay to the village $30 for each
such offense if paid within ten days, $50 if paid after ten days but before
45 days, and $100 if paid after 45 days. Such payment shall be made at the
police station, a numbered receipt shall be issued for all money so received,
and such money shall be promptly turned over to the Village Treasurer to be
credited to the General Fund.



(Am. Ord. 1376-07, passed 4-17-07)



CHAPTER 71:  RULES OF OPERATION



Section



Speed Restrictions



   71.001   Speed limits



   71.002   Special speed limits while passing schools and while
traveling through highway construction or maintenance zones



   71.003   Maximum attainable operating speed



   71.004   Minimum speed regulation



Turning and Starting; Signals



   71.020   Required position and method of turning at intersections



   71.021   Limitations on U-turns



   71.022   Starting parked vehicle



   71.023   When signal required



   71.024   Signal by hand and arm or signal device



   71.025   Method of giving hand and arm signals



Overtaking and Passing



   71.040   Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions



   71.041   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions



   71.042   Overtaking vehicles on the left



   71.043   When overtaking on the right is permitted



   71.044   Limitations on overtaking on the left



   71.045   Meeting or overtaking school bus



   71.046   One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands



   71.047   No-passing zones



   71.048   Driving on roadways laned for traffic



Right-of-Way



   71.060   Vehicles approaching or entering intersection



   71.061   Vehicle turning left



   71.062   Vehicles entering stop crosswalk



   71.063   Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection



   71.064   Merging traffic



   71.065   Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway



   71.066   Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency
vehicles



   71.067   Funeral processions



Special Stops Required



   71.080   Obedience to signal indicating approach of train or
railroad track equipment



   71.081   Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings



   71.082   Emerging from alley, building, private road, or driveway



   71.083   Stop when traffic obstructed



Prohibitions



   71.095   Backing



   71.096   Following vehicle too closely



   71.097   Obstruction of driver's view or driving mechanism



   71.098   Opening vehicle doors



   71.099   Coasting



   71.100   Following fire apparatus; driving over fire hose



   71.101   Driving upon sidewalk



   71.102   Use of roller skates, coasters, or similar devices



   71.103   Putting glass or other hazardous materials on highway
prohibited



   71.104   Obstructing person in highways



   71.105   Farm tractor operation



   71.106   Driving on controlled-access highway



Parades



   71.120   Definitions



   71.121   Permit required



   71.122   Application for permit



   71.123   Standards for issuance of permit



   71.124   Notice of rejection of permit application



   71.125   Appeal procedure when permit denied



   71.126   Alternative permit



   71.127   Notice to village and other officials when permit issued



   71.128   Contents of permit



   71.129   Duties of permittee



   71.130   Public conduct during parades



   71.131   Revocation of permit



SPEED RESTRICTIONS



§ 71.001  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   No vehicle may be driven upon any highway of this state at a
speed which is greater than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic
conditions and the use of the highway, or endangers the safety of any person
or property. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the
applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to
decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, approaching and
going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazard exists with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
Speed must be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any
person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.



   (A-5)   For purposes of this section, URBAN DISTRICT does not
include any interstate highway as defined by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-133.1
which includes all highways under the jurisdiction of the Illinois State Toll
Highway Authority.



   (B)   No person may drive a vehicle upon any highway of this state
at a speed which is greater than the applicable statutory maximum speed limit
established by divisions (C), (D), (E), (F) or (G) of this section, by ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605 or by a regulation or ordinance made under this
chapter.



   (C)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under this
chapter, the maximum speed limit in an urban district for all vehicles is:



      (1)   Thirty miles per hour; and



      (2)   Fifteen miles per hour in an alley.



   (D)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under this
chapter, the maximum speed limit outside an urban district for any vehicle is:



      (1)   Sixty-five miles per hour for all or part of highways
that are designated by the Department, have at least four lanes of traffic,
and have a separation between the roadways moving in opposite directions; and



      (2)   Fifty-five miles per hour for all other highways, roads,
and streets.



   (D-1)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under
this chapter, the maximum speed limit outside an urban district for any
vehicle is:



      (1)   Seventy miles per hour on any interstate highway as
defined by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-133.1 which includes all highways under
the jurisdiction of the Illinois State Toll Highway Authority;



      (2)   Sixty-five miles per hour for all or part of highways
that are designated by the Department, have at least four lanes of traffic,
and have a separation between the roadways moving in opposite directions; and



      (3)   Fifty-five miles per hour for all other highways, roads,
and streets. DuPage County may adopt ordinances setting a maximum speed limit
on highways, roads, and streets that is lower than the limits established by
this section.



   (E)   In DuPage County, unless some lesser speed restriction is
established under this chapter, the maximum speed limit outside an urban
district for a second division vehicle designed or used for the carrying of a
gross weight of 8,001 pounds or more (including the weight of the vehicle and
maximum load) is 60 miles per hour on any interstate highway as defined by
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-133.1 and 55 miles per hour on all other highways,
roads, and streets.



   (F)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under this
chapter, the maximum speed limit outside an urban district for a bus is:



      (1)   Sixty-five miles per hour upon any highway which has at
least four lanes of traffic and of which the roadways for traffic moving in
opposite directions are separated by a strip of ground which is not surfaced
or suitable for vehicular traffic, except that the maximum speed limit for a
bus on all highways, roads, or streets not under the jurisdiction of the
Department or the Illinois State Toll Highway Authority is 55 miles per hour;



      (2)   Fifty-five miles per hour on any other highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate speed, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1 and Ch.
625, Act 5, § 11-604



§ 71.002  SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS WHILE PASSING SCHOOLS AND WHILE TRAVELING
THROUGH HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION OR MAINTENANCE ZONES.



   (A)   While passing schools.



      (1)   For the purpose of this section, SCHOOL means the
following entities:



         (a)   A public or private primary or secondary school.



         (b)   A primary or secondary school operated by a
religious institution.



         (c)   A public, private, or religious nursery school.



      (2)   On a school day when school children are present and so
close thereto that a potential hazard exists because of the close proximity
of the motorized traffic, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in
excess of 20 miles per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling on
a roadway on public school property or upon any public thoroughfare where
children pass going to and from school.



      (3)   For the purpose of this section a school day shall begin
at seven ante meridian and shall conclude at four post meridian.



      (4)   This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate
signs are posted upon streets and highways under their respective
jurisdiction and maintained by the Department, township, county, park
district, city, village or incorporated town wherein the school zone is
located. With regard to the special speed limit while passing schools, such
signs shall give proper due warning that a school zone is being approached
and shall indicate the school zone and the maximum speed limit in effect
during school days when school children are present.



      (5)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of
electronic speed-detecting devices within 500 feet of signs within a special
school speed zone indicating such zone, as defined in this section, nor shall
evidence obtained thereby be inadmissible in any prosecution for speeding
provided the use of such device shall apply only to the enforcement of the
speed limit in such special school speed zone.



      (6)   Except as provided in division (A)(7) of this section, a
person who violates this section is guilty of a petty offense. Violations of
this section are punishable with a minimum fine of $150 for the first
violation and a minimum fine of $300 for the second or subsequent violation.



      (7)   A person committing a violation of this section is
guilty of aggravated special speed limit while passing schools when he or she
drives a motor vehicle at a speed that is:



         (a)   Twenty-six miles per hour or more but less than 35
miles per hour in excess of the applicable special speed limit established
under this section or a similar provision of a local ordinance and is guilty
of a Class B misdemeanor; or



         (b)   Thirty-five miles per hour or more in excess of
the applicable special speed limit established under this section or a
similar provision of a local ordinance and is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



      (8)   (a)   When a fine for a violation of division (A)(1)
of this section is $150 or greater, the person who violates division (A)(1)
of this section shall be charged an additional $50 to be paid to the unit
school district where the violation occurred for school safety purposes. If
the violation occurred in a dual school district, $25 of the surcharge shall
be paid to the elementary school district for school safety purposes and $25
of the surcharge shall be paid to the high school district for school safety
purposes. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the entire $50
surcharge shall be paid to the appropriate school district or districts.



         (b)   For purposes of this division (A)(8), SCHOOL
SAFETY PURPOSES includes the costs associated with school zone safety
education, the Safe Routes to School Program under Section 2705-317 of the
Department of Transportation Law of the Civil Administrative Code of
Illinois, safety programs within the School Safety and Educational
Improvement Block Grant Program under Section 2-3.51.5 of the School Code,
and the purchase, installation, and maintenance of caution lights which are
mounted on school speed zone signs.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605)



   (B)   While traveling through highway construction or maintenance
zones.



      (1)   A person may not operate a motor vehicle in a
construction or maintenance speed zone at a speed in excess of the posted
speed limit when workers are present.



      (2)   A person may not operate a motor vehicle in a
construction or maintenance speed zone at a speed in excess of the posted
speed limit when workers are not present.



      (3)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the use of electronic
speed-detecting devices within 500 feet of signs within a construction or
maintenance speed zone indicating the zone, as defined in this section, nor
shall evidence obtained by use of those devices be inadmissible in any
prosecution for speeding, provided the use of the device shall apply only to
the enforcement of the speed limit in the construction or maintenance speed
zone.



      (4)   (a)   As used in this section, a CONSTRUCTION OR
MAINTENANCE SPEED ZONE is an area in which the Department, Toll Highway
Authority, or local agency has posted signage advising drivers that a
construction or maintenance speed zone is being approached, or in which the
Department, Authority, or local agency has posted a lower speed limit with a
highway construction or maintenance speed zone special speed limit sign after
determining that the preexisting established speed limit through a highway
construction or maintenance project is greater than is reasonable or safe
with respect to the conditions expected to exist in the construction or
maintenance speed zone.



         (b)   If it is determined that the preexisting
established speed limit is safe with respect to the conditions expected to
exist in the construction or maintenance speed zone, additional speed limit
signs which conform to the requirements of this division (B)(4) of this
section shall be posted.



         (c)   Highway construction or maintenance speed zone
special speed limit signs shall be of a design approved by the Department.
The signs must give proper due warning that a construction or maintenance
speed zone is being approached and must indicate the maximum speed limit in
effect. The signs also must state the amount of the minimum fine for a
violation.



      (5)   A first violation of this section is a petty offense
with a minimum fine of $250. A second or subsequent violation of this section
is a petty offense with a minimum fine of $750.



      (6)   If a fine for a violation of this section is $250 or
greater, the person who violated this section shall be charged an additional
$125, which shall be deposited into the Transportation Safety Highway
Hire-back Fund in the State Treasury, unless the violation occurred on a
highway other than an interstate highway and a county police officer wrote
the ticket for the violation, in which case the $125 shall be deposited into
that county's Transportation Safety Highway Hire-back Fund. In the case of a
second or subsequent violation of this section, if the fine is $750 or
greater, the person who violated this section shall be charged an additional
$250, which shall be deposited into the Transportation Safety Highway
Hire-back Fund in the State Treasury, unless the violation occurred on a
highway other than an interstate highway and a county police officer wrote
the ticket for the violation, in which case the $250 shall be deposited into
that county's Transportation Safety Highway Hire-back Fund.



      (7)   The Department of State Police and the local county
police department have concurrent jurisdiction over any violation of this
section that occurs on an interstate highway.



      (8)   The Transportation Safety Highway Hire-back Fund, which
was created by Public Act 92-619, shall continue to be a special fund in the
State Treasury. Subject to appropriation by the General Assembly and approval
by the Secretary, the Secretary of Transportation shall use all moneys in the
Transportation Safety Highway Hire-back Fund to hire off-duty Department of
State Police officers to monitor construction or maintenance zones.



      (9)   Each county shall create a Transportation Safety Highway
Hire-back Fund. The county shall use the moneys in its Transportation Safety
Highway Hire-back Fund to hire off-duty county police officers to monitor
construction or maintenance zones in that county on highways other than
interstate highways. The county, in its discretion, may also use a portion of
the moneys in its Transportation Safety Highway Hire-back Fund to purchase
equipment for county law enforcement and fund the production of materials to
educate drivers on construction zone safe driving habits.



      (10)   For a second or subsequent violation of this section
within two years of the date of the previous violation, the Secretary of
State shall suspend the driver's license of the violator for a period of 90
days. This suspension shall only be imposed if the current violation of this
section and at least one prior violation of this section occurred during a
period when workers were present in the construction or maintenance zone.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605.1)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.003  MAXIMUM ATTAINABLE OPERATING SPEED.



   No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle on any street or
highway in this village where the minimum allowable speed on that street or
highway, as posted, is greater than the maximum attainable operating speed of
the vehicle.  Maximum attainable operating speed shall be determined by the
manufacturer of the vehicle and clearly published in the manual of
specifications and operation, or it shall be determined by applicable rule
and regulation promulgated by the Secretary of State.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-611)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.004  MINIMUM SPEED REGULATION.



   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede
or block the normal and regular movement of traffic except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation of his vehicle or in compliance with law.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-606(a))  Penalty, see § 70.99



TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS



§ 71.020  REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection
shall do so as follows:



      (1)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway.



      (2)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle, and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving
in such direction upon the roadway being entered.  Whenever practicable the
left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of
the center of the intersection.



      (3)   The state Department of Transportation and local
authorities in their respective jurisdictions may cause official
traffic-control devices to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and
thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in
this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when
such devices are so placed no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an
intersection other than as directed and required by such devices.



   (B)   Two-way left turn lanes.  Where a special lane for making
left turns by drivers proceeding in opposite directions has been indicated by
official traffic-control devices:



      (1)   A left turn shall not be made from any other lane.



      (2)   A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when
preparing for or making a left turn from or into the roadway or when
preparing for or making a U-turn when otherwise permitted by law.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-801)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.021  LIMITATIONS ON U-TURNS.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to
proceed in the opposite direction unless the movement can be made in safety
and without interfering with other traffic.



   (B)   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite
direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a
grade, where the vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from either direction within 500 feet.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-802)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.022  STARTING PARKED VEHICLE.



   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked,
unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-803)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.023  WHEN SIGNAL REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person may turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the
vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in § 71.020, or
turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a
vehicle from a direct course, or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.  No person may so
turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner
hereinafter provided.



   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required must
be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning within a business or residence district, and the
signal must be given continuously during not less than the last 200 feet
traveled by the vehicle before turning outside a business or residence
district.



   (C)   No person may stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this
chapter to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is
opportunity to give a signal.



   (D)   The electric turn signal device required in ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 12-208 must be used to indicate an intention to turn, change lanes, or
start from a parallel parked position, but must not be flashed on one side
only on a parked or disabled vehicle, or flashed as a courtesy or "do pass"
signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear.  However,
signal devices may be flashed simultaneously on both sides of a motor vehicle
to indicate the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care
in approaching, overtaking, and passing.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-804)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.024  SIGNAL BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE.



   Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given either by
means of the hand and arm or by an electric turn signal device conforming to
the requirements provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-208



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-805)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.025  METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.



   All signals given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of
the vehicle in the following manner, and the signals shall indicate as
follows:



   (A)   Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally.



   (B)   Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward, except that a person
operating a bicycle may extend the right hand and arm horizontally and to the
right side of the bicycle.



   (C)   Stop or decrease of speed.  Hand and arm extended downward.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-806)  Penalty, see § 70.99



OVERTAKING AND PASSING



§ 71.040  DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows:



      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction under the rules governing those movements;



      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive
to the left of the center of the roadway; provided, any person so doing shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon
the unobstructed portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute
an immediate hazard;



      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for
traffic under the rules applicable thereon;



      (4)   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic;



      (5)   Whenever there is a single-track paved road on one side
of the public highway and two vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose
right is the wider shoulder shall give the right-of-way on the pavement to
the other vehicle.



   (B)   Upon a two-lane roadway, providing for two-way movement of
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven in the right-hand lane available for
traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction, or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into
a private road or driveway.



   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic,
and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to
the left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by
official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side
of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to
use the lanes, or except as permitted under division (A)(2).  However, this
division shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center
line in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.



   (D)   Upon an interstate highway or fully access controlled freeway,
a vehicle may not be driven in the left lane, except when overtaking and
passing another vehicle.



   (E)   Division (D) of this section does not apply:



      (1)   When no other vehicle is directly behind the vehicle in
the left lane;



      (2)   When traffic conditions and congestion make it
impractical to drive in the right lane;



      (3)   When snow and other inclement weather conditions make it
necessary to drive in the left lane;



      (4)   When obstructions or hazards exist in the right lane;



      (5)   When a vehicle changes lanes to comply with ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, §§ 11-907, 11-907.5 and 11-908;



      (6)   When, because of highway design, a vehicle must be
driven in the left lane when preparing to exit;



      (7)   On toll highways when necessary to use I-Pass, and on
toll and other highways when driving in the left lane is required to comply
with an official traffic control device; or



      (8)   To law enforcement vehicles, ambulances, and other
emergency vehicles engaged in official duties and vehicles engaged in highway
maintenance and construction operations.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-701)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.041  PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.



   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each
other to the right and upon roadways having width for not more than one line
of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least
1/2 of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-702)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.042  OVERTAKING VEHICLES ON THE LEFT.



   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions,
and special rules otherwise stated in this chapter:



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance, and
shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of
the overtaken vehicle.  In no event shall the movement be made by driving
off the pavement or the main traveled portion of the roadway.



   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted,
the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of
the overtaking vehicle on audible signal, and shall not increase the speed of
his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.



   (C)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not, in passing upon
the left of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction, pass upon the right
of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless there is an
unobstructed lane of traffic available to permit the passing maneuver safely.



   (D)   The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle or
individual proceeding in the same direction on a highway shall leave a safe
distance, but not less than three feet, when passing the bicycle or
individual and shall maintain that distance until safely past the overtaken
bicycle or individual.



   (E)   A person driving a motor vehicle shall not, in a reckless
manner, drive the motor vehicle unnecessarily close to, toward, or near a
bicyclist, pedestrian, or a person riding a horse or driving an animal drawn
vehicle.



   (F)   Every person convicted of division (E) of this section shall
be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor if the violation does not result in great
bodily harm or permanent disability or disfigurement to another. If the
violation results in great bodily harm or permanent disability or
disfigurement to another, the person shall be guilty of a felony to be
prosecuted according to appropriate state law.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-703)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.043  WHEN OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT IS PERMITTED.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle with three or more wheels may overtake
and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following
conditions:



      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a
left turn;



      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient
width for two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction
being traveled by the overtaking vehicle;



      (3)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which
traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free
from obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving
vehicles.



   (B)   The driver of a two wheeled vehicle may not pass upon the
right of any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless the
unobstructed pavement to the right of the vehicle being passed is of a width
of not less than eight feet. This division does not apply to devices
propelled by human power.



   (C)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle
upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. Such
movement shall not be made by driving off the roadway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-704)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.044  LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.



   (A)   Passing on the left.



      (1)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the
center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction unless authorized by the provisions of this chapter, and
unless the left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction, or any vehicle overtaken.



      (2)   In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to an
authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and in the event the
passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for vehicles
approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-705)



   (B)   Conditions where passing on the left is prohibited.



      (1)   No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the
roadway under the following conditions:



         (a)   When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a
curve in the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within a distance
as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the
opposite direction.



         (b)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing
any intersection or railroad grade crossing.



         (c)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching
within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel.



      (2)   The limitations in division (B)(1) above do not apply
upon a one-way roadway, nor upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for two or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction,
nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private
road, or driveway when the movements can be made with safety.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-706)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.045  MEETING OR OVERTAKING SCHOOL BUS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop the vehicle before meeting
or overtaking, from either direction, any school bus stopped on a highway,
roadway, private road, parking lot, school property, or at any other
location, including, without limitation, a location that is not a highway or
roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging pupils.  The stop is
required before reaching the school bus when there is in operation on the
school bus the visual signals as specified in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§
12-803 and 12-805.  The driver of the vehicle shall not proceed until the
school bus resumes motion or the driver of the vehicle is signaled by the
school bus driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer actuated.



   (B)   The stop signal arm required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-803
shall be extended after the school bus has come to a complete stop for the
purpose of loading or discharging pupils and shall be closed before the
school bus is placed in motion again.  The stop signal arm shall not be
extended at any other time.



   (C)   The alternately flashing red signal lamps of an eight-lamp
flashing signal system required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805 shall be
actuated after the school bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of
loading or discharging pupils and shall be turned off before the school bus
is placed in motion again.  The red signal lamps shall not be actuated at
any other time except as provided in division (D) below.



   (D)   The alternately flashing amber signal lamps of an eight-lamp
flashing signal system required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805 shall be
actuated continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
school bus before stopping for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils
within an urban area, and during not less than the last 200 feet traveled by
the school bus outside an urban area. The amber signal lamps shall remain
actuated until the school bus is stopped.  The amber signal lamps shall not
be actuated at any other time.  The alternately flashing head lamps
permitted by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805 may be operated while the
alternately flashing red or amber signal lamps required by that section are
actuated.



   (E)   The alternately flashing head lamps permitted by ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 12-805 may be operated while the alternately flashing red or amber
signal lamps required by that section are actuated.



   (F)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway having four or more
lanes which permits at least two lanes of traffic to travel in opposite
directions need not stop the vehicle upon meeting a school bus which is
stopped in the opposing roadway; and need not stop the vehicle when driving
upon a controlled access highway when passing a school bus traveling in
either direction that is stopped in a loading zone adjacent to the surfaced
or improved part of the controlled access highway where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1414)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.046  ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.



   (A)   Upon a roadway designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall
be driven only in the direction designated at all or such times as shall be
indicated by official traffic-control devices.



   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island must be
driven only to the right of the island.



   (C)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more
roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or a
clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular
traffic, every vehicle must be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless
directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic-control
devices or police officers.  No vehicle may be driven over, across, or
within any dividing space, barrier, or section except through an opening in
the physical barrier, or dividing section, or space, or at a cross-over or
intersection as established by public authority.



   (D)   The driver of a vehicle may turn left across a paved noncurbed
dividing space unless prohibited by an official traffic-control device.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-708)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.047  NO-PASSING ZONES.



   (A)   The Board of Trustees is authorized to determine those
portions of any highway within the village where overtaking and passing or
driving on the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and may by
appropriate signs or markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end
of the zones, and when signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to
an ordinarily observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the
directions thereof.



   (B)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing
zone as set forth in division (A) no driver may at any time drive on the left
side of the roadway within the no-passing zone or on the left side of any
pavement striping designed to mark the no-passing zone throughout its length.



   (C)   This section does not apply under the conditions described in
§ 71.040 (A)(2), nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an
alley, private road, or driveway.  The pavement striping designed to mark
the no-passing zone may be crossed from the left-hand lane for the purpose of
completing a pass that was begun prior to the beginning of the zone in the
driver's direction of travel.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.048  DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.



   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent
herewith shall apply.



   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely
within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver
has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.



   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides
for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same
direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or in preparation for making a left turn or where such center lane is at the
time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the
vehicle is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official
traffic-control devices.



   (C)   Official traffic-control devices may be erected directing
specific traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be
used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of
the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such
device.  Drivers must obey lane designation signing except when it is
necessary to use a different lane to make a turning maneuver.



   (D)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting
the changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall
obey the directions of every such device.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-709)  Penalty, see § 70.99



RIGHT-OF-WAY



§ 71.060  VEHICLES APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION.



   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
roadways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the
left must yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.  This rule may
be modified at through highways or streets and where otherwise inconsistent
with the provisions of this traffic code.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-901)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.061  VEHICLE TURNING LEFT.



   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is
so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so
yielded, may proceed as soon as a safe interval occurs.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-902)  Penalty, see § 70.99 



§ 71.062  VEHICLES ENTERING STOP CROSSWALK.



   Where stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection, or flashing red signals are in place at a plainly marked
crosswalk between intersections, drivers of vehicles shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk, and pedestrians within or entering the
crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right-of-way over
vehicles so stopped.  Drivers of vehicles having so yielded the right-of-way
to pedestrians entering or within the nearest crosswalk at an intersection
shall also yield the right-of-way to pedestrians within any other crosswalk
at the intersection.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-903)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.063  VEHICLE ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION.



   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated
by stop or yield signs.



   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or
traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop
intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway before entering the intersection. After having stopped, the driver
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the
intersection from another roadway, or which is approaching so closely on the
roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when the driver
is moving across or within the intersection, but the driver, having so
yielded, may proceed as soon as a safe interval occurs.



   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in
obedience to the sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions, and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection, of if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway.  After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another
roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the
driver is moving across or within the intersection.



   (D)   If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or
interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield
right-of-way sign, the collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of the driver's failure to yield right-of-way.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-904)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.064  MERGING TRAFFIC.



   Notwithstanding the right-of-way provision in § 71.060, at an
intersection where traffic lanes are provided for merging traffic, the driver
of each vehicle on the converging roadways is required to adjust his
vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with another
vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-905)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.065  VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.



   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an
alley, building, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to
all vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-906)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.066  OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY
VEHICLES.



   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of this
chapter, or a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible
or visual signal, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and shall, if necessary to permit the safe passage of the
emergency vehicle, stop and remain in that position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the highway.



   (C)   Upon approaching a stationary authorized emergency vehicle,
when the authorized emergency vehicle is giving a signal by displaying
alternately flashing red, red and white, blue, or red and blue lights or
amber or yellow warning lights, a person who drives an approaching vehicle
shall:



      (1)   Proceeding with due caution, yield the right-of-way by
making a lane change into a lane not adjacent to that of the authorized
emergency vehicle, if possible with due regard to safety and traffic
conditions, if on a highway having at least four lanes with not less than two
lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching vehicle; or



      (2)   Proceeding with due caution, reduce the speed of the
vehicle, maintaining a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes
would be impossible or unsafe.



      (3)   As used in this division (C), AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY
VEHICLE includes any vehicle authorized by law to be equipped with
oscillating, rotating, or flashing lights under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
12-215, while the owner or operator of the vehicle is engaged in his or her
official duties.



   (D)   A person who violates division (C) of this section commits a
business offense punishable by a fine of not less than $100 or more than
$10,000.  It is a factor in aggravation if the person committed the offense
while in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.



   (E)   If a violation of division (C) of this section results in
damage to the property of another person, in addition to any other penalty
imposed, the person's driving privileges shall be suspended for a fixed
period of not less than 90 days and not more than one year.



   (F)   If a violation of division (C) of this section results in
injury to another person, in addition to any other penalty imposed, the
person's driving privileges shall be suspended for a fixed period of not less
than 180 days and not more than two years.



   (G)   If a violation of division (C) of this section results in the
death of another person, in addition to any other penalty imposed, the
person's driving privileges shall be suspended for two years.



   (H)   The Secretary of State shall, upon receiving a record of a
judgment entered against a person under division (C) of this section:



      (1)   Suspend the person's driving privileges for the
mandatory period; or



      (2)   Extend the period of an existing suspension by the
appropriate mandatory period.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.067  FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   (A)   Funeral processions have the right-of-way at intersections
when vehicles comprising the procession have their headlights and hazard
lights lighted, subject to the following conditions and exceptions:



      (1)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall
yield the right-of-way upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
giving an audible or visible signal;



      (2)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall
yield the right-of-way when directed to do so by a traffic officer;



      (3)   The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral
procession shall comply with stop signs and traffic-control signals but when
the leading vehicle has proceeded across an intersection in accordance with
the signal or after stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles in
the procession may proceed without stopping, regardless of the sign or
signal, and the leading vehicle and the vehicles in procession shall proceed
with due caution.



   (B)   The operator of a vehicle not in the funeral procession shall
not drive his vehicle in the funeral procession except when authorized to do
so by a traffic officer or when such vehicle is an authorized emergency
vehicle giving audible or visible signal.



   (C)   Operators of vehicles not a part of a funeral procession may
not form a procession or convoy and have their headlights or hazard lights or
both lighted for the purpose of securing the right-of-way granted by this
section to funeral processions.



   (D)   The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may
overtake and pass the vehicles in such procession if such overtaking and
passing can be accomplished without causing a traffic hazard or interfering
with such procession.



   (E)   The lead vehicle in the funeral procession may be equipped
with a flashing amber light which may be used only when such vehicle is used
as a lead vehicle in such procession.  Vehicles comprising a funeral
procession may utilize funeral pennants or flags or windshield stickers or
flashing hazard warning signal flashers to identify the individual vehicles
in such a procession.



   (F)   In the absence of law enforcement traffic control assistance
for a funeral procession, a funeral director or his or her designee may
direct traffic during a funeral procession.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1420)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED



§ 71.080  OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN OR RAILROAD
TRACK EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing where the driver is not always required to stop, that person
must exercise due care and caution as the existence of a railroad track
across a highway is a warning of danger, and under any of the circumstances
stated in this section, the driver shall stop within 50 feet but not less
than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad, and shall not proceed
until the tracks are clear and he or she can do so safely.



      (1)   The foregoing requirements shall apply when:



         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal
device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train or
railroad track equipment;



         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman
gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad
train or railroad track equipment;



         (c)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment
approaching a highway crossing emits a warning signal and the train or
railroad track equipment, by reason of its speed or nearness to the crossing,
is an immediate hazard;



         (d)   An approaching railroad train or railroad track
equipment is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing;



         (e)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment is
approaching so closely that an immediate hazard is created.



      (2)   Whenever a person driving a vehicle approaches a
railroad grade crossing where the driver is not always required to stop but
must slow down, the person must exercise due care and caution as the
existence of a railroad track across a highway is a warning of danger, and
under any circumstances stated in this section, the driver shall slow down
within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the
railroad, and shall not proceed until her or she checks that the tracks are
clear of an approaching train or railroad track equipment.



   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under
any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier
is closed or is being opened or closed.



   (C)   The Department of Transportation, and the village police force
with the approval of the Department, are hereby authorized to designate
particularly dangerous highway grade crossings of railroads and to erect stop
signs thereat.  When stop signs are erected at railroad grade crossings, the
driver of any vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad, and shall proceed only upon exercising
due care.



   (D)   At any railroad grade crossing provided with railroad
crossbuck signs, without automatic, electric, or mechanical signal devices,
crossing gates, or a human flagman giving a signal of the approach or passage
of a train or railroad track equipment, the driver of a vehicle shall in
obedience to the railroad crossbuck sign, yield the right-of-way and slow
down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall stop, if
required for safety, at a clearly marked stopped line, or if no stop line,
within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the
railroad and shall not proceed until he or she can do so safely.  If a
driver is involved in a collision at a railroad crossing or interferes with
the movement of a train or railroad track equipment after driving past the
railroad crossbuck sign, the collision or interference is prima facie
evidence of the driver's failure to yield right-of-way.  No person shall,
while driving a commercial motor vehicle, fail to negotiate a
railroad-highway grade railroad crossing because of insufficient
undercarriage clearance.



   (E)   It is unlawful to violate any part of this section.



      (1)   A violation of this section is a petty offense for which
a $500 fine shall be imposed for a first violation, and a $1,000 fine shall
be imposed for a second or subsequent violation.  The court may impose 25
hours of community service in place of the $500 fine for a first violation.



      (2)   For a second or subsequent violation, the Secretary of
State may suspend the driving privileges of the offender for a minimum of six
months.



   (F)   The village police shall impose fines as established in
division (E) for operators of vehicles that fail to obey signals indicating
the presence, approach, passage or departure of a train or railroad track
equipment.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201)



§ 71.081  CERTAIN VEHICLES MUST STOP AT ALL RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.



   (A)   The driver of any of the following vehicles shall, before
crossing a railroad track or tracks at grade, stop that vehicle within 50
feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail, and while so stopped,
shall listen and look for the approach of a train or railroad track
equipment, and shall not proceed until that movement can be made with safety:



      (1)   Any second division vehicle carrying passengers for hire;



      (2)   Any bus that meets all of the special requirements for
school buses in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-801; ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
12-803, and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805.  The driver of the bus, in
addition to complying with all other applicable requirements of this
division, must also turn off all noise producing accessories, including
heater blowers, defroster fans, auxiliary fans, and radios, before crossing a
railroad track or tracks;



      (3)   Any other vehicle which is required by federal or state
law to be placarded when carrying as a cargo or part of a cargo "hazardous
material" as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-500. After stopping as
required in this section, the driver shall proceed only in a gear not
requiring a change of gears during the crossing, and the driver shall not
shift gears while crossing the track or tracks.



   (B)   This section shall not apply:



      (1)   At any railroad grade crossing where traffic is
controlled by a police officer or flagperson;



      (2)   At any railroad grade crossing controlled by a
functioning traffic-control signal transmitting a green indication which
under law, permits the vehicle to proceed across the railroad tracks without
slowing or stopping, except that division (A) of this section shall apply to
any school bus;



      (3)   At any streetcar grade crossing within a business or
residence district; or



      (4)   At any abandoned industrial or spur track railroad grade
crossing designated as exempt by the Illinois Commerce Commission and marked
with an official sign as authorized in the state Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1202)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.082  EMERGING FROM ALLEY, BUILDING, PRIVATE ROAD, OR DRIVEWAY.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road,
or driveway within an urban area shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to
driving into the sidewalk area extending across the alley, building entrance,
road, or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at
the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic thereon, and shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrians as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the
roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1205)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.083  STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.



   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the
other side of the intersection, crosswalk, or railroad grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any
traffic-control signal indication to proceed.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1425)  Penalty, see § 70.99



PROHIBITIONS



§ 71.095  BACKING.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless the
movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic.



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same upon any
shoulder or roadway of any controlled-access highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1402)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.096  FOLLOWING VEHICLE TOO CLOSELY.



   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicles and the traffic upon and conditions of the street or highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-710)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.097  OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM.



   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when
there are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three, as to
obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or as
to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the
vehicle.



   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle or streetcar shall ride in a
position as to interfere with the driver's or motorman's view ahead or to the
sides, or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the
vehicle or streetcar.



   (C)   No passenger on a school bus may ride or stand in a position
as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the side or to the rear,
or to interfere with his control of the driving mechanism of the bus.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1406)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.098  OPENING VEHICLE DOORS.



   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be
done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic
for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1407)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.099  COASTING.



   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a down
grade shall not coast with the gears or transmission of the vehicle in
neutral.



   (B)   The driver of a truck or bus when traveling upon a down grade
shall not coast with the clutch disengaged.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1410)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.100  FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS; DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business
shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm
closer than 500 feet or stop the vehicle within 500 feet of any fire
apparatus stopped in answer to a fire alarm.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1411)



   (B)   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the
Fire Department when laid down on any street, private road, or driveway to be
used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.101  DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK.



   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk
area except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.



   (B)   This section does not apply to any vehicle moved exclusively
by human power, to any electric personal assistive mobility device, nor to
any motorized wheelchair.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or preempt
the authority of the village from regulating or prohibiting the use of
electric personal assistive mobility devices



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412.1)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.102  USE OF ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS, OR SIMILAR DEVICES.



   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster,
toy vehicle, skateboard, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except
while crossing a street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as
play streets when authorized by the traffic authority.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.103  PUTTING GLASS OR OTHER HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ON HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall throw, spill or deposit upon any highway any
bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any litter, as defined in the
Litter Control Act, ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 3.



   (B)   Any person who violates division (A) upon any highway shall
immediately remove the material or cause it to be removed.



   (C)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other debris, except any hazardous
substance as defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.215, hazardous waste as
defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.220, and potentially infectious medical
waste as defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360, dropped upon the highway
from such vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1413)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.104  OBSTRUCTING PERSON IN HIGHWAYS.



   No person shall willfully and unnecessarily hinder, obstruct, or delay,
or willfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder, or obstruct any
other person in lawfully driving or traveling along or upon any highway
within this village, or offer for barter or sale merchandise on the highway
so as to interfere with the effective movement of traffic.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1416)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.105  FARM TRACTOR OPERATION.



   (A)   No person shall operate a farm tractor on a highway in this
village unless the tractor is being used as an implement of husbandry in
connection with farming operations.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the use of a farm tractor as
an implement of husbandry in connection with farming operations shall be
deemed to include use of the tractor in connection with the transportation of
agricultural products and of farm machinery, equipment, and supplies, as well
as the transportation of the implement of husbandry from its place of
purchase to its place of storage, in connection with the obtaining of repairs
of the implement of husbandry, and the towing of a registered truck of not
more than 8,000 pounds for use as return transportation after the tractor is
left at the place of work or repair.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1418)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.106  DRIVING ON CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.



   No person may drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access
highway except at entrances and exits established by public authority.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-711)  Penalty, see § 70.99



PARADES



§ 71.120  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CRUISING.   The repeated operation of two or more vehicles in a
continuous or nearly continuous flow through a parking lot.



   PARADE.   Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or
procession of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk,
park, or other public place in the village, or CRUISING as defined above.



   PARADE PERMIT.   A permit required by this subchapter.



   PARKING LOT.   Any paved or unpaved area used by a place of business
or shopping center for the parking of vehicles of their customers, but shall
not include those operated for hire.



§ 71.121  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person or persons shall engage or participate in, aid,
form, or start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the
Chief of Police or other authorized village official.



   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Funeral processions;



      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or
participating in educational activities, provided the conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities;



      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.122  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application
with the Chief of Police or other authorized village official on forms
provided by such officer not less than 14 days prior to any parade. If a
potential parade will require significant involvement from village staff,
including but not limited to planning or police presence, any such
application should be submitted as far in advance as reasonably possible so
as to allow village staff the time and opportunity to make any necessary
arrangements or plans. Any application form must be completed in its entirety.



(Ord. 1706-14, passed 9-16-14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.123  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police or other authorized village official shall issue a
permit when, from a consideration of the application and from other
information obtained, he finds that:



   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;



   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the village to properly police the line
of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the village;



   (C)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the village other than that to be occupied by the proposed line
of march and areas contiguous thereto;



   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at
assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and
police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the
assembly areas;



   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement
of firefighting equipment en route to a fire;



   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to
its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en
route;



   (G)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods, or event, and is not designated to be held
purely for private profit;



   (H)   The parade, if it takes the form of cruising, has the approval
in writing of the owner or an authorized agent of the owner for the use of
the parking lot which is the site of the parade. 



   (I)   The issuance of a permit shall also be subject to Chapter 98,
§ 98.06 of the Village of Itasca Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 1706-14, passed 9-16-14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.124  NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT APPLICATION.



   The Chief of Police or other authorized village official shall act on
the application for a parade permit within ten days after filing thereof. 
If he disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant a notice of
his action stating the reasons for his denial of the permit.



(Ord. 1706-14, passed 9-16-14)



§ 71.125  APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.



   Any person or group denied a permit shall have the right to appeal the
denial to the Village Board of Trustees.  The appeal shall be taken within
30 days after notice of denial.  The Village Board of Trustees shall act on
the appeal within 30 days after its receipt.



(Ord. 1706-14, passed 9-16-14)



§ 71.126  ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police or other authorized village official, in denying an
application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct
of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different than that named
by the applicant.  An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall
file a written notice of his acceptance.  An alternate parade permit shall
conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit
under this subchapter.



§ 71.127  NOTICE TO VILLAGE AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.



   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be
sent to the President and the Fire Chief.



§ 71.128  CONTENTS OF PERMIT.



   Each parade permit shall state the following information:



   (A)   Starting time;



   (B)   Minimum speed;



   (C)   Maximum speed;



   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units
of the parade;



   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park, or other public
place to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;



   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;



   (G)   Such other information as is reasonably necessary to the
enforcement of this subchapter.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.129  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.



   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.  The parade
chairperson or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the
parade permit on his person during the conduct of the parade.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.130  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.



   (A)   Interference.  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct,
impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade.



   (B)   Driving through parades.  No driver of a vehicle except a
police car or other emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or
persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and
are conspicuously designated as a parade.



   (C)   Parking on parade route.  The Chief of Police or other
authorized village official shall have the authority, when reasonably
necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or
other public thoroughfare or part thereof constituting a part of the route of
a parade.  Signs shall be posted to such effect, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation
thereof.  No person shall be liable for parking on a street or other public
thoroughfare unless signs have been posted in accordance with this section.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.131  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The village shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder on application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



Method of Parking



   72.01   General parking regulations



   72.02   Unattended motor vehicles



Restrictions on Stopping, Standing, and Parking



   72.10   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places



   72.11   Stopping, standing, or parking outside business or residence
district



   72.12   Unauthorized use of parking spaces reserved for persons with
disabilities



   72.13   All-night parking



   72.14   Parking after snowfall



   72.15   Trailers and semi-trailers



Violations



   72.40   Authority to remove and tow vehicles



   72.41   Abandoned vehicles



   72.42   Towing of vehicles incidental to arrest



   72.43   Inventory searches of towed/impounded vehicle



   72.44   Notice of a right to a hearing



   72.45   Release of impounded vehicles



   72.46   Disposal of unclaimed vehicles



   72.47   Disposal of unclaimed vehicles without notice



 



   72.99   Penalty



METHOD OF PARKING



§ 72.01  GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with
the right-hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb
or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.



   (B)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall
be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the
direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within
12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge
of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of
the left-hand curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the
left-hand shoulder.



   (C)   No person shall park in violation of signs placed by and under
the jurisdiction of the state Department of Transportation which prohibit,
limit, or restrict the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any
highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.02  UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the brake thereon
and, when standing upon any perceptible grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1401) 



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to leave any vehicle unattended
on the streets of the village for more than 20 consecutive hours without
prior authorization from the Chief of Police.



      (2)   Any such vehicle shall be considered an abandoned
vehicle, and shall be removed by the Police Department and held as an
abandoned vehicle.



(Am. Ord. 1111-01, passed 10-2-01)  Penalty, see § 72.99



RESTRICTIONS ON STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING



§ 72.10  STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.



   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or
in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer, or an official
traffic-control device, no person shall:



      (1)   Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:



         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or
parked at the edge or curb of a street;



         (b)   On a sidewalk;



         (c)   Within an intersection;



         (d)   On a crosswalk;



         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or
within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a
safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;



         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;



         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure, upon
a highway, or within a highway tunnel;



         (h)   On any railroad tracks.  A violation of any part
of this division (A)(1)(h) shall result in a mandatory fine of $500 or 50
hours of community service.



         (i)   At any place where official signs prohibit
stopping;



         (j)   On any controlled-access highway;



         (k)   In the area between roadways of a divided highway,
including crossovers.



         (l)   In a public parking area if the vehicle does not
display a current annual registration sticker or current temporary permit
pending registration.



      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:



         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;



         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



         (d)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side
of a roadway;



         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any
fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire
station within 75 feet of the entrance (when properly sign-posted);



         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit
standing.



      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading property or passengers:



         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing;



         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.



   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control
into any prohibited area or away from a curb a distance as is unlawful.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1303)



   (C)   No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle on private
property without the implied or express consent of the owner or other person
in control or possession of the property, except in the case of emergency or
disablement of the vehicle, in which case the operator shall arrange for the
removal of the vehicle as soon as possible.



(Am. Ord. 1111-01, passed 10-2-01)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.11  STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING OUTSIDE BUSINESS OR RESIDENCE
DISTRICT.



   (A)   Outside a business or residence district, no person shall
stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended,
upon the roadway when it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave the
vehicle off the roadway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the
highway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of
other vehicles, and a clear view of the stopped vehicle shall be available
from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon the highway.



   (B)   The village, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction
or for the maintenance of which it is responsible, may place signs
prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on
any highway where in its opinion stopping, standing, or parking is dangerous
to those using the highway, or where stopping, standing, or parking vehicles
would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon.  Any
regulations adopted by the village regarding the stopping, standing, or
parking of vehicles upon any specific street, streets, or highways become
effective at the time of the erection of appropriate signs indicating the
regulations.



   (C)   This section, and § 72.10 and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304
shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled in such manner
and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily
leaving the vehicle in such position.



   (D)   Any second division vehicle used exclusively for the
collection of garbage, refuse, or recyclable material may stop or stand on
the road in a business, rural, or residential district for the sole purpose
of collecting garbage, refuse, or recyclable material.  The vehicle, in
addition to having its hazard lights lighted at all times that it is engaged
in stopping or standing, shall also use its amber oscillating, rotating, or
flashing light or lights as authorized under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
12-215(b), if so equipped.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.12  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING SPACES RESERVED FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES.



   (A)   It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not
properly displaying registration plates or decals issued to a person with
disabilities, as defined by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-159.1, pursuant to ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 3-616, 11-1301.1 or 11-1301.2, or to a veteran with a
disability pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609, as evidence that the
vehicle is operated by or for a person with disabilities or a veteran with a
disability, in any parking place, including any private or public off-street
parking facility, specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign
as designated under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301, for motor vehicles
displaying such registration plates. It shall be prohibited to park any motor
vehicle in a designated access aisle adjacent to any parking place
specifically reserved for persons with disabilities, by the posting of an
official sign as designated under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301, for motor
vehicles displaying such registration plates. When using the parking
privileges for persons with disabilities, the parking decal or device must be
displayed properly in the vehicle where it is clearly visible to law
enforcement personnel, either hanging from the rearview mirror or placed on
the dashboard of the vehicle in clear view. Disability license plates and
parking decals and devices are not transferable from person to person. Proper
usage of the disability license plate or parking decal or device requires the
authorized holder to be present and enter or exit the vehicle at the time the
parking privileges are being used. It is a violation of this section to park
in a space reserved for a person with disabilities if the authorized holder
of the disability license plate or parking decal or device does not enter or
exit the vehicle at the time the parking privileges are being used. Any motor
vehicle properly displaying a disability license plate or a parking decal or
device containing the International symbol of access issued to persons with
disabilities by any local authority, state, district, territory or foreign
country shall be recognized by state and local authorities as a valid license
plate or device and receive the same parking privileges as residents of this
state.



   (A-1)   An individual with a vehicle displaying disability license
plates or a parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with a
disability under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 3-616, 11-1301.1, or 11-1301.2 or
to a veteran with a disability under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609 is in
violation of this section if the person using the disability license plate or
parking decal or device is not the authorized holder of the disability
license plate or parking decal or device or is not transporting the
authorized holder of the disability license plate or parking decal or device
to or from the parking location and the person uses the disability license
plate or parking decal or device to exercise any privileges granted through
the disability license plate or parking decals or devices under the Illinois
Vehicle Code.



   (A-2)   A driver of a vehicle displaying disability license plates
or a parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with a disability
under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 3-616, 11-1301.1, or 11-1301.2 or to a
veteran with a disability under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609 is in violation
of this section if the person to whom the disability license plate or parking
decal or device was issued is deceased and the driver uses the disability
license plate or parking decal or device to exercise any privileges granted
through a disability license plate or parking decal or device under the
Illinois Vehicle Code.



   (B)   Any person or local authority owning or operating any public
or private offstreet parking facility may, after notifying the police or
sheriff's department, remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or
other place of safety any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for
use by a person with disabilities which does not display person with
disabilities registration plates or a special decal or device as required
under this section.



   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of
division (A) of this section shall be fined $250 in addition to any costs or
charges connected with the removal or storage of any motor vehicle authorized
under this section; but municipalities by ordinance may impose a fine up to
$350 and shall display signs indicating the fine imposed. If the amount of
the fine is subsequently changed, the municipality shall change the sign to
indicate the current amount of the fine. It shall not be a defense to a
charge under this section that either the sign posted pursuant to this
section or the intended accessible parking place does not comply with the
technical requirements of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301, Department
regulations, or local ordinance if a reasonable person would be made aware by
the sign or notice on or near the parking place that the place is reserved
for a person with disabilities.



   (C-1)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of
division (A-1) of this section a first time shall be fined $600. Any person
found guilty of violating division (A-1) of this section a second or
subsequent time shall be fined $1,000. Any person who violates division (A-2)
of this section is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and shall be fined $2,500.
The circuit clerk shall distribute 50% of the fine imposed on any person who
is found guilty of or pleads guilty to violating this section, including any
person placed on court supervision for violating this section, to the law
enforcement agency that issued the citation or made the arrest. If more than
one law enforcement agency is responsible for issuing the citation or making
the arrest, the 50% of the fine imposed shall be shared equally. If an
officer of the Secretary of State Department of Police arrested a person for
a violation of this section, 50% of the fine imposed shall be deposited into
the Secretary of State Police Services Fund.



   (D)   Local authorities shall impose fines as established in
divisions (C) and (C-1) of this section for violations of this section.



   (E)   As used in this section, AUTHORIZED HOLDER means an individual
issued a disability license plate under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616, an
individual issued a parking decal or device under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-1301.2, or an individual issued a license plate for veterans with
disabilities under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609.



   (F)   Any person who commits a violation of division (A-1) of this
section or a similar provision of a local ordinance may have his or her
driving privileges suspended or revoked by the Secretary of State for a
period of time determined by the Secretary of State. Any person who commits a
violation of division (A-2) of this section or a similar provision of a local
ordinance shall have his or her driving privileges revoked by the Secretary
of State. The Secretary of State may also suspend or revoke the disability
license plates or parking decal or device for a period of time determined by
the Secretary of State.



   (G)   Any police officer may seize the parking decal or device from
any person who commits a violation of this section. Any police officer may
seize the disability license plate upon authorization from the Secretary of
State. Any police officer may request that the Secretary of State revoke the
parking decal or device or the disability license plate of any person who
commits a violation of this section.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3)  (Ord. 595-85, passed 8-13-85)



§ 72.13  ALL-NIGHT PARKING.



   No person shall park any vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. of any day except physicians on emergency calls, on any streets in
the village.



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 5.09)  (Ord. 239-65, passed 10-5-65)  Penalty, see §
72.99



§ 72.14  PARKING AFTER SNOWFALL.



   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked on any public street
in the village at any time after not less than two inches of snow have fallen
and accumulated on the street.  Restriction on such parking shall remain in
effect until snow removal operations have removed the snow from a street,
after which it is again available for parking.  After such snowfall and
accumulation, if any parked vehicle obstructs or prevents or interferes with
snow removal operations being conducted by the village on any public street,
on order of any Police Officer of the village, that vehicle may be towed from
the public street.  Such towed vehicle shall be stored on any village
property or in any public garage or on a parking lot.  The vehicle shall be
restored to the owner or operator thereof only after payment of the
reasonable expense incurred by the village in removing and storing such
vehicle.  Towing expense shall not exceed $50 and storage charge shall not
exceed $5 per day.  These charges are in addition to the fines hereinafter
provided.



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 5.02)  (Ord. 540-83, passed 1-25-83)  Penalty, see §
72.99



§ 72.15  TRAILERS AND SEMI-TRAILERS.



   No trailer or semi-trailer shall be parked at any time on any street or
public right-of-way unless connected to a vehicle capable of pulling or
drawing such trailer or semi-trailer, and parked where legally permitted.



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 5.14)  (Ord. 459-77, passed 1-18-77)  Penalty, see §
72.99



VIOLATIONS



§ 72.40  AUTHORITY TO REMOVE AND TOW VEHICLES.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, is authorized to
immediately and without prior notice, tow away or cause to be towed away, any
vehicle that is on any public street, public place or private place providing
that it meets the following criteria:



      (1)   The vehicle is parked or left unattended in a posted
TOW-AWAY ZONE , village-owned parking lot, or is in violation of a
snow-parking ban.



      (2)   The vehicle is parked or left unattended in such a
manner that it blocks a driveway or traffic lane and creates an immediate
hazard or is endangering the public health or safety by creating an unsafe
condition or it is hindering the efficient flow of traffic.



      (3) The vehicle was used by an individual who was arrested for a
violation of the Illinois Criminal Statutes and/or the Illinois Vehicle Code
that is classified as a Class A misdemeanor or a felony violation.



      (4)   The vehicle was used in the commission of a felony as
defined by 720 ILCS 5 § 36-1.



      (5)   The vehicle was used in the commission of any violation
of 720 ILCS 5 § 11-501 (Driving Under the Influence).



   (B)   The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, is authorized to
tow away an abandoned vehicle which does not meet the requirements of §
72.41 only after the registered owner of the vehicle has been given notice
that the owner has a right to a hearing to determine whether there is
sufficient cause to have the vehicle towed.



   (C)   In the event of any emergency that would necessitate the
removal of any vehicle, the members of the Itasca Police Department are
authorized to remove and/or relocate such a vehicle to another location.



(Am. Ord. 1370-07, passed 3-20-07)



§ 72.41  ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   Officers have the authority and the responsibility to ensure the safe
and efficient flow of traffic on streets and highways. This sometimes
requires that vehicles be removed/towed to places of safety. Actions will be
governed by 625 ILCS 5 § 4-201 and 625 ILCS 5 § 4-203(b), which cover
abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicles.



(Am. Ord. 1370-07, passed 3-20-07)



§ 72.42  TOWING OF VEHICLES INCIDENTAL TO ARREST.



   (A)   It shall be the policy of the Itasca Police Department to tow
the vehicle of a person who has been placed under arrest for a misdemeanor or
felony violation of the Illinois Compiled Statutes or the Illinois Vehicle
Code who was using the vehicle at the time of the offense.



   (B)   Pursuant to provisions of 625 ILCS 5 § 6-101(d) and 625 ILCS
5 § 6-303(e), any person who is arrested for having no valid driver's
license or for driving while license is suspended or revoked and is in
violation of 625 ILCS 5 § 7-601 as it relates to mandatory insurance
requirements will have his or her vehicle immediately impounded by the
arresting officer and a hold will be placed on the vehicle.



   (C)   Pursuant to the provision of 625 ILCS 5 § 4-203(e), persons
arrested for a violation of 625 ILCS 5 § 11-501 will have their vehicles
impounded for a maximum period of 12 hours.



   (D)   Pursuant to the provisions of 625 ILCS 5 § 3-708, any person
who is arrested for operation of a motor vehicle when registration is
suspended for non-insurance ( a business offense)  will have his or her
vehicle immediately impounded by the arresting officer and a hold will be
placed on the vehicle. The vehicle may not be driven until the owner complies
with the Illinois Secretary of State's regulations on removing the
registration suspension. The vehicle may be released by the towing company
either to a licensed driver who shows proof of insurance for the vehicle and
proof of the suspension removal from the Secretary of State's Office or the
owner of the vehicle is having it removed by a tow.



(Ord. 1370-07, passed 3-20-07)



§ 72.43  INVENTORY SEARCHES OF TOWED/IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.



   The contents of all motor vehicles towed and/or impounded by the Itasca
Police Department are subject to inventory. A vehicle inventory is designed
to protect motor vehicles and their contents while in police custody and to
protect the Department against claims of lost, stolen or damaged property and
to protect Department personnel and the public against any injury or damaged
property due to any potential danger from hazardous materials or substances
that may be in the vehicle. Examination of contents of a motor vehicle
pursuant to a criminal investigation or with the intent of discovering
evidence of a crime is a search, not an inventory and shall be governed by
procedures covering searches.



(Ord. 1370-07, passed 3-20-07)



§ 72.44  NOTICE OF THE RIGHT TO A HEARING.



   (A)   Pre-tow notice.  Notice will be forwarded by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of the registered owner
of the vehicle, at the address that is indicated on the most recent
registration for the vehicle as maintained by the Illinois Secretary of State
or in the state where the vehicle is licensed. In no case will the Police
Department or the Village of Itasca be required to delay the towing of the
vehicle more than seven days following the mailing of the notice.



   (B)   Notice of impoundment/post-tow notice.  Notice will be
forwarded by certified mail return receipt requested to the last known
address of the registered owner of the vehicle, at the address that is
indicated on the most recent registration for the vehicle as maintained by
the Illinois Secretary of State or in the state the vehicle is licensed. In
no case will the Police Department or the Village of Itasca be required to
delay the towing of the vehicle more than seven days following the mailing of
the notice.



   (C)   All vehicles that are towed in accordance with this subchapter
will be considered impounded. Vehicles that are towed in accordance with this
subchapter will be impounded until the vehicle is claimed by the owner.



(Ord. 1370-07, passed 3-20-07)



§ 72.45  RELEASE OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.



   (A) If an owner of a vehicle impounded for reasons other than listed in
§ 72.42 wishes to recover a vehicle, the owner shall:



      (1)   Be required to show proof of ownership and identity;



      (2)   Complete the Waiver/Request for Hearing Form and elect
one of the following options:



         (a)   Waive the tow hearing, at which time the owner of
the vehicle will be directed to the company that towed the vehicle and pay
the tow bill.



         (b)   Request a hearing, at which time the owner of the
vehicle will complete and file with the Department a request for a hearing.
This may be filed in person, by mail or by fax. The hearing will be held
within seven business days, following submission of the request. The hearing
may be held at a later date if the owner and Department agree to a date and
time that is amenable to both parties.



         (c)    Request a delayed hearing, in which case the
hearing will be scheduled within seven business days after filing, unless the
owner requests a later date.



   (B)   If the vehicle was held for possible seizure at a village
impound lot and is ultimately released, it shall be ensured that the
individual claiming the vehicle has paid the appropriate towing fees to the
towing company that removed the vehicle at the request of the Itasca Police
Department. If this type of vehicle is to be released, the following
procedures will apply prior to the vehicle being released to the registered
owner:



      (1)   The owner or person legally entitled to control the
vehicle will be notified that the vehicle has been authorized for release and
has one day to arrive at the Itasca Police Department and claim the vehicle.



      (2)   The notification of release may be made by telephone or
registered mail, but must be documented in a supplemental to the original
case report.



      (3)   If the registered owner or other individual entitled to
the vehicle does not arrive at the Itasca Police Department on or before
first full day after notification was provided, that individual may be
charged a storage fee for leaving the vehicle in the village impound lot.



         (a)   Storage fees shall be applied at the rate of $15
per day.



         (b)   The fee shall be for the purpose of offsetting, to
the extent practicable, the cost to the Village of Itasca in implementing,
enforcing, and administering the provisions of this general order.



         (c)   Storage fees may be waived or reduced at the
direction of the Chief of Police.



         (d)   Storage fees are to be made payable to the Village
of Itasca and forwarded for deposit into the appropriate Village account.



(Ord. 1370-07, passed 3-20-07)



§ 72.46  DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.



   (A)   When an abandoned or unclaimed vehicle which is seven years of
age or newer remains unclaimed by a person legally entitled to its
possession, and it has been 30 days since the notice of tow was given or sent
to that person, the officer shall take the following steps:



      (1)   Send notice to the registered owner notifying the owner
of the circumstances surrounding the tow. This notice will contain
information as to when the vehicle was towed and the reason for the tow. The
notice will provide information on where the vehicle is stored and how the
owner may reclaim the vehicle.



      (2)   The notice will be sent by registered mail and will
contain the date on which the vehicle will be disposed of.



   (B)   If the owner of the vehicle does not respond within 14
business days, the designated officer will document this and will complete
the necessary paperwork to turn the vehicle over to the Towing Company to
satisfy the cost involved in towing and storing the vehicle.



(Ord. 1370-07, passed 3-20-07)



§ 72.47  DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES WITHOUT NOTICE.



   (A)   All vehicles that come under the control of the Itasca Police
Department as abandoned, inoperable or impounded will be disposed of in
accordance with 625 ILCS 5 § 4-203 through 625 ILCS 5 § 4-212.1.



   (B)   When the identification of the registered owner or other
person(s) legally entitled to the abandoned vehicle, seven years of age or
newer, cannot be determined after a reasonable effort, the vehicle may be
disposed of without notice to the registered owner or person(s) legally
entitled to the vehicle. It shall be the responsibility of the designated
officer to document all attempts that were made to identify the owner. This
officer shall complete the necessary paperwork to turn the vehicle over to
the towing company.



   (C)   When the unclaimed or abandoned auto is more than seven years
of age and is impounded in accordance with this subchapter, the vehicle shall
be kept for a minimum of ten days for purposes of determining ownership. The
designated officer will send by certified mail a notice to the last known
owner as indicated by records maintained by the Secretary of State's Office.
A check will also be made of the Illinois State Police Stolen Vehicles
Records to ensure that the vehicle is not reported as stolen or wanted in
connection with another offense. At the expiration of the ten-day period, and
without benefit of information from the registered owner, the designated
officer shall complete the necessary paperwork to turn the vehicle over to
the towing company that towed/removed the vehicle.



(Ord. 1370-07, passed 3-20-07)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided shall be fined as set forth in § 70.99(B).



(Am. Ord. 1321-06, passed 9-19-06)



Statutory reference:



   Statutory penalty provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§
11-1301.3(c) and (d))



CHAPTER 73:  MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES



Section



Bicycles



   73.01   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles



   73.02   Riding on bicycles



   73.03   Clinging to vehicles



   73.04   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths



   73.05   Carrying articles



   73.06   Lamps and other equipment on bicycles



   73.07   Lamps on mopeds



   73.08   Riding on mopeds



Motorcycles



   73.20   Riding on motorcycles



   73.21   Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles



   73.22   Required equipment on motorcycles



   73.23   Operating motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or moped on one
wheel



BICYCLES



§ 73.01  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway shall be granted all of
the rights, including, but not limited to, rights under ILCS Ch. 625, Art.
IX, and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this traffic code, except as to special regulations in this
traffic code and those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature
can have no application.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1502)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.02  RIDING ON BICYCLES.



   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon
or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.



   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time
than the number for which it is designed and equipped, except that an adult
rider may carry a child securely attached to his person in a back pack or
sling.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1503)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.03  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1504)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.04  RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.



   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a
roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and
under the conditions then existing shall ride as close as practicable and
safe to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except under the following
situations:



      (1)   When overtaking and passing another bicycle, motorized
pedalcycle, or vehicle proceeding in the same direction; or



      (2)   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or
into a private road or driveway; or



      (3)   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including,
but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles,
bicycles, motorized pedalcycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or
substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand
curb or edge.  For purposes of this subsection, a “substandard width
lane” means a lane that is too narrow for a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle
and a vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane; or



      (4)   When approaching a place where a right turn is
authorized.



   (B)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a
one-way highway with two or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the
left-hand curb or edge of the roadway as practicable.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505)



   (C)   Persons riding bicycles or motorized pedalcycles upon a
roadway shall not ride more than two abreast, except on paths or parts of
roadways set aside for their exclusive use.  Persons riding two abreast
shall not impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic and, on a
laned roadway, shall ride within a single lane subject to the provisions of
divisions (A) and (B) above.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505.1)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.05  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or
article which prevents the use of both hands in the control and operation of
the bicycle.  A person operating a bicycle shall keep at least one hand on
the handlebars at all times.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1506)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.06  LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.



   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with
a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of
at least 500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a
type approved by the state Department of Transportation which shall be
visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle.  A
lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may
be used in addition to the red reflector.



   (B)   A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a bicycle, any siren. This division (B) does not apply to a bicycle that
is a police vehicle or fire department vehicle.



   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will
adequately control movement of and stop and hold the bicycle.



   (D)   No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a
bicycle that is not equipped with a reflex reflector conforming to
specifications prescribed by the state Department of Transportation, on each
pedal, visible from the front and rear of the bicycle during darkness from a
distance of 200 feet.



   (E)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is
not equipped with side reflectors. The reflectors shall be visible from each
side of the bicycle from a distance of 500 feet, and shall be essentially
colorless or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and essentially
colorless or amber to the front of the center of the bicycle.  The
requirements of this division may be met by reflective materials which shall
be at least 3/16 inch wide on each side of each tire or rim to indicate as
clearly as possible the continuous circular shape and size of the tires or
rims of the bicycle, and which reflective materials may be of the same color
on both the front and rear tire or rim.  The reflectors shall conform to
specifications prescribed by the state Department of Transportation.



   (F)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is
not equipped with an essentially colorless front-facing reflector.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.07  LAMPS ON MOPEDS.



   Every moped, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type
approved by the state Department of Transportation which shall be visible
from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when in front of
lawful, low-powered beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle.  A lamp emitting
a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in
addition to the red reflector.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507.1)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.08  RIDING ON MOPEDS.



   (A)   The operator of a moped shall ride only astride the permanent
and regular seat attached thereto, and shall not permit two persons to ride
thereon at the same time, unless the moped is designed to carry two
persons.  Any moped designed for two persons must be equipped with a
passenger seat and footrests for use of a passenger.



   (B)   The provisions of §§ 73.01 through 73.07 shall be applicable
to the operation of mopeds, except for those provisions which by their nature
can have no application to mopeds.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.1)  Penalty, see § 70.99



MOTORCYCLES



§ 73.20  RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES.



   (A)   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and the operator shall not carry
any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless the
motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a
passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two
persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear
or side of the operator.



   (B)   A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting
astride the seat, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.



   (C)   No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebar grips
higher than the height of the head of the operator when the operator is
seated in the normal driving position astride that portion of the seat or
saddle occupied by the operator.



   (D)   The operator of any motorcycle shall keep at least one hand on
a handlebar grip at all times the motorcycle is in motion.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.21  SPECIAL EQUIPMENT FOR PERSONS RIDING MOTORCYCLES.



   (A)   The operator and every passenger of a motorcycle shall be
protected by glasses, goggles, or a transparent shield. 



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, glasses, goggles and
transparent shields are defined as follows:



   GLASSES.   Ordinary eye pieces such as spectacles or sunglasses worn
before the eye, made of shatter-resistant material.  SHATTER RESISTANT
MATERIAL , as used in this section, means material so manufactured,
fabricated, or created that it substantially prevents shattering or flying
when struck or broken.



   GOGGLES.   A device worn before the eyes, the predominant function of
which is protecting the eyes without obstructing peripheral vision.  Goggles
shall provide protection from the front and sides, and may or may not form a
complete seal with the face.



   TRANSPARENT SHIELD.   A windshield attached to the front of a
motorcycle that extends above the eyes when an operator is seated in the
normal, upright riding position, made of shatter-resistant material, or a
shatter-resistant protective face shield that covers the wearer's eyes and
face at least to a point approximately to the tip of the nose.



   (C)   Contact lenses are not acceptable eye protection devices.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1404)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.22  REQUIRED EQUIPMENT ON MOTORCYCLES.



   Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or
enclosed cab, shall be equipped with footrests for the passenger.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1405)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.23  OPERATING MOTORCYCLE, MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE, OR MOPED ON ONE WHEEL.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or
moped on one wheel.



   (B)   A person commits aggravated operating a motorcycle, motor
driven cycle, or moped on one wheel when he or she violated division (A)
above while committing a violation of § 71.001(B). A violation of this
division (B) is a petty offense with a minimum fine of $100, except a second
conviction of a violation of this division (B) is a Class B misdemeanor and a
third or subsequent conviction of a violation of this division (B) is a Class
A misdemeanor.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.2)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 74:  PEDESTRIANS



Section



   74.01   Pedestrian obedience to traffic control devices and traffic
regulations



   74.02   Pedestrian right-of-way at crosswalks



   74.03   Crossing at other than crosswalks



   74.04   Drivers to avoid colliding with pedestrians



   74.05   Pedestrian with disabilities; right-of-way



   74.06   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks



   74.07   Pedestrians soliciting rides or business



   74.08   Pedestrians walking on highways



   74.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks



   74.10   Pedestrians yield to authorized emergency vehicles



   74.11   Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs



   74.12   Bridge and railroad signals



   74.13   Motorized wheelchairs



§ 74.01  PEDESTRIAN OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS.



   (A)   A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device specifically applicable to him, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer.



   (B)   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian-control
signals provided in §§ 70.31 and 70.32 of this traffic code; but at all
other places, pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be
subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1001)



§ 74.02  PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, or not in
operation, the driver of a vehicle shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is
upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as
to be in danger.



   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of
safety, and walk or run into the path of a moving vehicle which is so close
as to constitute an immediate hazard.



   (C)   Division (A) shall not apply under the condition stated in §
74.03 (B).



   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at
any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.



   (E)   Whenever stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection or at a plainly marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers
shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians as set forth in § 71.062.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.03  CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than
within a marked crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a
pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control
signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in
a marked crosswalk.



   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally
unless authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized
to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic-control devices pertaining to the crossing movements.



   (E)   Pedestrians with disabilities may cross a roadway at any point
other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk where
the intersection is physically inaccessible to them but they shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.04  DRIVERS TO AVOID COLLIDING WITH PEDESTRIANS.



   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, or
any person operating a bicycle or other device propelled by human power and
shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise
proper precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused,
incapacitated, or intoxicated person.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003.1)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.05  PEDESTRIAN WITH DISABILITIES; RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
with clearly visible disabilities.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.06  PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.



   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.07  PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS.



   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of
soliciting employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.



   (C)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of
soliciting contributions from the occupant of any vehicle, unless expressly
permitted by this code.  Solicitation on highways within this village shall
be allowed only at intersections where all traffic is required to come to a
full stop.  Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be 16 years
of age or more and shall be wearing a high visibility vest.  The soliciting
agency shall be:



      (1)   Registered with the Attorney General as a charitable
organization as provided by "An Act to regulate solicitation and collection
of funds for charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof, and
making an appropriation therefor," approved July 26, 1963, as amended.



      (2)   Engaged in a statewide fund raising activity.



      (3)   Liable for any injuries to any person or property during
the solicitation which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence
of the soliciting agent.



   (D)   No person shall stand on or in the proximity of a roadway for
the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while
parked or about to be parked on a street or highway.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1006)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.08  PEDESTRIANS WALKING ON HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (E), where a sidewalk is
provided and its use is practicable, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (E), where a sidewalk is not
available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk only on
a shoulder, as far as practicable from the edge of the roadway.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (E), where neither a sidewalk
nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway
shall walk as near as practicable to an outside edge of a roadway, and, if on
a two-way roadway, shall walk only on the left side of the roadway.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any pedestrian
upon a roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (E)   Upon highways where the maximum posted speed limit is 45 miles
per hour or less, and during the period from sunrise to sunset, a pedestrian
who is 18 years of age or older and wearing in-line speed skates may travel
upon the roadway as near as practicable to an outside edge of the roadway.
Pedestrians wearing in-line speed skates upon a roadway may not impede or
obstruct other vehicular traffic. Pedestrians wearing in-line speed skates
shall be subject to all other rights and duties under this chapter. Nothing
in this title shall be construed to prevent a pedestrian wearing in-line
speed skates from using a lane designated for bicycles.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1007)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.09  RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.



   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians
on a sidewalk.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1008)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.10  PEDESTRIANS YIELD TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of an audible signal and visual signals meeting the requirements of ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-601, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully
making use of an audible signal only, every pedestrian shall yield the
right-of-way to the authorized emergency vehicle.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1009)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.11  PEDESTRIANS UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.



   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a
degree which renders himself a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway,
except on a sidewalk.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.12  BRIDGE AND RAILROAD SIGNALS.



   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or
approach thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge
operation signal indication has been given.



   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the
gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.



   (C)   No pedestrian shall enter, remain upon or traverse over a
railroad grade crossing or pedestrian walkway crossing a railroad track when
an audible bell or clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device is
operational giving warning of the presence, approach, passage, or departure
of a railroad train or railroad track equipment.



   (D)   A violation of any part of this section is a petty offense for
which a $250 fine shall be imposed for a first violation, and a $500 fine
shall be imposed for a second or subsequent violation.  The court may impose
25 hours of community service in place of the $250 fine for a first violation.



   (E)   Local authorities shall impose fines as established in
division (D) for pedestrians who fail to obey signals indicating the
presence, approach, passage, or departure of a train or railroad track
equipment.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1011)



§ 74.13  MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.



   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair upon a sidewalk or
roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the
duties applicable to a pedestrian.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004.1)



CHAPTER 75:  EQUIPMENT; LOADS



Section



Equipment



   75.01   Scope and effect of equipment requirements



Loads



   75.10   Scope and effect of size, weight, and load regulations



   75.11   Projecting loads on passenger vehicles



   75.12   Protruding members of vehicles



   75.13   Spilling loads prohibited



   75.14   Pushing of disabled vehicles



   75.15   Limited load streets



EQUIPMENT



§ 75.01  SCOPE AND EFFECT OF EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the
owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any
vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in an unsafe condition as to
endanger any person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is
not at all times equipped with the lamps and other equipment in proper
condition and adjustment as required in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-100 et
seq., or which is equipped in any manner in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§§ 12-100 et seq., or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-100 et seq.



   (B)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-100 et seq.,
with respect to equipment on vehicles shall not apply to implements of
husbandry, road machinery, road rollers, or farm tractors, or to farm-wagon
type trailers having a fertilizer spreader attachment permanently mounted
thereon, having a gross weight of not to exceed 36,000 pounds and used only
for the transportation of bulk fertilizer, or to farm-wagon type tank
trailers of not to exceed 2,000 gallons capacity, used during the liquid
fertilizer season as field-storage "nurse tanks," supplying the fertilizer to
a field applicator and highways only for bringing the fertilizer to a field
applicator from a local source of supply to the farm or field or from one
farm or field to another.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-101)  Penalty, see § 70.99



LOADS



§ 75.10  SCOPE AND EFFECT OF SIZE, WEIGHT, AND LOAD REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move on, upon, or
across, or for the owner to cause to knowingly permit to be driven or moved
on, upon, or across any highway any vehicle or vehicles of a size and weight
exceeding the limitations stated in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et seq.,
or otherwise in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et seq.



   (B)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et seq.
governing size, weight, and load do not apply to equipment for snow and ice
removal operations owned or operated by the village, or to implements of
husbandry, as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq., 
temporarily operated or towed in a combination upon a highway provided such
combination does not consist of more than three vehicles or, in the case of
hauling fresh, perishable fruits or vegetables from farm to the point of
first processing, not more than three wagons being towed by an implement of
husbandry, or to a vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit. The
provisions governing size and load do not apply to fire apparatus.



   (C)   (1)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et
seq. governing size, weight, and load do not apply to any snow and ice
removal equipment that is no more than 12 feet in width if the equipment
displays flags at least 18 inches square mounted on the driver's side of the
snow plow.



      (2)   These vehicles must be equipped with an illuminated
rotating, oscillating, or flashing amber, light or lights, or a flashing
amber strobe light or lights mounted on the top of the cab and of sufficient
intensity to be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight.  If the load on the
transport vehicle blocks the visibility of the amber lighting from the rear
of the vehicle, the vehicle must also be equipped with an illuminated,
rotating, oscillating, or flashing amber light or lights, or a flashing amber
strobe light or lights mounted on the rear of the load and of sufficient
intensity to be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-101)



   (D)   No person shall use the highways under the jurisdiction of the
village in violation of weight and location restrictions and commercial
vehicle restrictions.



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Power of village to regulate loads, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1



§ 75.11  PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES.



   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any street with any load
carried thereon extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of
the vehicle, nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of the
fenders on the right side thereof.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-105)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.12  PROTRUDING MEMBERS OF VEHICLES.



   No vehicle with boom, arm, drill rig, or other protruding component
shall be operated upon any highway in this state unless the protruding
component is fastened so as to prevent shifting, bouncing, or moving in any
manner.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-106)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.13  SPILLING LOADS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street unless the
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, shifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that
sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other
substance may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the
roadway.



   (B)   No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any
load unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to
prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner
a hazard to other users of the highway.



   (C)   The state Department of Transportation shall adopt those rules
and regulations it deems appropriate which require the securing of steel
rolls and other objects on flatbed trucks so as to prevent injury to users of
highways and damage to property.  Any person who operates a flatbed truck on
any highway in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated by the
state Department of Transportation under this division shall be punished as
provided in § 70.99.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.14  PUSHING OF DISABLED VEHICLES.



   It is unlawful under any circumstances for any vehicle to push any
other vehicle on or along any highway outside an urban area in this village,
except in an extreme emergency, and then the vehicle shall not be pushed
farther than is reasonably necessary to remove it from the roadway or from
the immediate hazard that exists.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-114)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.15  LIMITED LOAD STREETS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street
within the village when the gross weight of such vehicle, including the load,
exceeds 10,000 pounds or five tons, except only as herein-after especially
permitted, or exempted.



   (B)   The following types of vehicles may be operated on all village
streets and roads, notwithstanding other prohibitions, or that the gross
weight of such vehicles exceeds 10,000 pounds or five tons:  fire trucks and
public emergency vehicles; public utility vehicles which require the use of
such streets in making repairs; garbage or refuse trucks making pick-ups;
school buses picking up or discharging children in the area; village or park
maintenance vehicles, in the performance of any public works.



   (C)   A vehicle whose gross weight is in excess of 10,000 pounds or
five tons may traverse such restricted streets, only for the purpose of
making a delivery or picking up a load on such restricted street, in which
case the vehicle may be driven on such portion of those streets no more than
the minimum distance necessary for that purpose.  Use of restricted streets
by vehicles over five tons for the purpose of reaching an area for off-street
parking is prohibited; provided, recreational vehicles are permitted to be
driven over such restricted streets no more than twice weekly to the owner's
residence. With respect to large vehicles used in construction, such as
Readi-Mix concrete haulers, where a delivery will be more than once per week,
the operator of such vehicle shall first notify the Police Department and
request the routing to be followed to the site of such deliveries, and the
operator shall then follow the route so given.



   (D)   All trucks and commercial vehicles, regardless of weight, are
prohibited from being operated on Bloomingdale Road, from Irving Park Road on
the east, through and to the village limits on the west, excepting only such
vehicles picking up or making deliveries within that area.



   (E)   (1)   Subject to division (E)(2) of this section, the
following streets and roads within the village are exempt from the
restrictions imposed by this section:



         (a)   1.   Devon Avenue;



            2.   Thorndale Road (new);



            3.   Arlington Heights Road;



            4.   Division Street (only from Arlington Heights
Road to Walnut Street);



            5.   Walnut Street (only from Division Street to
Irving Park Road);



            6.   Irving Park Road;



            7.   Rohlwing Road;



            8.   Prospect Road (only between Industrial Drive
and Irving Park Road); and



            9.   Industrial Drive.



         (b)   All streets and roads east of Rohlwing Road and
west of Interstate 90:



            1.   Bryn Mawr Avenue;



            2.   Hollywood Avenue;



            3.   Ardmore Avenue;



            4.   Expressway Drive; and



            5.   Thorndale Avenue (old).



         (c)   All streets and roads in the village lying west of
Rohlwing Road (except Medinah Road and the west 500 feet of Crest Road),
which are included as restricted streets):



            1.   Bryn Mawr Avenue;



            2.   Ardmore Avenue;



            3.   Baker Drive (part north of Milwaukee Road
Tracks);



            4.   Hilltop Drive;



            5.   Thorndale Avenue (part within village limits);



            6.   Norwood Avenue;



            7.   Glenlake Avenue;



            8.   Meacham Road;



            9.   Crest Road (except West 500 feet);



      (2)   No vehicle shall traverse the streets and roads listed
in this division (E) in excess of the weight limitations imposed by the state
from time to time, and as recited in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111, and as
hereafter amended.



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 12.01)  (Ord. 472-77, passed 8-23-77)  Penalty, see
§ 72.99



CHAPTER 76:  MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES



Section



   76.01   Reckless driving



   76.02   Drag racing



   76.03   Accidents involving death or personal injuries



   76.04   Duty to give information and render aid



   76.05   Accident involving damage to vehicle



   76.06   Duty upon damaging unattended vehicle or other property



   76.07   Duty to report accident



   76.08   False reports



   76.09   When driver fails to report



   76.10   Impoundment of motor vehicles used in connection with
illegal activities



§ 76.01  RECKLESS DRIVING.



   No person shall drive any vehicle with a willful or wanton disregard
for the safety of persons or property.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503(a))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.02  DRAG RACING.



   ( Editor's note: § 76.02 was repealed as part of the 2009 supplement
to this Code of Ordinances because substantially equivalent State law (ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-504) was repealed by the Illinois General Assembly.)



§ 76.03  ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident
resulting in personal injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop
the vehicle at the scene of the accident, or as close thereto as possible,
and shall then forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at the
scene of the accident until the requirements of § 76.09 have been
fulfilled.  Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more
than is necessary.



   (B)   (1)   Any person who has failed to stop or to comply with
these requirements shall, as soon as possible but in no case later than
one-half hour after the motor vehicle accident, or, if hospitalized and
incapacitated from reporting at any time during the period, as soon as
possible but in no case later than one-half hour after being discharged from
the hospital, report the place of the accident, the date, the approximate
time, the driver's name and address, the registration number of the vehicle
driven, and the names of all other occupants of the vehicle, at the police
station or sheriff's office near where the accident occurred.  No report
made as required under this division shall be used, directly or indirectly,
as a basis for the prosecution of any violation of division (A).



      (2)   Any person arrested for violating this section is
subject to chemical testing of his or her blood, breath, other bodily
substance, or urine for the presence of alcohol, other drug or drugs,
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, as provided
in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1, if the testing occurs within 12 hours of
the time of the occurrence of the accident that led to his or her arrest. 
The person's driving privileges are subject to statutory summary suspension
under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1 if he or she fails testing or
statutory summary revocation under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1 if he or
she refuses to undergo the testing.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, PERSONAL INJURY shall mean any
injury requiring immediate professional treatment in a medical facility or
doctor's office.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-401)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.04  DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident
resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which
is driven or attended by any person shall give the driver's name, address,
registration number, and owner of the vehicle the driver is operating, and
shall upon request and if available, exhibit the driver's license to the
person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle
collided with, and shall render to any person injured in the accident
reasonable assistance, including the carrying or the making of arrangements
for the carrying of the person to a physician, surgeon, or hospital for
medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that such treatment is
necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person.



   (B)   If none of the persons entitled to information pursuant to
this section is in condition to receive and understand the information and no
police officer is present, the driver, after rendering reasonable assistance,
shall forthwith report the accident at the Police Department, disclosing the
information required by this section.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-403)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.05  ACCIDENT INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident
resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any
person shall immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the motor vehicle
accident or as close thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to and
in every event shall remain at the scene of the motor vehicle accident until
the requirements of § 76.04 have been fulfilled. A driver does not violate
this section if the driver moves the vehicle as soon as possible off the
highway to the nearest safe location on an exit ramp shoulder, a frontage
road, the nearest suitable cross



street, or other suitable location that does not obstruct traffic and remains
at that location until the driver has fulfilled the requirements of § 76.04.
Every stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
If a damaged vehicle is obstructing traffic lanes, the driver of the vehicle
must make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved so as
not to block the traffic lanes.



   (B)   Any person failing to comply with this section shall be guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor.



   (C)   Upon conviction of a violation of this section, the court
shall make a finding as to whether the damage to a vehicle is in excess of
$1,000, and in such case a statement of this finding shall be reported to the
Secretary of State with the report of conviction. Upon receipt of such report
of conviction and statement of finding that the damage to a vehicle is in
excess of $1,000, the Secretary of State shall suspend the driver’s license
or any nonresident’s driving privilege.



   (D)   If any peace officer or highway authority official finds a
vehicle standing upon a highway or toll highway in violation of a
prohibition, limitation, or restriction on stopping, standing, or parking
imposed under this code or a disabled vehicle that obstructs the roadway of a
highway or toll highway, the peace officer or highway authority official is
authorized to move the vehicle or to require the operator of the vehicle to
move the vehicle to the shoulder of the road, to a position where parking is
permitted, or to public parking or storage premises. The removal may be
performed by, or under the direction of, the peace officer or highway
authority official or may be contracted for by local authorities. After the
vehicle has been removed, the peace officer or highway authority official
shall follow appropriate procedures, as provided in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5,
§ 4-203.



   (E)   A towing service, its officers, and its employees are not
liable for loss of or damages to any real or personal property that occurs as
the result of the removal or towing of any vehicle under division (D) above,
as provided in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 4-213(b).



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.06  DUTY UPON DAMAGING UNATTENDED VEHICLE OR OTHER PROPERTY.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved
in a motor vehicle accident with any vehicle which is unattended, or other
property, resulting in any damage to such other vehicle or property shall
immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the
operator or owner of such vehicle or other property of the driver's name,
address, registration number, and owner of the vehicle the driver was
operating or shall attach securely in a conspicuous place on or in the
vehicle or other property struck a written notice giving the driver's name,
address, registration number, and owner of the vehicle the driver was driving
and shall without unnecessary delay notify the Police Department and shall
make a written report of such accident when and as required in § 76.07. 
Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary. If a damaged vehicle is obstructing traffic lanes, the driver of
the vehicle must make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it
moved so as not to block the traffic lanes.



   (B)   Any person failing to comply with this section shall be guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor.



   (C)   If any peace officer or highway authority official finds a
vehicle standing upon a highway or toll highway in violation of a
prohibition, limitation, or restriction on stopping, standing, or parking
imposed under this code or a disabled vehicle that obstructs the roadway of a
highway or toll highway, the peace officer or highway authority official is
authorized to move the vehicle or to require the operator of the vehicle to
move the vehicle to the shoulder of the road, to a position where parking is
permitted, or to public parking or storage premises. The removal may be
performed by, or under the direction of, the peace officer or highway
authority official or may be contracted for by local authorities. After the
vehicle has been removed, the peace officer or highway authority official
shall follow appropriate procedures, as provided in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5,
§ 4-203.



   (D)   A towing service, its officers, and its employees are not
liable for loss of or damages to any real or personal property that occurs as
the result of the removal or towing of any vehicle under division (D) above,
as provided in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 4-213(b).



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-404)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.07  DUTY TO REPORT ACCIDENT.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an
accident within this village, resulting in injury to or death of any person
or in which damage to the property of any one person, including himself, in
excess of $500 is sustained shall, as soon as possible but not later than ten
days after the accident, file with the Police Department a copy of the
written report required to be filed with the state under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 11-406(a).



   (B)   Whenever a school bus is involved in an accident in this
village, caused by a collision, a sudden stop, or otherwise, resulting in any
property damage, personal injury, or death, and  whenever an accident occurs
within 50 feet of a school bus in this village resulting in personal injury
to or the death of any person while awaiting or preparing to board the bus or
immediately after exiting the bus, the driver shall as soon as possible, but
not later than ten days after the accident, file with the Police Department a
copy of the written report required to be filed with the state under ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 11-406(b).  If a report is also required under division (A)
above, that report and the report required by this division (B) shall be
submitted on a single form.



   (C)   The Chief of Police may require any driver, occupant, or owner
of a vehicle involved in an accident of which report must be made as provided
in this section or § 76.09 to file supplemental reports whenever the
original report is insufficient in the opinion of the Chief of Police and may
require witnesses of the accident to submit written reports.  The report may
include photographs, charts, sketches, and graphs.



   (D)   Should the Police Department learn through other reports of
accidents required by law of the occurrence of an accident reportable under
§§ 76.03 through 76.09 and the driver, owner, or witness has not reported
as required under (A) through (C) above or § 76.09 within the time
specified, the person is not relieved of the responsibility and the Police
Department shall notify the person by first class mail directed to his last
known address of his legal obligation.  However, the notification is not a
condition precedent to impose the penalty for failure to report as provided
in (E) below.



   (E)   The Secretary of State shall suspend the driver’s license or
any nonresident’s driving privilege of any person who fails or neglects to
make report of a traffic accident as herein required or as required by any
other law of this state.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406) 



Statutory reference:



   Authorization for village to require accident reports, see ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 11-415



§ 76.08  FALSE REPORTS.



   Any person who provides information in an oral or written report
required by §§ 76.03 through 76.09 with knowledge or reason to believe that
the information is false shall be fined as provided in § 70.99.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-409)



§ 76.09  WHEN DRIVER FAILS TO REPORT.



   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a
required written accident report and if there was another occupant in the
vehicle at the time of the motor vehicle accident capable of making a written
report, the occupant shall make or cause the written report to be made.  If
the driver fails for any reason to make the report the owner of the vehicle
involved in the motor vehicle accident shall, as soon as practicable, make
the report to the Police Department.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-410)



§ 76.10  IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN CONNECTION WITH ILLEGAL
ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Violations authorizing impoundment.  A motor vehicle,
operated with the permission, express or implied of the owner of record, that
is used in connection with the following violations shall be subject to tow
and impoundment by the village, and the owner of record of said vehicle shall
be liable to the village for an administrative fee in addition to any towing
and storage fees, as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   Offenses.



      (1)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission
of, or in the attempt to commit an offense for which a motor vehicle may be
seized and forfeited pursuant to section 36-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code
of 1961 (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 36-1 et seq.), shall subject the owner to
an administrative fee of $500;



      (2)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or
drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in
violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501, shall subject the owner to an
administrative fee of $500;



      (3)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with
the commission or attempted commission of any felony offense in violation of
the provisions of the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550,
§ 1, shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of $500;



      (4)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with
the commission or attempted commission of any offense in violation of the
Illinois Controlled Substances Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, § 100 shall
subject the owner to an administrative fee of $500;



      (5)   Operation of use of a motor vehicle in the commission or
attempted commission of an offense in violation of section 24-1 (unlawful use
of weapons), 24-1.5 (reckless discharge of firearms), or 24-3.1 (unlawful
possession of firearms and firearm ammunition) of the Illinois Criminal Code
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 24-1, 24-1.5 or 24-3.1, respectively), shall
subject the owner to an administrative fee of $500;



      (6)   Driving while driver’s license, permit or privileges
to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 6-303, shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of $500;
except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure impoundment if the
suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving), or due to failure
to comply with emissions testing;



      (7)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting,
possessing, or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled
substance as defined by the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act
550, § 2, or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570,
§§ 100 et seq., shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of $500;



      (8)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired
driver’s license in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 6-101 where the period of expiration is greater than one year,
shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of $500;



      (9)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having
been issued a driver’s license or permit in violation of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101, or operating a motor vehicle
without ever having been issued a driver’s license or permit due to a
person’s age, shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of $500; and



      (10)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against
whom a warrant has been issued by a Circuit Clerk in Illinois for failing to
answer charges that the driver violated section 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 6-101, 6-303 or 11-501,
respectively), shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of $500.



      (11)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission
of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Article 16 (theft
and related offenses) or 16A (retail theft) of the Criminal Code of 1961
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 16-0.1 et seq.), shall be subject to an
administrative fee of $500.



   (C)   General regulations.



      (1)   This section shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any
existing state or federal laws or village ordinances pertaining to vehicle
seizure, towing and impoundment, and the owner shall be subject to these
penalties in addition to any penalties that may be assessed by a court for
any criminal charges.



      (2)   This section does not apply if the vehicle used in the
violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the
appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was
discovered, or upon verifiable proof that the vehicle was stolen at the time
the vehicle was impounded.



      (3)   Fees or towing and storage of a vehicle under this
section shall be those approved by the Chief of Police for all tow companies
authorized to tow for the Police Department.



   (D)   Notice.  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to
believe that a vehicle is subject to tow and impoundment pursuant to this
section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a
facility authorized by the village.  Before or at the time the vehicle is
towed the police officer shall notify or make a reasonable attempt to notify
the owner, lessee, or person identifying himself or herself as the owner or
lessee of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the
vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, of the fact of the impoundment,
and of the vehicle and of the owner’s or lessee’s right to an
administrative hearing and right to request a preliminary vehicle impoundment
hearing to be conducted under division (E) of this section. The police
officer shall also provide notice that the vehicle shall be impounded pending
the completion of the hearings provided for in divisions (E) and (F) of this
section, unless the owner of the vehicle posts with the village a cash bond
in the amount of $500 and pays the accrued towing and storage charges.



   (E)   Preliminary hearing.  If the owner of record of a vehicle
impounded pursuant to this section desires to appeal the impoundment, said
owner must make a request for hearing within 24 hours of the impoundment. 
Said request shall be in writing and filed with the Chief of Police, or
his/her designee who shall conduct such preliminary hearing within 24 hours
after receipt of the request, excluding



Saturdays, Sundays or village holidays.  All interested persons shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary vehicle
impoundment hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the
hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type
commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their
affairs. If after the hearing, the Chief of Police or his or her designee
determines there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle is subject to
impoundment pursuant to this section, he or she shall order the continued
impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this section unless the owner of
the vehicle posts with the village a cash bond in the amount of $500 and pays
the towing company any applicable towing and storage fees. If the Chief of
Police or his or her designee determines that there is no such probable
cause, the vehicle will be returned without penalty or other fees.



   (F)   Hearing.



      (1)   Within ten days after a vehicle is impounded pursuant to
this section the village shall notify, by personal service or certified mail
return receipt requested, the owner of record or lessee of the vehicle and
any lienholder of record, of the date, time, and location of a plea hearing
that will be conducted pursuant to this section. The hearing shall be
conducted by a Hearing Officer, designated by the Village Administrator, who
is an attorney licensed to practice law in Illinois for a minimum of three
years. The hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless continued by order of
the court or the Hearing Officer no later than 45 days after the vehicle was
impounded. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
be heard at the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to
subdivision (b)(4) of section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 11-208.3(b)(4)). The hearing shall be recorded, and the
Hearing Officer shall be empowered to administer oaths and to secure by
subpoena both the attendance and testimony of witnesses and production of
relevant books and papers. Persons appearing at a hearing may be represented
by counsel at their own expense. At any time prior to the hearing date the
Hearing Officer may at the request of either party, direct witnesses to
appear and give testimony at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence will
not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it
is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct
of their affairs. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the vehicle
impoundment.



      (2)   If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines by
a preponderance of the evidence, that the vehicle was used in connection with
a violation set forth in this section, the Hearing Officer shall enter an
order finding the owner of record of the vehicle is civilly liable to the
village for an administrative fee in the amount of $500 and requiring the
vehicle to continue to be impounded until the owner pays the administrative
fee to the village plus fees to the towing company for the towing and storage
of the vehicle. If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the
Hearing Officer shall enter a default order in favor of the village. If the
Hearing Officer finds no such violation occurred, the Hearing Officer shall
order the immediate return of the owner’s vehicle or cash bond without
fees. Unless the Hearing Officer overturns the basis for the vehicle
impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee, or lienholder
of record until all administrative fees and towing and storage charges are
paid.



   (G)   Administrative fee.  If an administrative fee is imposed
pursuant to this section, such fee shall constitute a debt due and owing the
village. Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine,
penalty, or administrative fee imposed which remains unpaid in whole or in
part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review under
the Administrative Review Law may be enforced in the same manner as a
judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.  If a cash bond has
been posted pursuant to this section the bond shall be applied to the fee.
Except as provided otherwise in this section, a vehicle shall continue to be
impounded until the fee is paid to the village and any applicable towing and
storage fees are paid to the towing company, in which case possession of the
vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the
vehicle or the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment
to enforce a lien as provided by law. Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed
within 35 days after the expiration of the time during which the owner of
record may seek judicial review of the village’s action under this section,
or the time at which a final judgment is rendered in favor of the village, or
the time a final administrative decision is rendered against an owner of
record who is in default, shall be deemed abandoned and may be disposed of as
an abandoned or unclaimed motor vehicle as provided by law in accordance with
the provisions of Article II of Chapter 4 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as
amended (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 5- 201 et seq.).



   (H)   Vehicle possession.  Except as otherwise specifically
provided by law, no owner, lien holder, or other person shall be legally
entitled to take possession of a vehicle impounded under this section until
the administrative fee and fees applicable under this section have been paid.
However, whenever a person with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle
has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be
given to that person if he or she agrees in writing to refund the village the
amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required
to pay all lien holders of record, not to exceed the administrative fee, plus
the applicable fees. For purposes of this section, the “owner of record”
of a vehicle is the record titleholder as registered with the Secretary of
State of the State of Illinois.



   (I)   Administrative review.  Any owner, lien holder, or other
person with a legal interest in the vehicle, who is not satisfied with the
final decision of the Hearing Officer, shall have the right to appeal the
decision to the Circuit Court, pursuant to the Administrative Review Act, as
set forth fully in ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.



(Ord. 1551-10, passed 11-16-10; Am. Ord. 1607-12, passed 2-21-12; Am. Ord.
1743-15, passed 11-3-15)



CHAPTER 77:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Streets closed to vehicular traffic



   II.   One-way streets



   III.   Speed limits



   IV.   Stop intersections



   V.   Yield right-of-way



   VI.   Trucks or commercial vehicles prohibited



   VII.   Left turn prohibited



   VIII.   Right turn prohibited



   IX.   No passing zones



SCHEDULE I:  STREETS CLOSED TO VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.



   The following described streets are closed to vehicular traffic.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Line Street
 
Approximately 175 feet west from the west right-of-way of Walnut Street to
the east right-of-way of the public alley.
 
647-88
 
2-9-88



 



SCHEDULE II:  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   (A)   The following streets are established as one-way streets on
Sundays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., and traffic shall move
only in the direction indicated.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Direction
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


North Elm Street
 
At Division Street, southwest corner
 
North
 
239-65
 
10-5-65



 



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 12.09)



   (B)    The following streets shall be one-way streets on school days
only between the hours of 8:00 a.m and 4:30 p.m., and traffic shall move only
in the direction indicated:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Direction
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Washington
 
Between Cherry and Elm
 
West
 
1040-99
 
11-2-99



 



   (C)    The following streets shall be one-way streets on school days
only between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., and traffic shall move
only in the direction indicated:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Direction
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


North
 
Between Rush and Elm
 
West
 
1040-99
 
11-2-99



 



(Am. Ord. 1040-99, passed 11-2-99) Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE III:  SPEED LIMITS.



   Vehicles shall not exceed the speed of 25 m.p.h. on any street, road or
highway within the village, excepting as further restricted in school zones,
as established from time to time, and except on those streets, and for
distances stated, where different speed limits are set and established from
time to time. Speed limits are established for the streets and distances as
follows:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Speed Limit (m.p.h.)
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Arlington Heights Road
 
Between north village limits and North St.
 
35
 
239-65
 
10-5-65


Illinois Route 53
 
Between the north and south city limits
 
50
 
239-65
 
10-5-65


Irving Park Road
 
500 feet west of Maple Street to Rush Street
 
35
 
239-65
 
10-5-65


Irving Park Road
 
1000 feet west of Catalpa to 500 feet west of Maple
 
35
 
239-65
 
10-5-65


Irving Park Road
 
Between Emmerson Street and Rush Street
 
35
 
239-65
 
10-5-65


Irving Park Road
 
Between east village limits and Emmerson Street
 
45
 
239-65
 
10-5-65


Irving Park Road
 
Between Illinois Rt. 53 and 1000 feet west of Catalpa
 
45
 
239-65
 
10-5-65


Irving Park Road
 
All portions within the village limits and west of Illinois Route 53
 
55
 
239-65
 
10-5-65


Park Boulevard
 
Between Devon and Thorndale
 
35
 
531-82
 
8-17-82


Pierce Road
 
Between Park Blvd. and Arlington Heights Road
 
35
 
531-82
 
8-17-82


Prospect Road
 
From Thorndale to 350 feet north of Industrial Drive
 
35
 
531-82
 
8-17-82


Walnut Street
 
Between Line Street and Center Street
 
20
 
239-65
 
10-5-65




 



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 11.13)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE IV:  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   All traffic from every direction shall stop at the following
described intersections.



 


Intersection

 

Ord. No.

 

Date







 


 





Bloomingdale and Forest/Lombard

 

1175-03

 

8-19-03




Bloomingdale and Walnut

 

1174-03

 

8-9-03




Bryn Mawr and Catalpa

 

1100-01

 

8-21-01




Bryn Mawr and North Walnut

 

1207-04

 

5-18-04




Division and Catalpa

 

522-81

 

12-15-81




Division and Walnut

 

522-81

 

12-15-81




George and Walnut

 

1590-11

 

11-15-11




Inverness Lane and Country Club Drive

 

1192-04

 

1-6-04




North and Walnut

 

522-81

 

12-15-81




North Street and Willow Street

 

1713-14

 

12-9-14




Norwood and Hilltop

 

522-81

 

12-15-81




Parkside and George

 

522-81

 

12-15-81




Parkside Avenue and Washington Street

 

1656-13

 

5-21-13




Surrey Lane and County Club Drive

 

1193-04

 

1-6-04




Surrey Lane and Inverness Lane

 

1191-04

 

1-6-04




Washington and Oak

 

1184-03

 

10-21-03




Washington and Walnut

 

1394-07

 

7-24-07





 



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 11.01)



   (B)   Traffic on the following described streets shall stop as
indicated.



 

Street
 
Stop at
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Alexandra
 
Arlington Heights
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Ardmore
 
Rohlwing
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Arlington Heights
 
Division
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Baker
 
Ardmore
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Baker
 
Bryn Mawr
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Baker
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Baker
 
Norwood
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Birch
 
Catalpa
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Bloomingdale
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Bonnie Brae
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Bonnie Brae Avenue
 
Washington Street
 
1723-15
 
1-20-15


Broker
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Broker Avenue
 
Washington Street
 
1723-15
 
1-20-15


Bryn Mawr
 
Arlington Heights
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Bryn Mawr
 
Catalpa
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Bryn Mawr
 
Rohlwing
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Catalpa
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Center
 
Catalpa
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Center
 
Walnut
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Cherry
 
Division
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Cherry
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Cherry
 
North
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Cherry Street
 
Washington Street
 
1628-12
 
7-3-12


District
 
Ardmore
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


District
 
Bryn Mawr
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Division
 
Hickory
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Elm
 
Bloomingdale
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Elm
 
Bryn Mawr
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Elm
 
Center
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Elm
 
Division
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Elm
 
North
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Elm Street
 
Washington Street
 
1628-12
 
7-3-12


Emmerson
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Emmerson Avenue
 
Washington Street
 
1723-15
 
1-20-15


Exit 1
 
Park
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Exit 2
 
Park
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Exit 3
 
Park
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Exit 4
 
Park
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Exit 5
 
Park
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


First
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


George
 
Oak
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


George
 
Prospect
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Glenlake
 
Baker
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Glenlake
 
Meacham
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Grove
 
Maple
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Grove
 
Walnut
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Hillcrest
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Hilltop
 
Ardmore
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Hilltop
 
Glenlake
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Hilltop
 
Norwood
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Hilltop
 
Thorndale
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Hollywood
 
Rohlwing
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Home
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Home Avenue
 
Washington Street
 
1723-15
 
1-20-15


Industrial Drive
 
Prospect
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Linden
 
Division
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Linden
 
North
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Line
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Line
 
Maple
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Line
 
Walnut
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Lombard
 
Bloomingdale
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Maple
 
Bloomingdale
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Maple
 
Center
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Maple
 
Division
 
1277-05
 
11-15-05


Maple
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Maple
 
North
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Maple
 
Washington Street
 
1628-12
 
7-3-12


Nordic
 
Rohlwing
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


North
 
Arlington Heights
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


North
 
Catalpa
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


North
 
Hickory
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Norwood
 
Rohlwing
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Oak
 
Bloomingdale
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Oak
 
Division
 
1277-05
 
11-15-05


Oak
 
North
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Orchard
 
Walnut
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Park
 
Devon
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Parkside
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Pierce
 
Arlington
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Pierce
 
Ketter
 
1123-02
 
2-5-02


Pierce
 
Park
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Princeton
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Prospect
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Prospect
 
Thorndale
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Rush
 
Division
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Rush
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Rush
 
North
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Rush
 
Schiller
 
1278-05
 
11-15-05


Rush
 
Washington
 
1236-05
 
2-15-05


Schiller
 
Princeton
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Schiller
 
Prospect
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Sunnyside
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Sunnyside Avenue
 
Washington Street
 
1723-15
 
1-20-15


Theodore
 
Arlington Heights
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Theodore
 
Cherry
 
1276-05
 
11-15-05


Thorndale
 
Rohlwing
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Walnut
 
Bloomingdale
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Walnut
 
Bryn Mawr
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Walnut
 
Washington
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Walters
 
Arlington Heights
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Walters
 
Cherry
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Walters
 
Maple
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Washington
 
Oak
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Washington
 
Parkside
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Washington
 
Princeton
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Washington
 
Prospect
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Williamsburg
 
Irving
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Willow
 
Bryn Mawr
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Willow
 
Division
 
1277-05
 
11-15-05


Willow
 
North
 
522-81
 
12-15-81




 



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 11.02)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE V:  YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   Traffic on the following described streets shall yield the right-of-way
to traffic at the indicated intersections.



 

Street
 
Yield at
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Bonnie Brae
 
George
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Bonnie Brae
 
Washington
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Broker
 
George
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Broker
 
Washington
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Cherry
 
Bryn Mawr
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Cherry
 
George
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Cherry
 
Washington
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Country Club
 
North
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Elm
 
Bryn Mawr
 
522-811
 
2-15-81


Elm
 
Walters
 
522-811
 
2-15-81


Elm
 
Washington
 
522-811
 
2-15-81


Emmerson
 
George
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Emerson
 
Washington
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Home
 
George
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Home
 
Washington
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Linden
 
Bryn Mawr
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Linden
 
Walters
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Maple
 
Bryn Mawr
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Maple
 
Division
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Maple
 
George
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Maple
 
Washington
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Oak
 
Division
 
522-811
 
2-15-81


Prestwick
 
Medinah
 
1466-08
 
11-18-08


Princeton
 
George
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Rush
 
George
 
522-811
 
2-15-81


Rush
 
Washington
 
522-811
 
2-15-81


Sunnyside
 
George
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Sunnyside
 
Washington
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Walnut
 
Bryn Mawr
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Walnut
 
George
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Walnut
 
Walters
 
522-81
 
12-15-81


Willow
 
Division
 
522-81
 
12-15-81




 



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 11.04)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VI:  TRUCKS OR COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No trucks or commercial vehicles shall enter on or travel over
the portions of the streets hereinafter set forth, and all such truck and
commercial vehicular traffic is prohibited, other than for emergency
vehicles, or trucks or commercial vehicles making local deliveries to the
residences abutting the portions of such streets, as hereinafter set forth.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Arlington Heights Road
 
Between Thorndale and Irving Park
 
840-95
 
1-17-95


Arlington Heights Road
 
Between Thorndale and Division Street
 
840-95
 
1-17-95


Bryn Mawr
 
Between Cherry Street and Arlington Heights Road
 
455-76
 
9-7-76


Cherry
 
Between Bryn Mawr and Walters Lane
 
455-76
 
9-7-76


Division
 
Between Walnut and Arlington Heights Road
 
840-95
 
1-17-95


Walnut
 
Between Irving Park and Division
 
840-95
 
1-17-95


Walters Lane
 
Between Cherry Street and Arlington Heights Road
 
455-76
 
9-7-76




 



   (B)   Trucks are prohibited from making commercial deliveries in
areas where customer and public parking is permitted, in the following places
and areas:



 

Street
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Parking lot
 
At 228 North Walnut Street
 
459-77
 
1-18-77



 



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 12.14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VII:  LEFT TURN PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle on the following
described streets to turn left onto the indicated intersecting street.



 

Street
 
Direction
 
Intersecting Street
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Irving Park Road
 
West
 
Walnut Street, south
 
431-73
 
12-4-73



 



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 12.11) 



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle on the following
described streets to turn onto the indicated intersecting streets on school
days at the times indicated:



 

Street
 
Direction
 
Intersecting Street
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Elm
 
South
 
North Street (6:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.)
 
1040-99
 
11-2-99


Elm
 
South
 
Washington (8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.)
 
1040-99
 
11-2-99



 



(Am. Ord. 1040-99, passed 11-2-99) Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VIII:  RIGHT TURN PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle on the following described streets
to turn right onto the indicated intersecting streets on school days between
6:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.:



 

Street
 
Direction
 
Intersecting Street
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Linden
 
North
 
North Street
 
1040-99
 
11-2-99


Alley Drive
 
North
 
North Street
 
1040-99
 
11-2-99


Elm
 
North
 
North Street
 
1040-99
 
11-2-99



 



(Am. Ord. 1040-99, passed 11-2-99) Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE IX:  NO PASSING ZONES.



   It is a violation of law for any vehicle traveling along the following
roads to pass another vehicle in contravention of the Illinois Vehicle Code
of the state as well as the Vehicle Code of the village.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Bloomingdale Road
 
Between Irving Park Road and the I-290 overpass
 
823-94
 
9-27-94



 



(Ord. 823-94, passed 9-27-94)



CHAPTER 78:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Parking prohibited at all times



   II.   Limited time parking



   III.   Parking between signs prohibited



   IV.   Off-street and on-street parking during certain hours; charges



   V.   Parking permitted between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.



   VI.   [Reserved]



   VII.   Bus parking only



   VIII.   Parallel parking required



   IX.   Handicapped parking



SCHEDULE I:  PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES.



   (A)   Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following
described locations.



 

Street
 
Side
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Ardmore Drive
 
Both
 
I-290 to Hilltop
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Baker Drive
 
Both
 
C.M. St. P. & P.R.R. to Glenlake
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Bryn Mawr Avenue
 
Both
 
I-290 to Hilltop
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Catalpa
 
East
 
Bryn Mawr to end of Street
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Catalpa
 
East
 
Irving to 60 feet south
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Catalpa
 
West
 
Irving to 190 feet north
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Catalpa
 
West
 
100 Block North
 
1385-07
 
5-22-07


Center
 
South
 
Maple to Walnut
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Clover Ridge
 
South
 
Catalpa west 560 feet
 
1306-06
 
4-18-06


Clover Ridge Court
 
Outer
 
824 and 850 Clover Ridge Court
 
1585-11
 
8-16-11


Clover Ridge Lane
 
West
 
Between Park and Bryn Mawr
 
1585-11
 
8-16-11


Crest Rd.
 
Both
 
Entire length of street
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


District Drive
 
Both
 
Entire length of street
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Division
 
North
 
Walnut to Linden
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Division
 
South
 
Walnut to 100 feet west
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Expressway Drive
 
Both
 
Entire length of street
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


First Street
 
Both
 
Entire length of street
 
1320-06
 
6-20-06


Frontage Road (Thorndale)
 
Both
 
Intersection with Thorndale and Park West to end of road
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Glenlake Ave.
 
Both
 
Entire length of street
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Hilltop Drive
 
Both
 
Bryn Mawr to Glenlake
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Hollywood Ave.
 
Both
 
Entire length of street
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Illinois Route 53 (Rohlwing Road)
 
Both
 
From the southern village boundary line to the Elgin O’Hare Expressway
 
1582-11
 
6-21-11


Industrial Dr.
 
Both
 
Entire length of street
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Irving Park
 
Both
 
Catalpa to 400 feet east
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Irving Park
 
Both
 
150 feet west of Maple to Rush Street
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Irving Park
 
Both
 
Within the limits of the Walnut Avenue and Prospect Road improvements
 
579-85
 
2-26-85


Line Street
 
North
 
Walnut to Irving Park
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Maple
 
Both
 
Line Street to Irving Park
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Maple
 
East
 
Orchard to Center
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Maple
 
West
 
100 feet north of Orchard to Center
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Meacham Road
 
Both
 
Village limits to Crest
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Medinah Road
 
Both
 
Village limits to Crest
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Nordic Road
 
South
 
Rohlwing to Swift
 
1083-01
 
4-17-01


Nordic Road
 
North
 
Club Terrace to Swift
 
1083-01
 
4-17-01


Norwood Ave.
 
Both
 
Entire length of street
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Orchard
 
South
 
100 feet east of Walnut to Elm
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Park Blvd.
 
Both
 
Thorndale to Devon
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Pierce Road
 
Both
 
Arlington Heights to Park Blvd.
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Prospect Road
 
East
 
Irving Park to C.M. St. P. & P.R.R.
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Prospect Road
 
West
 
Irving to 150 feet north
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Prospect Road
 
Both
 
C.M. St. P. & P.R.R. to Thorndale
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Rohlwing
 
Both
 
North and South to Nordic Road
 
634-87
 
9-22-87


Rohlwing
 
Both
 
Soo Line Railroad to Irving Park Road
 
659-88
 
8-6-88


Rohlwing Road (Illinois Route 53)
 
Both
 
From the southern village boundary line to the Elgin O’Hare Expressway
 
1582-11
 
6-21-11


Rohlwing Road
 
Both
 
Norwood Avenue and Hamilton Parkway
 
730-91
 
10-15-91


Route 19
 
Both
 
I-290 overpass east to Walnut Avenue
 
1055-00
 
6-20-00


Thorndale Ave. (old)
 
Both
 
I-290 to Hilltop
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Walnut
 
East
 
Center to Division
 
1101-01; 1113-13
 
10-2-01; 11-20-01


Walnut
 
East
 
Line to 150 feet south
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Walnut
 
East
 
Line to Irving Park Road
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Walnut
 
West
 
Irving Park Road to Orchard
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Walnut
 
West
 
50 feet north to 50 feet south of access drive to 220 North Walnut
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Willow
 
East
 
Irving Park Road north to railroad tracks
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Willow
 
East
 
200 block north
 
1285-05
 
12-6-05




 



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 10.01)



   (B)   Parking shall be prohibited, Monday through Friday, from 7:00
a.m. to 4:30 p.m., in the following locations, except parking shall be
allowed in these locations for the indicated vehicles or persons.



 

Street
 
Side
 
Location
 
Vehicles Permitted to Park
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Line
 
Both
 
Maple to 150 feet east
 
Building Department Vehicles
 
538-82; 1101-01
 
12-7-82; 10-2-01


Line
 
South
 
Walnut to Irving Park
 
Village Hall Employees
 
538-82; 1101-01
 
12-7-82; 10-2-01



 



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 10.02)



   (C)   Parking is prohibited on school days at the times indicated:



 

Street
 
Side
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Circle access drive
 
Both
 
South of Orchard Street and west of Walnut Street, and only pick-up or
drop-off traffic shall be permitted, at all times.
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


North Street
 
North
 
From main entrance to west of Peacock Junior High School parking lot (student
drop off and pick up allowed only) between 6:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
 
1040-99
 
11-2-99


North
 
South
 
Walnut to Arlington Heights Road between 6:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
 
1040-99
 
11-2-99


Washington
 
North
 
Front of main sidewalk entrance to Benson Primary School from Rush to west
parking lot (student drop off and pick up allowed only) between 8:00 a.m. and
4:30 p.m.
 
1040-99
 
11-2-99



 



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II:  LIMITED TIME PARKING.



   (A)   Parking shall be allowed for a period of two hours in the
following described locations.



 

Street
 
Side
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Catalpa
 
East
 
Irving Park to C.M. St. P. & P.R.R.
 
538-82; 974-97
 
12-7-82; 11-4-97


Catalpa
 
West
 
North side of Post Office to 190 feet north of Route 19
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Catalpa
 
West
 
North side of 200 N. Catalpa to 190 feet north of Irving Park
 
974-97
 
11-4-97


Maple
 
West
 
Orchard to 100 feet north
 
538-82; 974-97
 
12-7-82; 11-4-97



 



   (B)   Two-hour parking for trucks.



      (1)   On streets which have industrial or manufacturing
premises located thereon, a truck may stand or park on a street adjacent to
or adjoining premises while waiting for space to become available to make
deliveries or pickups at said premises, so long as the driver is in
attendance and present with his truck, and provided that such standing,
parking, or waiting time does not exceed two hours.



      (2)   Such standing or parking shall be close to the premises
and on the same side of the street where deliveries or pickups are being
made, except that parking or standing on either side of a street abutting
residential property shall be prohibited.



      (3)   Whenever there is such a number of trucks standing or
parking that the orderly flow of traffic is congested or is impeded thereby
on the street, or when snow plowing is required, a traffic officer may order
the driver to remove the truck to another area, and the driver shall so move
the vehicle.



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 10.03)  (Ord. 538-82, passed 12-7-82)



   (C)   No parking shall be allowed on the east side of Rush Street,
between George and Washington on Sundays only between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 1:00 p.m.



(Ord. 839-95, passed 1-17-95)



   (D)   Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, parking shall be allowed for a maximum period of four hours in the
following described locations:



 

Street
 
Side
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date




Center
 
Both
 
Walnut to Linden
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Center
 
Both
 
Oak to Maple
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Center
 
North
 
Maple to Walnut
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Division
 
North
 
Maple to Walnut
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Division
 
South
 
Maple to 100 feet west of Walnut
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Division
 
South
 
Walnut to Linden
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Elm
 
Both
 
Orchard to Division
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Gigi Gruber
 
Both
 
Maple to Irving
 
1620-12
 
4-17-12


Grove
 
Both
 
Oak to Walnut
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Maple
 
Both
 
Bloomingdale to Line
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Maple
 
Both
 
Center to Division
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Oak
 
Both
 
Railroad tracks to Division
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Orchard
 
Both
 
Maple to Walnut
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Orchard
 
North
 
Walnut to Elm
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Orchard
 
South
 
Walnut to 100 feet east
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Schiller
 
South
 
First Street to Rush Street
 
1141-02
 
7-16-02


Walnut
 
East
 
150 feet south of Line Street to Bloomingdale
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Walnut
 
East
 
Center to Orchard
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Walnut
 
East
 
Orchard to railroad tracks
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Walnut
 
West
 
30 feet south of Division to 50 feet north of access drive to 220 North Walnut
 
1101-01; 1113-01
 
10-2-01; 11-20-01


Walnut
 
West
 
Irving to Bloomingdale
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01


Walnut
 
West
 
Orchard to 50 feet south of access drive to 220 North Walnut
 
1101-01
 
10-2-01




 



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE III:  PARKING BETWEEN SIGNS PROHIBITED.



   No vehicle shall be parked between signs at the following described
locations.



 

Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


220 North Catalpa
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


535 South Elm
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


540 South Elm
 
1824-16
 
10-18-16



 



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 10.04) (Am. Ord. 1101-01, passed 10-2-01)  Penalty,
see § 70.99



SCHEDULE IV:  OFF-STREET AND ON-STREET PARKING DURING CERTAIN HOURS; CHARGES.



   (A)   Off-street parking areas providing spaces for the parking of
vehicles from 6:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. on all days are hereby established in
the following described places.



      (1)   Reserved.   Between North Maple and North Oak and
North of C.M. St. P. & P.R.R. (Lot #3)



      (2)   Unreserved.   (Lot #1) West side of Maple Street to
south of Irving Park Road



               (Lot #2) South of Orchard Street to West of Elm



   (B)   Charges.



      (1)   For off-street reserved parking, a charge of $15.00 per
vehicle per calendar month is established for the use of one reserved parking
space in the lot designated.



      (2)   For off-street unreserved parking, a charge of $1.50 per
day is established for the use of one unreserved parking space in the lot
designated or the portions of streets designated.



   (C)   The Board of Trustees may from time to time by ordinance or
resolution amend the regulations and charges for the use of such areas. No
charge will be made for parking in such areas so designated on Saturdays,
Sundays, legal holidays, or from 6:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m.  All parking is
prohibited from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.



   (D)   Any person who shall violate any of these provisions or not
pay the parking charges hereby established, shall be subject to have their
vehicles towed away at said person's expense.



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 10.05)  (Ord. 538-82, passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord.
1101-01, passed 10-2-01; Am. Ord. 1292-06, passed 2-7-06; Am. Ord. 1563-11,
passed 2-9-11)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE V:  [RESERVED]



SCHEDULE VI:  PARKING FOR SCHOOL BUSES ONLY BETWEEN HOURS OF 8:00 A.M. AND
4:00 P.M.



   Parking shall be allowed for school buses only from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. on school days in the following described locations.  No other vehicles
shall park in such streets or areas during the restricted periods.



 

Street
 
Side
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Catalpa
 
West
 
From 150 feet north of Bryn Mawr to 250 feet north of Bryn Mawr
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


North
 
North
 
50 feet to 150 feet west of Linden Street
 
538-82
 
12-7-82


Washington
 
North
 
From West Washington School Drive to 100 feet west of the drive
 
538-82
 
12-7-82



 



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 10.07)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VII:  BUS PARKING ONLY.



   Parking shall be prohibited in the following described locations,
except that vehicles used for bus purposes shall be permitted to park as
indicated.



 

Street
 
Side
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Line
 
Both
 
Between Walnut Avenue and Irving Park Boulevard
 
162-61
 
10-24-61



 



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VIII:  PARALLEL PARKING REQUIRED.



   (A)   Parallel parking shall be required in the following described
locations, except on Sunday.



 

Street
 
Side
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Washington
 
Both
 
Between Rush Street and West School Drive
 
538-82
 
12-7-82



 



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 10.08) 



   (B)   Parallel parking shall be required in the following described
locations.



 

Street
 
Side
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Washington
 
South
 
Between Rush and Elm
 
1040-99
 
11-2-99



 



(Am. Ord. 1040-99, passed 11-2-99) Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE IX:  HANDICAPPED PARKING.



   No parking shall be permitted in the following spaces designated for
handicapped parking only:



 

Street
 
Side
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Catalpa
 
West
 
Two spaces in front of Franzen School
 
1040-99
 
11-2-99


North
 
North
 
One space near main entrance to Peacock Junior High School
 
1040-99
 
11-2-99



 



(Ord. 1040-99, passed 11-2-99) Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 79:  SIZE AND WEIGHT OF VEHICLES



Section



   79.01   Definitions



   79.02   Overweight and/or over-dimension vehicles



   79.03   Permits for overweight and/or over-dimension vehicles



   79.04   Vehicles prohibited on certain streets



 



   79.99   Penalty



§ 79.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the context otherwise requires, all words and phrases used
herein shall have the same meaning as the same or similar words or phrases
defined and used in state law.



   AXLE LOAD.  The total load transmitted to the road by all wheels whose
centers may be included between two parallel transverse vertical planes 40
inches apart extending across the full width of the vehicle.



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.   Any vehicle operated for the transportation of
persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial
enterprise, "For-Hire" or "Not-For-Hire", but not including a commuter van, a
vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose,
or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially.



   CONSTRUCTION VEHICLE.   Any vehicle over 10,000 pounds actual weight,
registered gross weight or GVWR that is required to comply with ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, §§ 12-712 and 12-713 on identification required to be displayed.



   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR).   The value specified by the
manufacturer or manufacturers as the maximum loaded weight of a single
vehicle.  The GVWR of a combination of vehicles (commonly referred to as the
"Gross Combination Weight Rating" or GCWR) is the GVWR of the power unit plus
the GVWR of the towed unit or units.  In the absence of a value specified by
the manufacturer, GCWR is determined by adding the GVWR of the power unit and
the total weight of the towed unit and any load on the unit.



   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle whether operated singly or in
combination without load plus the weight of the load thereon.



   HIGHWAY.  The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.



   IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY.   Every vehicle designed and adapted
exclusively for agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising operations,
including farm wagons, wagon trailers or like vehicles used in connection
therewith, or for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.   Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every
vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley
wires, but not operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human
power and motorized wheelchairs.  For this chapter, motor vehicles are
divided into two divisions:



      (1)   FIRST DIVISION.   Those motor vehicles that are
designed for the carrying of not more than ten persons.



      (2)   SECOND DIVISION. Those motor vehicles that are designed
for carrying more than ten persons, those motor vehicles designed or used for
living quarters, those motor vehicles that are designed for pulling or
carrying freight, cargo or implements of husbandry, and those motor vehicles
of the First Division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the
Second Division.



   PERMIT ROUTE.   The route authorized by the issuing authority with
proper jurisdiction over the roadway(s) for which permission has been granted
to move a vehicle or combination of vehicles that is in itself indivisible or
carrying an indivisible load that exceeds normal dimensions or weight or a
combination thereof



   SEMI-TRAILER.  Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.



   TANDEM AXLES.   Any two or more single axles whose centers are more
than 40 inches and not more than 96 inches apart, measured to the nearest
inch between extreme axles in the series, except as provided in ILCS Ch. 625,
Art. 5, § 15-111 for special hauling vehicles.



   TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a
pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn
by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon
the towing vehicle.



   TRUCK TRACTOR.   Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a
part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.



(Ord. 1183-03, passed 10-21-03)



§ 79.02  OVERWEIGHT AND/OR OVER-DIMENSION VEHICLE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in control of, to
drive, to park, or move on, upon or across, or for the owner to cause or
knowingly permit to be parked, driven, or moved upon or across, any street or
highway under the jurisdiction of the village, any vehicle or combination of
vehicles exceeding the size and weight limitations stated in the ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 15-102 (width), ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-103 (height), ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-107 (length), and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111
(weight).



   (B)   Size and weights limitations while operating on village
streets shall not apply to fire apparatus or equipment for snow or ice
removal operations owned or operated by or for any governmental body or to
implements of husbandry temporarily operated or towed in a combination in the
furtherance of a farm or agricultural endeavor and to any vehicle or
combination of vehicles operating under the terms of a valid oversize and/or
dimension permit issued by the village under the authority of § 79.03 hereof.



   (C)   Where lower size and weight limits or other restrictions are
imposed by ordinance under authority of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-111,
15-316 and 15-317, and signs indicating such limitations or restrictions are
posted, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or combination of
vehicles in excess of such size or weight limitations or in violation of such
restrictions.



   (D)   Whenever any vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in
violation of this section, the owner and/or driver of such vehicle shall be
deemed guilty of such violation and either or both the owner and driver of
such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation.



(Ord. 1183-03, passed 10-21-03)



§ 79.03  PERMITS FOR OVERWEIGHT AND/OR OVER-DIMENSION VEHICLES.



   (A)   A permit shall be required for the movement of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles with a non-divisible load on roadways and bridges
within the jurisdiction of the village that exceeds the dimensions and
weights permitted for the particular roadways to be traversed whether they be
non-designated or designated roadways.



   (B)   The village with respect to any street or highway under its
jurisdiction may, upon application to the Village Police Department on forms
provided by the Police Department, and good cause being shown therefore issue
a special permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the
maximum specified in § 79.02.  The applicant shall furnish the following
information in the special permit application:



      (1)   The name and address of the owner or lessee of the
vehicle;



      (2)   Applicant's name;



      (3)   Type of permit requested, whether it be for a single
trip, round trip, or multiple routing;



      (4)   The description and registration (or the Illinois
Department of Transportation's (IDOT) registration number or classification)
of the power unit;



      (5)   Description of the object or vehicle to be moved;



      (6)   The number of axles of the vehicle or combination of
vehicles;



      (7)   The maximum axle weights of all single, tandem or series
axles;



      (8)   The maximum gross weight of the vehicle;



      (9)   The maximum width, length and height of the vehicle and
load; and,



      (10)   The requested routing over Village streets to and from
a specific location.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:



      (1)   A one-way or single trip movement means one move from
the point of origin to the point of destination.  Any additional stops
between the point of origin and the point of destination are expressly
prohibited.  Single trip permits are effective for seven consecutive days
from the date of issuance unless otherwise directed by the Police Department.



      (2)   Round trip movement means two trips over the same route
in opposite directions. Round trip permits are effective for 14 consecutive
days from the date of issuance.



      (3)   Multiple moves are those in such close proximity to each
other in distance or in time that the Police Department would consider
incorporating two or more permit moves within one permit application. 
Multiple move permits when granted by the Police Department shall be for a
period of time not to exceed 90 days from the date of issuance.



   (D)   The owner or his or her agent shall submit an application fee
based on the charts contained herein for a single routing which will be valid
for seven calendar days, round trip routing valid for 14 calendar days and
multiple routings valid for a base period of three months.  Permits may be
issued for a maximum of four consecutive permit periods (365 days) with the
permit fee calculated in the appropriate multiples of the base three month
multiple trip permit.  Permits are valid only for the date periods specified
on the permit and for the specific vehicle, load and routing as established
by the Chief of Police or designee.  No substitution of vehicle, load or
routing is permitted without express written permission by the Chief of
Police or his or her designee, and the permit must be carried in the vehicle
to which the permit applies at all times.



 

Permit size - weight (with load)
 
Fee


 
Single trip
 
Round trip
 
Multiple


Up to 100,000 pounds
 
50
 
75
 
150


100,001 - 120,000
 
75
 
100
 
200


120,001 - 150,000
 
100
 
125
 


Over 150,000
 
100*
 
200*
 



 



* Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road damage
fees.



 

Permit size - width (with load)
 
Fee


 
Single trip
 
Round trip
 
Multiple


Up to 12'
 
25
 
40
 
75


12'1" to 13' 6"
 
50
 
75
 
100


Over 13'6" wide
 
50*
 
75*
 



 



* Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road damage
fees



 

Permit size - height (with load)
 
Fee


 
Single trip
 
Round trip
 
Multiple


13'6" to 14'6"
 
25
 
40
 
75


Over 14'6"
 
50*
 
75
 



 



* Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road damage
fees



 

Permit size - length (with load)
 
Fee


 
Single trip
 
Round trip
 
Multiple


Up to 100'
 
25
 
40
 
75


Over to 100'
 
50*
 
75*
 



 



* Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road damage
fees



NOTE:



   If a vehicle requires a permit due to multiple weight and/or dimension
issues, the total fee will be based on the largest individual weight or
dimension factor only.



   (E)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee is authorized to
approve the application for approved routes.  Upon approval and payment of
all required fees, the Police Department shall issue a permit allowing
passage of the oversize and/or overweight vehicles over village streets. 
The permit shall be specific and contain:



      (1)   Permit number;



      (2)   The dates for which the permit is valid;



      (3)   Whether the permit is for single, round or multiple trip
routing;



      (4)   The description of object or vehicle to be moved;



      (5)   Authorized gross weight, axle weights, width, length and
height;



      (6)   The authorized routing over village streets, including
the origin and termination point within the village;



      (7)   The fee paid;



      (8)   The date and signature of the Chief of Police or his or
her designee; and,



      (9)   In addition, the permit will specify general conditions
that the permittee must comply with that are consistent and reasonable for
the protection of the general public and village streets.  A copy of all
permits issued will be provided to the Village Administrator for
informational purposes.



   (F)   It is the duty of the permittee to read and familiarize
himself or herself with the permit provisions upon receipt.  Undertaking of
the permit move is deemed prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit
and that:



      (1)   The permittee is in compliance with all operation
requirements;



      (2)   All dimension and weight limitations specified in the
permit will not be exceeded;



      (3)   All operation, registration and license requirements
have been complied with;



      (4)   All financial responsibilities, obligations and other
legal requirements have been met; and



      (5)   The permittee assumes all responsibility for injury or
damage to persons or to public or private property, including his or her own,
or to the object being transported, caused directly or indirectly by the
transportation or movement of vehicles and objects authorized under the
permit.  The permittee agrees to hold the village harmless from all suits,
claims. damages, or proceedings of any kind and to indemnify the village for
any claim it may be required to pay arising from the movement.



   (G)   The permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which the permit
applies at all times while operating on streets within the village and shall
be exhibited upon demand to any law enforcement officer, police officer or
authorized official of the village.



   (H)   Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the
provisions of a village permit, whether it be by size, weight or general
provisions, then, either or both the owner and driver of such vehicle shall
be deemed in violation of this chapter, and either or both the owner and the
driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation.



(Ord. 1183-03, passed 10-21-03; Am. Ord. 1258-05, passed 6-7-05)



§ 79.04  VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   As provided under the authority of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-111 and
15-316, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle upon any street where the
operation of that vehicle is prohibited by ordinance or statute and where
signs of such prohibition are posted.  Vehicles operating under the
authority of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-111 or 15-316 while utilizing
village streets under "reasonable access" rules will be considered in
violation of this section if they are not utilizing the most direct route to
points of loading and unloading.



(Ord. 1183-03, passed 10-21-03)



§ 79.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates,
disobeys, neglects, fails to comply with or resists enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500
for each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
calendar day on which a violation occurs.



   (B)   In addition to seeking a fine, as herein above provided the
Village Attorney may institute any proper action in the name of the village
to enjoin the violation of any provision of this chapter.



(Ord. 1183, passed 10-21-03)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   ANIMALS





         91.   FAIR HOUSING





         92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND FIREWORKS





         93.   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES





         94.   NUISANCES





         95.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         96.   TREES AND SHRUBS





         97.   ALARMS





         98.   PARADES AND OPEN AIR MEETINGS





         99.   GRAFFITI




CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   90.01   Cruelty unlawful



   90.02   Dangerous animals



   90.03   Diseased animals



   90.04   Housing to be kept clean; where animals may be kept



   90.05   Keeping bees unlawful



   90.06   Hunting unlawful



   90.07   Killing dangerous animals



   90.08   Loud noises; disturbing the peace



   90.09   Running at large unlawful; tying animal in street unlawful



   90.10   Dogs and cats; numbers permitted



Dogs



   90.15   License required; fee; badge to be worn by dog



   90.16   Impoundment and redemption; vicious dog may be euthanized by
police/village



   90.17   Dogs to be leashed



   90.18   Quarantine and examination of dog that has bitten a person



   90.19   Excrement to be removed and disposed of



   90.20   Supervision or leashing of dogs on owner's property



Electric and Electronic Pet Containment Systems



   90.25   Definition



   90.26   Compliance required



   90.27   Location of system



   90.28   Permit required



   90.29   Drawings and plans



   90.30   Signs



   90.31   Permit fees



Kennels and Pet Shops



   90.35   Definition



   90.36   License required; fee



   90.37   Sanitation



 



   90.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  CRUELTY UNLAWFUL.



   No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the village in any way. 
Any person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.



('52 Code, Ch. 14, § 504)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.02  DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous animal of any kind to run
at large within village.  Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae
naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit
from the Chief of Police.



('52 Code, Ch. 14, § 505)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  DISEASED ANIMALS.



   (A)   No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or an
infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large, or allowed to be exposed
in any public place whereby the health of man or beast may be affected; nor
shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the
owner thereof, except under the supervision of the Health Officer.



   (B)   It is hereby made the duty of the Health Officer to secure
such disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected
premises as to prevent the communication and spread of contagion or
infection, except in cases where the State Veterinarian is empowered to act.



('52 Code, Ch. 14, § 509)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  HOUSING TO BE KEPT CLEAN; WHERE ANIMALS MAY BE KEPT.



   (A)   No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any
animal is or may be kept to become unclean, or unwholesome, and it shall be
unlawful to keep any live swine or pigs, cattle or goats in the village.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to house or keep any live poultry or fowl
within 150 feet of any residence other than the residence of the owner of
such animals, or within 150 feet of any public street.



('52 Code, Ch. 14, § 510)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  KEEPING BEES UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor bees in the village.



('52 Code, Ch. 14, § 511)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  HUNTING UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in killing any animal
other than as prescribed by law in the village.



('52 Code, Ch. 21, § 747)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.07  KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   The members of the Police Department or any other person in the village
are authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any kind when it is necessary
for the protection of any person or property.



('52 Code, Ch. 14, § 508)



§ 90.08  LOUD NOISES; DISTURBING THE PEACE.



   It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the
peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night.



('52 Code, Ch. 14, § 506)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.09  RUNNING AT LARGE UNLAWFUL; TYING ANIMAL IN STREET UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to permit any cattle, horse, swine, sheep, goats
or poultry to run at large in the village; any such animal running at large
in any public place in the village shall be impounded in the manner provided
in this chapter.  It shall be further unlawful to picket or tie any such
animal in any of the streets of the village for the purpose of grazing or
feeding.



('52 Code, Ch. 14, § 507)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.10  DOGS AND CATS; NUMBERS PERMITTED.



   (A)   No person shall keep or harbor, within the corporate limits of
the village, more than three dogs or cats over two months old on any lot or
premises occupied by one family or more, except that any animal used as a
bona fide seeing eye dog shall not be counted in determining the number of
animals in a household.  Different parties living on the same lot or
premises or in the same building, or using the same premises, shall not keep
or harbor thereon more than three dogs or cats; provided, however, that if
the lot or premises is improved with or more than one dwelling unit, each
dwelling unit shall constitute a separate lot or premises for the purposes of
this section.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to duly-organized and approved
pet shops, small animal stores, kennels, zoological parks, performing animal
exhibitions, educational institutions, veterinary hospitals or animal
shelters.



(Ord. 1226-04, passed 10-19-04)  Penalty, see § 90.99



DOGS



§ 90.15  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; BADGE TO BE WORN BY DOG.



   (A)   Every person owning, keeping or harboring any dog within the
village shall register the same with the Village Clerk who shall keep a book
for that purpose, and it shall be the further duty of such person to pay to
the Village Clerk annually within 30 days after the first day of January of
each year, or upon acquiring any unlicensed dog thereafter a tax of $3 for
each dog kept or harbored by such person.



   (B)   The Village Clerk shall provide each and every year such
number of metal badges as may be necessary, of such size and shape as the
Clerk shall deem expedient, having stamped thereon the words "Dog License"
and the number indicating the year for which the tax is paid and it shall be
the duty of the Village Clerk to deliver one of such metal badges to the
person paying the tax upon any such dog at the time of payment.



   (C)   Every person keeping or harboring any dog so licensed shall
keep and maintain a collar around the neck of the dog with the metal badge,
as in division (B) described, securely fastened to the collar, and every dog
found in the village without such badge shall be deemed an unlicensed dog,
and shall be so disposed of by the Chief of Police or other police officer of
the village as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 166-61, passed 11-28-61)



§ 90.16  IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION; VICIOUS DOG MAY BE EUTHANIZED BY
POLICE/VILLAGE.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or other
designated village employee to capture and impound in a pound each and every
dog found at large, without a collar, tag or muzzle, as is in this subchapter
provided.  The Chief of Police or designee shall thereupon notify such owner
of said dog so taken if the name of the owner is ascertained, and said owner
shall be permitted to redeem said dog within seven days by paying all license
and other fees then upon said animal, together with the sum of $5 per day for
the cost of keeping such animal and the cost of advertising, if any.  Should
no redemption be made of any animal thus impounded, the pound keeper is
authorized to euthanize all animals so unredeemed at the end of the seventh
day.



   (B)   It shall be lawful for the Chief of Police or other designated
village employee to kill any vicious dog at large within the limits of the
village, which cannot safely be taken up and impounded.



(Ord. 166-61, passed 11-28-61; Am. Ord. 1231-04, passed 11-16-04)



§ 90.17  DOGS TO BE LEASHED.



   It shall be unlawful within the village limits to permit any dog to be
in any public place or on any private premises other than the owner's, unless
such dog is on a leash.



(Ord. 166-61, passed 11-28-61)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.18  QUARANTINE AND EXAMINATION OF DOG THAT HAS BITTEN A PERSON.



   Whenever any dog bites a person, the owner of said dog shall
immediately notify the Police Department, who shall order the dog held in a
licensed kennel for a period of ten days at the owner's expense.  The dog
shall be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and again at the end
of the ten-day period.  If at the end of ten days a licensed veterinarian is
convinced that the dog is then free from rabies, the dog shall be released
from quarantine or from the pound as the case may be.  If the dog dies in
the meanwhile, its head shall be sent to the State Department of Health for
examination for rabies.



(Ord. 166-61, passed 11-28-61)



§ 90.19  EXCREMENT TO BE REMOVED AND DISPOSED OF.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit a dog
to be on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such
person, unless such person has in his immediate possession a device for the
removal of excrement and a depository for the transmission of excrement to a
receptacle located upon property owned or possessed by such person.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person in control of, causing or
permitting any dog to be on any property, public or private, not owned or
possessed by such person to fail to remove excrement left by such dog to a
proper receptacle located on property owned or possessed by such person.



(Ord. 454-76, passed 8-17-76)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.20  SUPERVISION OR LEASHING OF DOGS ON OWNER'S PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful within the village to permit any dog to be in the
front yard of any property unless such dog is on a leash or is being
supervised by a person that is in the front yard with the dog.  This section
may be enforced without regard to whether the front yard is enclosed by any
fence, by an electric or electronic pet containment system, or by any other
barrier.



(Ord. 1257-05, passed 5-17-05)  Penalty, see § 90.99



ELECTRIC AND ELECTRONIC PET CONTAINMENT SYSTEMS



§ 90.25  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELECTRIC OR ELECTRONIC PET CONTAINMENT SYSTEM.   Any electric or
electronic system, located either aboveground or underground, that is
designed and installed for the purpose of containing pets within any
geographic area through electric or electronic means.



(Ord. 1257-05, passed 5-17-05)



§ 90.26  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   Every electric or electronic pet containment system constructed,
installed and maintained hereafter shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1257-05, passed 5-17-05)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.27  LOCATION OF SYSTEM.



   Electric or electronic pet containment systems shall be a permitted
accessory use in any residence district provided that it conforms with this
chapter and other applicable ordinances of the village, including the zoning
ordinance.  Electric or electronic pet containment systems shall be
permitted in the front yard of a property only if it is to be located at a
distance not less than ten feet from the front yard property line.



(Ord. 1257-05, passed 5-17-05)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.28  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to proceed with construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any electric or electronic pet containment
system within the village unless permits therefor shall have first been
obtained from the Building Commissioner.



(Ord. 1257-05, passed 5-17-05)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.29  DRAWINGS AND PLANS.



   (A)   All drawings and plans for the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any electric or electronic pet containment
system for which a permit is required shall first be presented to the
Building Commissioner for examination and approval as to proper location,
construction and use.



   (B)   All plans and drawings shall be drawn to a scale of not less
than one-eighth of an inch to the foot, on paper or cloth, in ink, or by some
process that will not fade or obliterate.  All distances and dimensions
shall be accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing
the lot lines and including information pertaining to the electric or
electronic pet containment system, and all appurtenances thereto.



   (C)   All electric or electronic pet containment systems shall be
constructed in conformity with the approved plans.  If any deviations from
such plans are desired, a supplementary plan covering that portion of the
work involved shall be filed for approval and shall conform to the provisions
of this chapter.



(Ord. 1257-05, passed 5-17-05)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.30  SIGNS.



   (A)   For any property on which an electric or electronic pet
containment system has been installed within the front yard of the property,
the presence of the system shall be indicated by the placement of no less
than two signs on the property, with one sign to be located at each corner of
the front yard property line.  Such signs shall be located in such a manner
that they are able to be read from front yard parkway.  Any signs required
by this section shall measure no more than one square foot in area.  Any
signs required by this section shall not require a separate permit under any
other provision of the village's ordinances, including the zoning ordinance.



   (B)   If a property has a front yard measuring greater than 66 feet
in length, an additional sign indicating the presence of an electric or
electronic pet containment system shall be required, to be located near the
middle of the front yard property line.



(Ord. 1257-05, passed 5-17-05)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.31  PERMIT FEES.



   The fee for a permit for the construction, installation, alteration or
enlargement of an electric or electronic pet containment system shall be $5.



(Ord. 1257-05, passed 5-17-05)



KENNELS AND PET SHOPS



§ 90.35  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SMALL ANIMAL STORE .  Any establishment for raising, training,
boarding or selling dogs, cats, birds, mice, rats or other small animals for
hire or profit, or where more than three dogs or three cats are harbored or
kept.



('52 Code, Ch. 13, § 382)



§ 90.36  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a small animal store anywhere in the
village, without having first secured a license therefor.  The annual fee
for such license shall be $25.



('52 Code, Ch. 13, § 381)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.37  SANITATION.



   Every place used as a small animal store shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.  No refuse or waste material shall be allowed to remain
thereon for more than 24 hours.  All animals therein shall be humanely
treated, and any animal having a contagious disease shall be isolated and
properly treated.



('52 Code, Ch. 13, § 383)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not provided shall be fined, upon conviction thereof, not
less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of § 90.19 shall be deemed
to be guilty of an offense and shall be punished, upon conviction thereof, by
a fine of not less than $10 for the first offense, $20 for the second
offense, $40 for the third offense, $80 for the fourth offense, $160 for the
fifth offense, and $200 for each offense thereafter.  If any violation shall
be of a continuing nature, each day of violation shall be deemed a separate
offense and subject to the progressive penalties contained herein.



   (C)   In addition to any other penalties provided by this chapter,
any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be
required to immediately comply with all other applicable provisions of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, compliance with the front yard
setback requirements for electric or electronic pet containment systems
described in § 90.27.



(Ord. 454-76, passed 8-17-76; Am. Ord. 1257-05, passed 5-17-05)



CHAPTER 91:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Policy



   91.02   Definitions



   91.03   Notice of regulations to be posted



Fair Housing Regulations



   91.10   Prohibited acts



   91.11   Limitations



Administration



   91.20   Human Relations Commission created



   91.21   Appointment; removal; quorum



   91.22   Duties of the Commission



   91.23   Complaint procedures; investigation and hearing



   91.24   Enforcement action by Board of Trustees



 



   91.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  POLICY.



   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village, and the purpose
of this chapter, to secure to all persons living or desiring to live in the
village full and equal opportunity to purchase, lease, rent or occupy real
property without discrimination based on race, color, religion, national
origin or ancestry.



(Ord. 290-69, passed 12-17-68)



§ 91.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   REAL ESTATE BROKER .  Any natural person, partnership, corporation or
other entity, who for consideration sells, purchases, exchanges or rents (or
offers or negotiates to do any of the foregoing) real property of another.



   REAL PROPERTY.   Any real estate, vacant land, building or structure
or portion thereof in the village, but such term shall not include rooms for
rental to one or two persons in a single-family dwelling, the remainder of
which is occupied by the owner or members of his immediate family, or a
lessee of the entire dwelling or members of the lessee's immediate family.



(Ord. 290-69, passed 12-17-68)



§ 91.03  NOTICE OF REGULATIONS TO BE POSTED.



   Notice of the provisions of this chapter shall be published and
distributed by the Human Relations Commission.  Said notice shall be posted
and maintained in a conspicuous public area in the place of business of every
real estate broker covered by this chapter.



(Ord. 290-69, passed 12-17-68) 



FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS



§ 91.10  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   No owner of real property, lessee, sublessee, real estate broker or
salesperson, lender, financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any of
the foregoing, shall discriminate against any person because of race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry in regard to the sale, lease, or rental
of or dealings concerning real property.  Any such discrimination shall be
considered an unfair real estate practice and a violation of this chapter. 
Without limiting the foregoing, it shall also be an unfair real estate
practice and a violation of this chapter for any real estate broker or other
person to:



   (A)   Publish, circulate, issue or display, or cause to be
published, circulated, issued or displayed, any communication, notice,
advertisement, sign or other writing of any kind relating to the sale, rental
or leasing of any real property which will indicate or express any such
discrimination.



   (B)   Exploit or overcharge any person for real property because of
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry.



   (C)   Solicit for sale or lease, or listing for sale or lease, of
any real property on the ground of loss of value due to the present or
prospective entry into the neighborhood of any person or persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry.



   (D)   Make, distribute, or cause to be made or distributed, any
written material or statements designed to induce any owner of real property
to sell or lease the owner's property because of any present or prospective
change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry of persons
in the neighborhood.



   (E)   Refuse to sell, lease or rent any real property because of
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry of the proposed buyer or
tenant.



   (F)   Refuse examination of copies of any listing of any real
property to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry.



   (G)   Enter into a listing agreement which prohibits the sale,
lease, or rental of real property to any person because of race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry.



   (H)   Represent to any person, deliberately and knowingly, that any
real property is not available for inspection, purchase, sale, rent or lease,
when in fact it is so available, because of the person's race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry.



   (I)   Refuse to receive, or in the case of a real estate agent to
transmit, a bona fide offer for the purchase, sale, exchange, lease or rental
of any real property because of race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry.



   (J)   Sell, lease or rent, or offer to sell, lease or rent any real
property on terms, conditions, or privileges that discriminate between
persons because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry.



   (K)   Discriminate, or participate in discrimination, in connection
with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, construction,
repair or maintenance of any real property because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry.



(Ord. 290-69, passed 12-17-68)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.11  LIMITATIONS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall require an owner to offer real property
to the public at large before selling, leasing or renting it, nor shall this
chapter be deemed to prohibit owners from giving preference to prospective
buyers or tenants for any reason other than race, color, religion, national
origin or ancestry.



(Ord. 290-69, passed 12-17-68)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 91.20  HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION CREATED.



   There is hereby created a Human Relations Commission which shall
consist of five members appointed by the President with the consent and
approval of the Board of Trustees.  All five members of the Commission shall
be appointed from the community at large and all members shall be resident
owners of real property in the village and legally qualified voters.



(Ord. 290-69, passed 12-17-68)



§ 91.21  APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL; QUORUM.



   Each member appointed shall serve for a term of three years or until
such member's successor is duly appointed and qualified.  Members shall be
removable for cause by the President with the consent of the Board of
Trustees, upon written charges and after a public hearing.  The President
shall designate one member of the Commission to be its Chairperson.  Three
members shall constitute a quorum and the concurrence of a majority of the
quorum shall be sufficient for action by the Commission.



(Ord. 290-69, passed 12-17-68)



§ 91.22  DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.



   It shall be the duty of the Human Relations Commission to receive and
investigate complaints charging unfair real estate practices, and seek
conciliation of such complaints, seek compliance by violators, hold hearings,
make findings of fact, issue recommendations and publish its findings of fact
and recommendations in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 290-69, passed 12-17-68)



§ 91.23  COMPLAINT PROCEDURES; INVESTIGATION AND HEARING.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved in any manner by an unfair real estate
practice may file a written complaint with the Commission setting forth the
grievance.  Said complaint must be filed within 60 days of the occurrence of
the alleged unfair real estate practice and shall state the name and address
of the complainant and of the person or persons against whom the complaint is
brought and shall also state the alleged facts surrounding the alleged unfair
real estate practice.



   (B)   After the filing of any complaint the Chairman of the
Commission shall designate three members as a panel to make prompt
investigation in connection therewith.  If the panel determines that the
respondent has not engaged in any unlawful practice, it shall state its
findings of fact in writing and the Commission shall dismiss the complaint. 
If the panel determines, after such investigation, that probable cause exists
for the allegations made in the complaint they shall immediately endeavor to
eliminate the alleged practice by conference, conciliation and persuasion. 
In case of failure to eliminate such practice within 60 days of the date of
filing of the complaint, the Commission shall then proceed promptly with a
full hearing of the complaint.  The Commission shall then send a copy of
such complaint, or a description of the alleged practice in the event no
complaint has been filed, to all parties, and at the same time notify them of
a full hearing of the alleged practice at a time and place to be specified in
such notice.  Any real estate broker or other person charged with the unfair
real estate practice shall have the right to file an answer, and such person
and complaint may appear at the hearing in person or be represented by
counsel, and submit testimony.



   (C)   Such hearing shall be conducted by the entire Commission or a
quorum thereof.  The Commission shall not be bound by the strict rules of
evidence.  The Commission shall have the power to administer oaths and to
take sworn testimony.  No report shall be delayed more than 60 days after
the date of the issuance of notice for the first hearing.  At the conclusion
of the hearing the Commission shall file with the Board of Trustees and mail
to the parties involved a written report of its findings and conclusions,
including recommendations, if any, regarding the filing of a complaint with
the Department of Registration and Education of the state, against any real
estate broker found to have an unfair real estate practice, seeking
suspension or revocation of the license issued to such broker by the state,
and the filing of suit against any person found to have committed an unfair
real estate practice.



(Ord. 290-69, passed 12-17-68)



§ 91.24  ENFORCEMENT ACTION BY BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   Upon receipt of any report under § 91.23, and after consideration
thereof at a regular meeting, the Board of Trustees shall take such action as
is appropriate for the enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 290-69, passed 12-17-68)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Any person committing an unfair real estate practice shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 or more than
$500.



(Ord. 290-69, passed 12-17-68)



CHAPTER 92:  FIRE PREVENTION AND FIREWORKS



Section



Explosives and Fireworks



   92.01   Fireworks unlawful; exception for permitted public displays



   92.02   Storing nitroglycerine or TNT unlawful



   92.03   Explosives to be stored according to rules of State Fire
Marshal



 



   92.99   Penalty



EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS



§ 92.01 FIREWORKS UNLAWFUL; EXCEPTION FOR PERMITTED PUBLIC DISPLAYS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to store, discharge or set off any
fireworks or give any pyrotechnic displays in the village except as herein
provided.



   (B)   No public exhibition of fireworks or pyrotechnics shall be
given unless a permit is first obtained from the President and Board of
Trustees.  All such public displays shall be under the supervision of a
competent person, and shall be supervised by the Chief of Police or some
member of the police department assigned to this duty by the Police Chief.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
sell, offer for sale or keep for the purpose of selling any fireworks in the
village at any time.



('52 Code, Ch. 20, § 647)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.02  STORING NITROGLYCERINE OR TNT UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to keep or store any nitroglycerine or the
explosive commonly known as TNT in the village in any quantities, excepting
for medicinal or laboratory purposes and for such purposes no more than one
pound shall be stored in any one building or premises.



('52 Code, Ch. 20, § 648)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.03  EXPLOSIVES TO BE STORED ACCORDING TO RULES OF STATE FIRE MARSHAL.



   All explosives must be kept or stored in accordance with the rules of
the State Fire Marshal, subject to the provisions of this subchapter.



('52 Code, Ch. 20, § 649)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined according to the penalty
set forth in § 10.99 of this code.



CHAPTER 93:  INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES



Section



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Nuisance



   93.03   Duty of owner



   93.04   Notice



   93.05   Impounding of vehicle



   93.06   Towing and storage charges



   93.07   Procedures following towing



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE.   Any motor vehicle from which for a period
of at least 30 days the engine, wheels or other parts essential for the its
safe operation have been removed, altered or damaged, thereby making the
vehicle incapable of being driven under its own power or unsafe for operation
on the streets and highways of this state due to its inability to comply with
the Illinois Vehicle Code.  Any motor vehicle having an expired license
registration for more than 30 days or that is without a current village
sticker for a similar time period, may be considered an INOPERABLE MOTOR
VEHICLE for the purposes of this chapter.  INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES shall
not include any motor vehicles that are kept within enclosed buildings.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any wheeled vehicle that is, or is intended to be,
operable as a self-propelled vehicle.



   PROPERTY.   Any real property within the village which is not a street
or highway.



(Ord. 442-74, passed 10-15-74; Am. Ord. 1133-02, passed 5-7-02)



§ 93.02  NUISANCE.



   Inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private property, are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance.



(Ord. 442-74, passed 10-15-74)



§ 93.03  DUTY OF OWNER.



   All persons having control of any inoperable motor vehicle shall
dispose of same within five days after receipt of written notice or within
five days after posted notice from the village authorities, or from the Chief
of Police or any member of the Police Department designated by the Chief of
Police, commanding the disposition of such inoperable motor vehicle, and
removal of same.



(Ord. 442-74, passed 10-15-74; Am. Ord. 1133-02, passed 5-7-02)  Penalty,
see § 93.99



§ 93.04  NOTICE.



   (A)   If an operable vehicle does not display any current license or
registration plates or decals from which the last known owner may be
determined in a reasonably expeditious manner, notice shall be conspicuously
posted on the windshield of such vehicle and, in addition, shall also be sent
certified by U.S. Mail to the person or persons in control of the property on
which such inoperable vehicle sits.



   (B)   If the inoperable vehicle displays any current license or
registration plates or decals from which the current or last known owner may
be determined in a reasonably expeditious manner, such notice shall be
conspicuously posted on the windshield of such inoperable vehicle and, in
addition, shall also be sent certified by U.S. Mail to the current or last
known owner or to the person or persons in control of the property on which
such inoperable vehicle sits.



   (C)   Such notice shall advise the owner(s) of the legal or factual
basis for the presumption of abandonment and of the opportunity to be heard
on the propriety of the pending impoundment.



(Ord. 1133-02, passed 5-7-02)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.05  IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLE.



   After five days following the written notice and the owner or other
person fails to remove or dispose of said inoperable vehicle, the Chief of
Police or any person designated by the Chief is hereby authorized to enter
onto private real property and remove any inoperable vehicle which reasonably
appears to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 442-74, passed 10-15-74)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.06  TOWING AND STORAGE CHARGES.



   Whenever an inoperable vehicle is towed or removed by a towing service
upon order of the Chief of Police, or the designee thereof, the owner of the
inoperable vehicle or the person or persons in control of the property on
which such inoperable vehicle is located, shall be responsible for all towing
and storage charges.



(Ord. 1133-02, passed 5-7-02)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.07  PROCEDURES FOLLOWING TOWING.



   (A)   Whenever an inoperable vehicle is authorized to be towed or
removed by the Chief of Police, or the designee thereof, the village shall,
within 48 hours of the towing or removal of such inoperable vehicle, provide
notification to the last registered owner, lienholder, or other person
legally entitled to ownership of the inoperable vehicle, if known, and also
to person or persons in control of any property from which such inoperable
vehicle may have been towed or removed, that the inoperable vehicle has been
towed pursuant to this chapter and providing the name and current telephone
number of the towing service towing or removing the inoperable vehicle.



   (B)   If the village is unable to determine the identity of the
registered owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to ownership of
the inoperable vehicle within 48 hours of the towing or removal, then
notification shall be provided within 48 hours after the identity of the
registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to ownership
of the inoperable vehicle is determined.



(Ord. 1133-02, passed 5-7-02)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall be subjected to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $500
on conviction thereof, with each day constituting a separate offense.



(Ord. 442-74, passed 10-15-74)



CHAPTER 94:  NUISANCES



Section



   94.01   Definition



   94.02   Public nuisances prohibited



   94.03   Public nuisances affecting health



   94.04   Nuisances affecting peace and safety



   94.05   Littering public places



   94.06   Willow trees and osage hedges prohibited in certain places



   94.07   Height of weeds, grass and plants restricted



   94.08   Whistles



   94.09   Abatement



   94.10   Lien



 



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE.   A thing, act, condition or use of property which
shall continue for such length of time as to:



   (A)   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health,
repose or safety of the public; or



   (B)   In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property; or



   (C)   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend
to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway,
stream, body of water or other public way.



(Ord. 539-83, passed 1-25-83)



§ 94.02  PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to
exist any public nuisance within the village or within the police
jurisdiction of the village.



(Ord. 539-83, passed 1-25-83)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.03  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.



   The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but shall not be
construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of
§ 94.01:



   (A)   Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death;



   (B)   Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash,
rubbish, rotting lumber, lumber and building materials being stored outside
for future use for an unreasonable period of time, bedding, packing material,
abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles, parts, junk or machinery, scrap metal
or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or
other vermin may breed;



   (C)   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects
can multiply;



   (D)   The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes,
gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the village limits in such
quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or
to threaten or cause substantial injury to property;



   (E)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake,
canal or body of water by sewage, or industrial wastes to other substances;
or any act in violation of the Environmental Protection Act;



   (F)   Any use of property, substances or things within the village
emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or
disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical
senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience
the health of any appreciable number of persons within the village;



   (G)   All abandoned wells which have not been securely covered or
secured from public use by a licensed well contractor;



   (H)   Any obstruction in or across any watercourse, drainage ditch
or ravine; the filling of drainage ditches or areas designated for surface
water runoff; the filling between lots and other areas to cause one's
neighbor or neighbors a water or drainage problem;



   (I)   The deposit of garbage, rubbish or any offensive substance on
any street, sidewalk or public place, or on any private property, except as
may be permitted by ordinance;



   (J)   Any rank growth of weeds, such as Jimson, Burdock, Ragweed,
Thistle, Cocklebur, or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or
tract of land in the village.



(Ord. 539-83, passed 1-25-83)



   (K)   It shall be a nuisance and unlawful to plant or permit the
growth of the bush of the species of tall, common or European barberry,
further known as Barberis Vulgaris, or its horticultural varieties within the
village.



('52 Code, Ch. 20, § 653)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.



   The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such
enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting
public peace or safety coming within the provisions of § 94.01:



   (A)   All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the
provisions of the ordinances of the village relating to materials and manner
of construction of buildings and structures; all tree or play houses erected
without first obtaining a building permit;



   (B)   All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which
purport to be or may be mistaken as official traffic-control devices placed
or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing;



   (C)   All trees, fences, hedges, billboards or other obstructions
which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways
from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk;



   (D)   All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less
than eight feet above the surface thereof or less than ten feet above the
surface of a public alley way, and not less than 14 feet above the surface of
a public street;



   (E)   All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws
of the state and ordinances of the village;



   (F)   All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of
repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
use;



   (G)   All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are
strung less than 15 feet above the surface of the street or ground;



   (H)   All loud and discordant noises or vibrations of any kind;



   (I)   All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks
and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the
ordinances of the Village or which, although made in accordance with such
ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after
the purpose thereof has been accomplished;



   (J)   All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused
basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk;



   (K)   All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors
and other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a
device for opening from the inside by pushing only;



   (L)   Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a
public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk
which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free
use of the streets or sidewalks;



   (M)   Any advertisements or signs affixed to any building, wall,
fence, sidewalk, street or other private or public property without
permission of the owner thereof, but which otherwise complies with the other
village ordinances;



   (N)   Any sign, marquee or awning which is in an unsafe condition,
or which overhangs any roadway, or which overhangs any sidewalk less than
eight feet above the sidewalk surface;



   (O)   The discharge or emission of any contaminant into the
environment so as to cause or tend to cause air or water pollution contrary
to the provisions of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, ILCS Ch. 415,
Act 5, §§ 1 et seq., or the performance of any action in violation of said
Act;



   (P)   Any nuisance so defined by the ILCS Ch. 740, Act 105, §§ 1
et seq.



(Ord. 539-83, passed 1-25-83)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.05  LITTERING PUBLIC PLACES.



   It is unlawful for any person to deposit, place, leave or dump any
refuse, rubbish, junk, trash or waste material of any kind in or upon any
street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, park or other public place in the
village.  For the purpose of this section, vehicles or parts of vehicles not
in condition for normal use shall be considered as junk or trash.



(Ord. 539-83, passed 1-25-83)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.06  WILLOW TREES AND OSAGE HEDGES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.



   The planting of willow trees on the right-of-way of streets and alleys
in the village is hereby prohibited.  Osage hedges shall not be planted or
maintained anywhere in the village.



(Ord. 539-83, passed 1-25-83)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.07  HEIGHT OF WEEDS, GRASS AND PLANTS RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants
other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, to grow to a
height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the village, and any such plants or
weeds exceeding such height are declared to be a nuisance.



(Ord. 539-83, passed 1-25-83)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.08  WHISTLES.



   It shall be unlawful to blow or cause to be blown or sounded any steam
whistle of any stationary or steam engine except as a signal for starting or
stopping work or in emergencies to avoid injury to persons or property.



('52 Code, Ch. 20, § 762)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.09  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Inspection of premises.  Whenever complaint is made to the
Village President, or other official, that a public nuisance exists, or has
existed within the village, they shall promptly notify the Building
Commissioner, or some other village official, whom the President shall
designate, who shall forthwith inspect or cause to be inspected the premises
and shall make a written report of his findings to the President.  Whenever
practicable, the inspecting officer shall cause photographs to be made of the
premises and shall file the same in the office of the Village Clerk.



   (B)   Summary abatement.



      (1)   Notice to the owner.  If the inspecting officer shall
determine that a public nuisance exists on private property and that there is
great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or
decency, the village health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Village
President may direct the Chief of Police, or the Chief's designee, to serve a
notice on the owner, or, if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or
person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance and to post a copy of
the notice on the premises.  Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant or
person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove
such nuisance within ten days, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter
and state that unless such nuisance is so abated, the village will cause the
same to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or
person causing, permitting or maintaining the same, as the case may be.



      (2)    Abatement by village.  If the nuisance is not abated
within the time provided or if the owner, occupant or person causing the
nuisance cannot be found, the Building Commissioner or some other village
official, whom the President shall designate, shall cause the abatement or
removal of such public nuisance.  Express authority to enter upon the
premises where weeds are growing and to cut, destroy and remove weeds is
hereby conferred upon the village.



   (C)   Abatement by court action.  If the inspecting officer shall
determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the
nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger
to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the inspecting
officer shall file a written report of findings with the President, who shall
cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in the name of the
village.



(Ord. 539-83, passed 1-25-83)



§ 94.10  LIEN.



   (A)   Notice of debt.  In addition to any other penalty imposed by
this chapter for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or
maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by
the village shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person
causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and if notice to abate the
nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the
real estate as other special taxes.



   (B)   Lien.  Charges for grading, removing debris and destruction
of weeds shall be a lien upon the premises.  Whenever a bill for such
charges remains unpaid for 60 days after it has been rendered, the Clerk may
file with the County Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim.  This
statement shall contain a legal description of the premises, the expenses and
costs incurred by the village and the date the weeds were cut, and a notice
that the village claims a lien for this amount.  Notice of such lien claim
shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if the owner's address is
known.  Failure of the Clerk to record such lien claim or to mail such
notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect
the right to foreclose the lien for such charges as provided in division (C)
following.



   (C)   Foreclosure of lien.  Property subject to a lien for unpaid
weed cutting charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same and the
proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting
costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens.  Such
foreclosure shall be in equity in the name of the village.  The Village
Attorney shall institute such proceedings, in the name of the village, in any
court having jurisdiction over such matter, against any property for which
such bill has remained unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered.



(Ord. 539-83, passed 1-25-83)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Any owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining a
nuisance as described by this chapter, and who has received an order or
notice of an alleged violation of this chapter, shall be subject to a penalty
of not less than $10 nor more than $500 for each day each alleged violation
continues.



(Ord. 539-83, passed 1-25-83)



CHAPTER 95:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



Administration



   95.01   Supervision



Construction



   95.10   Sidewalks to be constructed in connection with building
permit



   95.11   Construction permit required



   95.12   Bond



   95.13   Specifications



   95.14   Driveways



   95.15   Erection of poles and wires; permit required



Excavations and Openings



   95.25   Excavations



   95.26   Openings in public way; permit required



   95.27   Bond



   95.28   Supervision of work; restoration of pavement



   95.29   Cost of supervision and inspection; return of deposit



Use of Streets and Sidewalks



   95.40   Injury to pavement



   95.41   Streets and sidewalks to be maintained in good repair



   95.42   Reporting defects



   95.43   Obstruction unlawful



   95.44   Barricades; disturbing unlawful



   95.45   Display of goods for sale unlawful; marking signs or
advertisements unlawful



   95.46   Encroachment



   95.47   Obstruction of drains unlawful



   95.48   Gas pumps; permit and bond required



   95.49   Barbed wire or electric current fences prohibited



   95.50   Deposits on street



   95.51   Deposits on sidewalks



   95.52   Burning leaves and rubbish prohibited



   95.53   Articles on windows



   95.54   Scaffolds



   95.55   Dumping of snow prohibited



   95.56   Mailboxes



ADMINISTRATION



§ 95.01  SUPERVISION.



   All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways shall be
under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works.  The
Superintendent shall have supervision over all work thereon, and cleaning
thereof, and shall be charged with the enforcement of all code provisions
relating to such public places (except traffic ordinances) and is hereby
authorized to enforce such provisions.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 1)



CONSTRUCTION



§ 95.10  SIDEWALKS TO BE CONSTRUCTED IN CONNECTION WITH BUILDING PERMIT.



   Any person, firm or corporation making application for a building
permit shall at the time of making application for such permit, and in
consideration of the issuance of such permit by the village, agree, as part
of the improvement to be erected, to construct sidewalks along the front and
(in cases of corner lots) along the side of said premises, as do not then
have good usable sidewalks, and to replace such broken or unrepairable
sections of such existing sidewalks as the village shall designate; and to
repair and patch any such sections of sidewalk which are broken or cracked,
but which are repairable, whether or not such breaks and cracks occur before
or after construction of said building. Such sidewalks shall be built or
repaired to comply with the ordinances and other requirements of the village
relating to construction of sidewalks and shall be constructed under the
supervision and subject to the approval of the village.  The proper grade at
which such sidewalk or sidewalks shall be constructed shall be furnished by
the village without charge to the applicant.  No application for water
service for such premises need be granted by the village unless and until
such sidewalk shall have been constructed or repaired and found acceptable by
the village.  The foregoing provisions shall not apply to any lots within
any subdivision the plat or plan for which, or covenants in the deeds for
which, contemplate that no sidewalks shall or will be constructed in such
subdivision.



(Ord. 185-62, passed 11-6-62)



§ 95.11  CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public
street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or to repair the same without
having first secured a permit therefor.  Applications for such permits shall
be made to the Village Clerk, and shall state the location of the intended
pavement or repair, the extent thereof, and the person or firm who is to do
the actual construction work.  No such permit shall be issued except on
order of the President and Board of Trustees.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.12  BOND.



   Each applicant shall file a bond in the amount of $10,000, with
sureties to be approved by the President and Board of Trustees, conditioned
to indemnify the village from any loss or damage resulting from the work
undertaken or the manner of doing the same.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 3)



§ 95.13  SPECIFICATIONS.



   All street and sidewalk pavement shall be made in conformity with the
specifications laid down from time to time by the President and Board of
Trustees.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 4)



§ 95.14  DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any driveway in
or across any public walk in the village where this necessitates any
interference with or change in the grade of any public sidewalk, curb or
parkway without having first obtained a permit therefor from the Board of
Trustees.  Applications for such permits shall state the size, location and
material to be used in such driveway and it shall be unlawful to depart from
such specifications or vary from them without permission from the President
and Board of Trustees.



   (B)   A fee of $5 shall be paid for such permit.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the person, firm or corporation
maintaining any such driveway to keep the same free from snow and ice or any
obstruction and to keep the same in good repair where the same crosses a
public sidewalk.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 22)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.15  ERECTION OF POLES AND WIRES; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles
or wires over any public place, street, alley or other public way without
having first secured permission from the President and Board of Trustees.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



EXCAVATIONS AND OPENINGS



§ 95.25  EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to make any excavation in or tunnel under
any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the village
without having first secured a permit therefor.  Applications for such
permits shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall specify the intended
location and purpose of the excavation.



   (B)   No person shall make any such excavation or tunnel without
first having secured and furnished the village with a copy of or certificates
of a bond or policy conditioned to indemnify and hold the village harmless
for any loss, damage or liability resulting from the work done or any acts or
omissions in connection therewith.



   (C)   Any such person making any such excavation shall refill the
same properly and shall restore the surface to its condition before the
excavation was made, as soon as possible.



   (D)   All such excavations, refills and resurfacing shall be made
subject to the supervision and under the direction of the Superintendent of
Public Works.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.26  OPENINGS IN PUBLIC WAY; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)    It shall be unlawful for any person to make an opening in any
public way or other public place without first obtaining a permit therefor
from the Superintendent of Public Works.



   (B)   The Superintendent of Public Works shall not issue any permit
for the opening of any public way or public place until the Superintendent
shall have been fully advised of the time, place and character of such
opening and the purpose thereof.  All applications for permits shall be
accompanied by a plat or pencil tracing or sketch showing the location,
character and dimensions of any proposed opening for the installation of new
work, or the location and character of any alterations involving changes in
the location of pipes, conduits, wires or other conductors.



   (C)   Before a permit shall be granted to open any public way or
public place for any purpose, the Superintendent of Public Works shall make
an estimate of the cost of inspection and restoring the said pavement and
surface to a condition equally as good as before it shall have been so opened
with a fair additional sum as margin for contingent damages.



   (D)   When a permit shall be issued, it shall be transmitted to the
Village Clerk, and the Clerk shall collect the amount of the said estimate
and the fee for the said permit before delivering the same.



(Ord. 128-58, passed 12-2-58)



§ 95.27  BOND.



   No permit shall be issued permitting or allowing the tearing up,
removing or repairing of any public way, or any part thereof, until the
applicant for such permit shall first have executed to the village a good and
sufficient bond in an amount to be fixed by the Superintendent of Public
Works and in no case to be less than $10,000, with sureties to be approved by
said Superintendent of Pubic Works, conditioned to indemnify, save and keep
harmless the village from any and all loss, cost, damage, expense or
liability of any kind whatsoever which the village may suffer, which the
village may be put to or which may be recovered from the village, from or on
account of the issuance of such permit, from or on account of any act or
thing done by virtue of the authority given in such permit or for any damage,
loss or expense to any person caused by the tearing up, removing or repairing
of such public way or part thereof.



(Ord. 128-58, passed 12-2-58)



§ 95.28  SUPERVISION OF WORK; RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.



   (A)   All work done under authority of such permit shall be
supervised and inspected by the Superintendent of Public Works.



   (B)   Immediately after the completion of the work done under such
authority, the Superintendent of Public Works shall forthwith cause to be put
back and restored and replaced in proper shape and condition any pavement
displaced by reason of such work, and shall cause to be restored and replaced
the surface of any public way which may be opened or otherwise disturbed. 
All of this work shall be done in such manner as shall be satisfactory to the
said Superintendent of Public Works, and as will leave the said public way in
a condition equally as good as before it was opened or disturbed under public
authority.



(Ord. 128-58, passed 12-2-58)



§ 95.29  COST OF SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION; RETURN OF DEPOSIT.



   (A)   The cost of such supervision and inspection, and restoring the
said pavement or public way shall be determined by the Superintendent of
Public Works, and shall be deducted and paid into the Village Treasury from
the amount deposited with the Village Clerk as hereinbefore provided.



   (B)   After completion of the work to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent of Public Works, the Superintendent shall certify to the
Village Treasurer the amount of any surplus remaining from the amount
deposited in such case, and said surplus shall thereupon be paid over to the
proper claimant.  If for any reason the amount of such deposit shall be
insufficient to cover the cost of such work, or if any damage shall have been
done to any underground work or connections, or otherwise, which shall have
caused increased expenditure, the amount of such deficiency or damage shall
be certified to the Village Treasurer, who shall collect the same from the
person to whom the permit was issued.



(Ord. 128-58, passed 12-2-58)



USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



§ 95.40  INJURY TO PAVEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful to walk upon, drive any vehicle or animal upon or
injure any newly street or alley pavement while the same is guarded by a
warning sign or barricade; or to knowingly injury any street, sidewalk or
alley pavement.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.41  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS TO BE MAINTAINED IN GOOD REPAIR.



   All public street, alley and sidewalk pavement shall be in good
repair.  Such repair work, whether done by the village or by the abutting
owner, shall be under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 6)



§ 95.42  REPORTING DEFECTS.



   It shall be the duty of every village officer or employee becoming
cognizant of any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk, or any obstruction
thereof, to report the same to the Superintendent of Public Works as soon as
possible.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.43  OBSTRUCTION UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause,
create or maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public way, except as may be specifically authorized by ordinance or by the
Superintendent of Public Works.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.44  BARRICADES; DISTURBING UNLAWFUL.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation laying or repairing any
pavement on a street, sidewalk or other public place or making an excavation
in the same shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury of any
person or vehicle by reason of the work; such barricades shall be protected
by suitable lights at night time.



   (B)   Any defect in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent
injury; and any person, firm or corporation properly maintaining any opening
or excavation in any such place shall guard such opening or excavation while
the same remains open by proper barricades and lights.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 9)



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any
barricade or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or
excavation or opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.45  DISPLAY OF GOODS FOR SALE UNLAWFUL; MARKING SIGNS OR
ADVERTISEMENTS UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any
street, sidewalk or other public place as space for the display of goods or
merchandise for sale; or to write on or mark any signs or advertisements on
any such pavement.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.46  ENCROACHMENT.



   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure
which encroaches upon any public street or property.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.47  OBSTRUCTION OF DRAINS UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or
alley.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.48  GAS PUMPS; PERMIT AND BOND REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to maintain or erect any gasoline pump or
tank in any public street, alley or sidewalk without having first secured a
permit therefor from the President and Board of Trustees.



   (B)   No such permit shall be issued until the applicant furnishes a
bond to indemnify the village against loss or liability in the sum of $50,000
for any such loss or liability occasioned by such tank or pump.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.49  BARBED WIRE OR ELECTRIC CURRENT FENCES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in
whole or part of barbed wire, of any similar materials designed to cause
injury to a person or of any wire charged with electrical current anywhere
within the village except to protect industrial property, in which case
barbed wire must be at least six feet above sidewalk and extend inward of
property.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.50  DEPOSITS ON STREET.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any material
which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, any waste material, any glass
or other articles which may cause injury to any person, animal or property.



   (B)   Coal or other materials may be deposited in streets
preparatory to delivery for use; provided that such deposit does not reduce
the usable width of the street or roadway at that point to less than 18 feet,
and provided that such material or coal other than material used in actual
building construction, shall not be permitted to remain in such street for
more than three hours.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.51  DEPOSITS ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk any
material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, any waste material,
any glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals or
property.



   (B)   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks
preparatory to delivery; provided that the usable width of the sidewalk is
not thereby reduced to less than four feet, and provided that no such article
shall remain on such walk for more than one-half hour.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.52  BURNING LEAVES AND RUBBISH PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to burn any
leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any of the public streets,
sidewalks or alleys in the village.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. 1, § 21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.53  ARTICLES ON WINDOWS.



   It shall be unlawful to place any moveable article on any window ledge,
or other place abutting on a public street, alley or other place at a height
above four feet from the ground in such a manner that the same can be or is
in danger of falling onto such street, alley, sidewalk or other public place.



('52 Code, Ch. 21, § 761)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.54  SCAFFOLDS.



   Any scaffolds or ladders placed in such a position that they overhang
or can fall onto any public street, alley or other public place in the
village, shall be firmly and properly constructed and safeguarded; and it
shall be unlawful to place or leave any tools or articles on any such place
in such a manner that the same can fall onto any such street, sidewalk, alley
or other public place from a height greater than four feet.



('52 Code, Ch. 21, § 760)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.55  DUMPING OF SNOW PROHIBITED.



   No person, except for village personnel engaged in snow removal
activities, shall dump, shovel, plow, or deposit, or cause to be dumped,
shoveled, plowed or deposited any snow onto any part of a public road, street
or sidewalk.



('52 Code, Ch. 16, § 12.15)  (Ord. 459-77, passed 1-18-77)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 95.56  MAILBOXES.



   All residential mailboxes within the village shall conform to the
following standards:



   (A)   Mailbox standards.  The standards for the placement of
freestanding mailboxes shall be as follows: the face of the mailbox shall not
be less than eight inches nor more than 12 inches from the back edge of the
curb or, where no curb exists, less than 16 inches nor more than 20 inches
from the near edge of the public street pavement.



   (B)   Mailbox construction.  Mailboxes shall be mounted on a
support structure which is a minimum of four inches by four inches or a
maximum of six inches by six inches treated wood post or a minimum 1 ½)
inches to a maximum of three inches diameter light gauge galvanized steel
hollow pipe, or a similar structure as approved by the Director of Public
Works, and found by him or her to be of comparable quality and safety to the
wooden post or light gauge steel pipe structures.



   (C)   Failure to comply.  Failure to comply with these mailbox
regulations may result in penalties pursuant to § 10.99 of this code, and
shall render the mailbox owner ineligible to receive any appropriate
reparations under division (D) below.



   (D)   Reparations.  In the event of municipal snowplowing along the
streets of the village which results in direct contact damaging a mailbox
which is in compliance with this section, the village shall make reparations
to the mailbox owner in an amount of said damage, not to exceed $75 per
mailbox per event causing such damage. Nonconforming mailboxes and/or
nonconforming mailbox support structures previously in existence upon the
effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived which are
damaged by direct contact by municipal snowplowing along the streets of the
village, shall likewise be entitled to reparations not to exceed $75 per
event causing such damage.



   (E)   Clearing of parkway/mailbox. The village is not responsible
for clearing snow from the parkway immediately in front of mailboxes. 
Property owners are authorized to clear snow from the immediate parkway area
in front of their mailboxes in order to ensure mailbox accessibility.



(Ord. 1360-06, passed 1-16-07; Am. Ord. 1424-08, passed 1-8-08)



CHAPTER 96:  TREES AND SHRUBS



Section



General Provisions



   96.01   Definitions



Administration



   96.10   Village Tree Committee created; membership



   96.11   Duties of Tree Committee



   96.12   Powers of the village and the Tree Committee



   96.13   Interference with Tree Committee unlawful



   96.14   Review by Board of Trustees; appeals



Planting and Removal



   96.20   Planting permit required



   96.21   Trees which may be planted



   96.22   Trees which are prohibited



   96.23   Spacing



   96.24   Distance from curb and sidewalk



   96.25   Distance from street corners and fireplugs



   96.26   Distance from utilities



   96.27   Removal permit required



   96.28   Removal of trees from private property



   96.29   Removal of stumps



Care of Trees and Shrubs



   96.35   Injury



   96.36   Attachment of sign or notice unlawful



   96.37   Wire, rope and poles to be kept away from trees



   96.38   Gas pipes



   96.39   Excavations not to damage roots



   96.40   Pruning dangerous, overhanging or interfering branches



   96.41   Topping prohibited; exception



Chemical Applications



   96.50   Permit required



   96.51   Application



   96.52   Approval by Board of Trustees discretionary



 



   96.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARK TREES.   Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names, and in all areas owned by the village
or to which the public has free access as a park.



   STREET TREES.   Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation
on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues,
or ways within the village.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 96.10  VILLAGE TREE COMMITTEE CREATED; MEMBERSHIP.



   There is hereby created the Village Tree Committee which shall consist
of five members who shall be appointed by the President with the approval of
the Board of Trustees.  The members shall be appointed for terms of one
year, to the end of the village fiscal year or until their successors have
been duly appointed and qualified.  One member shall be the Director of
Public Works, one member shall be the Village Forester, one member shall be
the Director of the Nature Center, one member shall be a member from the
Itasca Garden Club, and one member shall be a Village Trustee.  The members
of the Committee shall serve without compensation.  The Committee shall
choose its own officers and make its own rules and regulations and keep
minutes of its proceedings.  A majority of the members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of any business.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85; Am. Ord. 1029-99, passed 7-6-99)



§ 96.11  DUTIES OF TREE COMMITTEE.



   It shall be the responsibility of the Village Tree Committee to study,
investigate, advise and develop and administer a written plan for the care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees
and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in all other public areas.  Such
plan shall be presented from time to time to the Board of Trustees and, on
its acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive
village tree plan.  When requested by the Village Board or the Village
President, the Tree Committee shall consider, investigate, make findings,
report and make recommendations on any special matter or question coming
within the scope of its work.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)



§ 96.12  POWERS OF THE VILLAGE AND THE TREE COMMITTEE.



   (A)   The village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure
public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such
public grounds.



   (B)   The Village Tree Committee may remove or cause or order to be
removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by
reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines,
water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious
fungus, insect or other pest.  This section does not prohibit the planting
of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and
location of said trees is in accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)



§ 96.13  INTERFERENCE WITH TREE COMMITTEE UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the Village Tree Committee or any of its agents while engaging in and about
the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any
street trees, park trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this
chapter.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.14  REVIEW BY BOARD OF TRUSTEES; APPEALS.



   The Village Board shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the Village Tree Committee.  Also, any person may appeal from
any ruling or order of the Village Tree Committee to the Village Board, which
Board shall afford the right to be heard at a public hearing.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)



PLANTING AND REMOVAL



§ 96.20  PLANTING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or shrub in any public street or
parkway or other public place without having first secured a permit
therefor.  Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Clerk,
and shall be referred by the Clerk to the President and Board of Trustees of
the village.  All trees and shrubs so planted shall be placed subject to the
directions and approval of the Village Tree Committee.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. II, § 1)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.21  TREES WHICH MAY BE PLANTED.



   The following list constitutes the official street trees species for
the village.  No species other than those included in this list may be
planted as street trees without the written permission of the Village Tree
Committee.



 

Small Trees
 
Medium Trees
 
Large Trees




Apricot
 
Ash, Green
 
Coffeetree,


Crabapple,
 
Ginkgo
 
Kentucky


flowering (sp.)
 
Hackberry
 
Norway Maple


Golden Rain Tree
 
Honeylocust
 
Crimson King Maple


Hawthorne (sp.)
 
  (thornless)
 
True Red Maple


Pear, Bradford
 
Linden or
 
Maple, Silver (hard)


Redbud
 
Basswood (sp.)
 
Maple, Sugar


Soapberry
 
Skyline Locust
 
Oak, Bur


Lilac, Jap. Tree
 
Mulberry, Red
 
Red Oak


Peach (flowering)
 
  (fruitless,
 
Pin Oak


Plum, Purpleleaf
 
  male)
 
Sycamore


Plum (flowering)
 
Oak, English
 
Sycamore,


Serviceberry
 
Oak, Red
 
  London Plantree


 
Pagodatree,
 
Cottonwood


 
  Japanese
 
  (cottonless, male)


 
Pecan


 
Birch, River


 
Osage Orange


 
  (male,


 
  thornless)


 
Persimmon


 
Poplar, White


 
Sassafras




 



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)



§ 96.22  TREES WHICH ARE PROHIBITED.



   The following trees are deemed undesirable for street tree planting and
are prohibited:  Aspen, Black Locust, Box Elder, Catalpa, Chinese Elm,
Cottonwood (female), Evergreens, Fruit Trees, Osage Orange (female), Poplar,
Soft (Silver) Maple, Tree of Heaen (Ailanthus), and Willow.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.23  SPACING.



   The spacing of street trees shall be in accordance with the three
species size classes listed in § 96.21, and no trees may be planted closer
together than the following except in special plantings designed or approved
by a landscape architect:  Small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and
large trees, 50 feet.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.24  DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.



   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks
will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in § 96.21,
and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the
following:  Small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large
trees, four feet.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)  Penalty see § 96.99



§ 96.25  DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS.



   No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street
corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. 
No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet to any fireplug and not
within six feet of any driveway.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.26  DISTANCE FROM UTILITIES.



   No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in §
96.21 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility
wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line,
sewer line, transmission line or other utility.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.27  REMOVAL PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub in any
street, parkway or other public place without having first secured a permit
therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Clerk,
and shall be referred by the Clerk to the President and Board of Trustees for
approval before permission shall be granted.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. II, § 2)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.28  REMOVAL OF TREES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   The village shall have the right to cause the removal of any
tree on private property within the village when such tree is dead or dying,
constitutes a hazard to life and property, or when such tree may harbor
insects or disease that constitutes a potential threat to other trees within
the village.



   (B)   Nuisance declared.  Any tree found to be dead or dying, to
constitute a hazard to life or property, or to constitute a potential threat
to other trees within the village, located on any premises in the village,
shall hereby be declared to be a public nuisance. Any such tree shall be
removed following a notice provided pursuant to division (E) below and in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any
person that owns any premises on which such a tree is located to allow such
tree to remain on any such premises in violation of this chapter.



   (C)   Breeding places, nuisance.  Parts of trees in a dead or dying
condition, including stumps and wood in wood piles, that are found to
constitute a hazard to life or property, or to constitute a potential threat
to other trees within the village, are hereby declared to be public
nuisances. Any such part of a tree shall be removed following a notice
provided pursuant to division (E) below and in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person that owns premises on
which any such tree parts, stumps or wood piles are located to permit the
same to remain on any such premises in violation of this chapter. It shall
also be unlawful for any person or company to sell or otherwise dispose of
elm logs, or any other logs that constitute a potential threat to trees
within the village, within the corporate limits of the village. In the event
of such violation, that person or company shall be required to remove and 
properly dispose of the logs at his, her or their own expense within 30 days
after service of a notice to remove the same.



   (D)   Enforcement and inspection. The provisions of this section
shall be enforced by the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee.
The Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized,
after giving notice of the intent and purpose, to enter in or upon any
premises in the village, at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of
inspecting such premises at which there exists a reasonable cause to believe
there may contain dead, dying or diseased trees or breeding places of
threatening insects. The  Director of Public Works, or his or her designee,
may remove from such trees such samples, borings or specimens as are required
for the purpose of making a laboratory analysis to determine whether any tree
located thereon is infected with a disease or insect that constitutes a
potential threat to trees within the village. It shall be unlawful for any
person to prevent the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, from
entering upon such premises for the purpose of carrying out the duties
specified hereunder or to interfere with the Director of Public Works, or his
or her designee, in the performance of the lawful duties authorized under the
provisions of this section.



   (E)   Notice.  If any tree growing on any premises in the village
is found to be dead or dying, to constitute a hazard to life or property, or
to constitute a potential threat to other trees within the village, the
Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall serve a notice upon
the owner or occupant of the premises on which the said tree is growing to
remove the said tree. Such notice shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The identity of the property by common description;



      (2)   The tree affected;



      (3)   A notice that it is unlawful to permit such tree to
remain on the  property;



      (4)   A request for the removal of the tree;



      (5)   A notice to contact the Director of Public Works, or his
or her designee, within ten days of receiving the notice, in accordance with
division (F);



      (6)   A notice that if the tree is not properly removed in
accordance with division (F) the village will make necessary arrangements to
remove the same and charge the cost thereof to the owner or occupant of the
premises; and



      (7)   A notice that if the cost and expense incurred in the
removal of any tree is not paid, then within 90 days after an invoice for
such cost and expense has been mailed to the property owner, a notice of lien
on the real estate affected will be filed in the Office of the Recorder of
Deeds of DuPage County, Illinois.



   (F)   Abatement. Any person served with a notice to remove a dead,
diseased or potentially hazardous tree shall contact the Director of Public
Works, or his or her designee, within ten days of receiving the notice. The
Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, and the property owner,
shall then formulate a plan to remove the tree. Any such tree shall be
removed within 90 days of contacting the Director of Public Works, or his or
her designee. Any person served with a notice who fails to contact the
Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, within ten days, shall
remove the tree within 30 days of the date that such notice is served. If any
person refuses or neglects to remove a tree in accordance with the provisions
herein, then the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, may enter
in or upon the premises where the tree is located and  remove the tree. The
cost and expense of such removal shall be charged to and paid by the owner or
occupant of the lot or premises.



   (G)   Liens. If a diseased or potentially hazardous tree is removed
by the village, or by someone directed to remove the said tree on behalf of
the village, a notice of lien containing the cost and expense of removal
incurred by the village  may be recorded in the following manner: the
village or the person or firm authorized by the village to remove such tree
in his or its own name, shall file a notice of lien in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County, Illinois.  The lien notice shall consist
of a sworn statement setting out:



      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;



      (2)   The amount of the cost and expense incurred or payable
for the  service; and



      (3)   The date or dates when such cost or expense was incurred
by the village. Such notice shall be filed within 90 days, but not less than
30 days, after an invoice for such cost and expense has been mailed to the
property owner.



   (H)   Release of lien.  Upon payment of the cost and expense by the
owner or persons interested in the real estate affected, after notice of lien
has been filed, the lien shall be released by the village or person in whose
name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record in the
same manner herein provided for the filing of a notice of lien.



   (I)   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section
shall be fined an amount of not less than $25 or not greater than $750 for
each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed
on each week during or on which a diseased tree is permitted to remain in
violation of division (F) above.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85; Am. Ord. 1327-06, passed 7-18-06; Am. Ord.
1667-13, passed 8-20-13)



§ 96.29  REMOVAL OF STUMPS.



   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface
of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the
surface of the ground.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)



CARE OF TREES AND SHRUBS



§ 96.35  INJURY.



   It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted in any public
place.



('52 Code, Ch. 9., Art. II, § 3)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.36  ATTACHMENT OF SIGN OR NOTICE UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any
tree or shrub in any street, parkway or any other public place.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. II, § 4)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.37  WIRE, ROPE AND POLES TO BE KEPT AWAY FROM TREES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or other rope to any
tree without permission of the President and Board of Trustees.



   (B)   Any person or company given the right to maintain poles and
wires in the streets, alleys or other public places in the village shall, in
the absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such
wires and poles free from and away from any trees or shrubs in such places so
far as may be possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly
trimmed and subject to the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works,
so that no injury shall be done to the poles or wires or shrubs and trees by
contact.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. II, § 7)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.38  GAS PIPES.



   Any person, firm or corporation maintaining any gas pipe in the village
shall, in the absence of a provision in the franchise concerning the subject,
keep such pipes free from leaks, so as not to damage trees or shrubs.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. II, § 8)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.39  EXCAVATIONS NOT TO DAMAGE ROOTS.



   In making excavations in streets or other public places, proper care
shall be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub, wherever
possible.



('52 Code, Ch. 9, Art. II, § 9)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.40  PRUNING DANGEROUS, OVERHANGING OR INTERFERING BRANCHES.



   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within
the village shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct
the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the
surface of the street or sidewalk.  Said owners shall remove all dead,
diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a
menace to the safety of the public.  The village shall have the right to
prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the
proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes
with visibility of any traffic control device or sign.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.41  TOPPING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION,



   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or
village department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public
property.  Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree
so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.  Trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or
other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be
exempted from this section at the determination of the Village Tree Committee.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)  Penalty, see § 96.99



CHEMICAL APPLICATIONS



§ 96.50  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall spray or apply or cause to be
sprayed or applied any chemicals on any trees, shrubs or vegetation which are
located on or in the public streets, parkways and areas without first
requesting permission in writing of the Board of Trustees, and receiving the
prior written approval of the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 287-69, passed 3-4-69)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.51  APPLICATION.



   Such written request shall contain statements concerning the area and
place, the chemical to be used and in what proportion, the type and manner of
application of spray, who will conduct the operation and the proposed date of
the operation.



(Ord. 287-69, passed 3-4-69)



§ 96.52  APPROVAL BY BOARD OF TRUSTEES DISCRETIONARY.



   Approval by the Board of Trustees is not a matter of right, is entirely
discretionary with the Board and shall only be given after evaluation of the
request and consideration of all facts and circumstances.



(Ord. 287-69, passed 3-4-69)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $500; and each day on which a
violation occurs or exists shall be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 604-85, passed 12-3-85)



CHAPTER 97:  ALARMS



Section



   97.01   Purpose and intent



   97.02   Definitions



   97.03   Permit required



   97.04   Permit application



   97.05   Monitoring procedures



   97.06   Alarm activations at a premises where an alarm user permit
has not been issued



   97.07   Updating alarm user application



   97.08   Audible alarm system requirements



   97.09   Automatic dialing telephone alarm requirements



   97.10   False alarms prohibited



   97.11   False alarms fines; notifications



   97.12   Permit revocation



   97.13   Testing equipment



   97.14   No liability of village



 



   97.99   Penalty



§ 97.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted for the purpose of
regulating and permitting alarm systems to which emergency personnel and
equipment are expected to respond.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98)



§ 97.02  DEFINITIONS.



   ALARM COMPANY.   The business by any person, firm, partnership,
corporation, association, organization, company, or other entity of selling,
leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or
installing any alarm system, or causing to be sold, leased, maintained,
serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, or installed, in or on any
building, structure or facility.



   AGENT.   Any person employed by, working for, or subcontracted by an
alarm company.



   ALARM SYSTEM COORDINATOR.  The Itasca Police Department Deputy Chief
of Administration, or his/her designee.



   AUDIBLE ALARM.   An alarm system or device that generates an audible
sound.



   AUTOMATIC DIALING DIGITAL ALARM COMMUNICATOR SYSTEM.   A system in
which signals are transmitted from a digital alarm communicator transmitter
located at a protected premise, through the public switched telephone
network, to a digital alarm communicator receiver at a central alarm station,
or police department alarm monitoring system.



   AUTOMATIC DIALING TELEPHONE ALARM.   A device that automatically dials
any of the Police Department emergency communications center telephone lines,
without human activation.



   CALENDAR YEAR.  January 1 through December 31.



   CENTRAL ALARM SYSTEM.   A system in which the operation of electrical
protection circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded at,
or maintained and serviced from a place of business having trained operators
in attendance at all times.



   CHIEF OF POLICE.   The Village of Itasca Chief of Police or his
designee.



   FALSE ALARM.   An activation or transmission of any alarm signal
caused by human error, mechanical error or electronic malfunction, negligence
of the alarm user or alarm user's employee, whether or not the exact cause of
the alarm is determined, or any other activation or transmission of any alarm
signal where no actual contact or attempted burglary or robbery exists.
Severe weather, power outages, transmission line malfunctions, acts of God,
malicious acts of persons not under the control of the alarm user, or any
other cause clearly beyond the control of the alarm user will be considered
in determining if an alarm activation was false and whether or not any
occurrence, fine, warning or other punitive action will be taken against the
alarm user as provided for by this chapter.



   NOTICE.   Written notice given by personal service upon the addressee
or, given by the United States Postal Office, postage paid, to the
addressee's last known mailing address.



   PERSON.   A natural person, or firm, partnership, corporation,
association, company or other entity.



   PRERECORDED TELEPHONE MESSAGE.   Any prerecorded voice message
transmitted or received over a telephone line.



   PROTECTED PREMISES.   Any building, structure, or facility where an
alarm system is installed to signal the occurrence of any actual or attempted
burglary or robbery to which the police are expected to respond.



   SYSTEM.   Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical,
arranged to signal the occurrence of any actual or attempted burglary or
robbery, to which police are expected to respond.



   USER.   A person(s), firm, partnership, corporation, association,
organization, company, or other entity in control of a premise where an alarm
system is located.



   VILLAGE.   The Village of Itasca, Illinois.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98; Am. Ord. 1038-99, passed 10-19-99; Am. Ord.
1710-14, passed 11-4-14)



§ 97.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation
or other legal entity to use, own or lease an alarm system, or to be in
control of premises wherein an alarm system is operated or maintained without
having first obtained a permit as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation
or other legal entity to use, own or lease an alarm system or to be in
control of a premises wherein an alarm system is operated or maintained when
a permit therefore has been revoked.



   (C)   A permit must be obtained for each separately addressed
operating location.



   (D)   No fee shall be charged to obtain an alarm user permit.



   (E)   All permits issued are valid indefinitely unless revoked.



   (F)   The transferring of alarm permits in part or whole, from one
user or property to another, is prohibited.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.04  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Permit applications must contain the following information:



      (1)   The full legal name, address and telephone number of the
applicant.



      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the premises
where the alarm system is located.



      (3)   The type of alarm system at the protected premises.



      (4)   A list of three persons, including their addresses and
telephone numbers, who can be contacted [and will respond] to the premises in
the event of an emergency, or to reset or deactivate the alarm system, or who
could contact the alarm user if the alarm user is not at the protected
premises.



      (5)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the person
or company that installed the alarm system.



      (6)   The name, address and telephone number of the person or
company that is responsible for the maintenance and repair of the alarm
system.



   (B)   Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant. A
permit will not be issued until the completed application is received, and
the Alarm System Coordinator has granted approval for the permit.



   (C)   An application for an alarm user permit shall be denied if:



      (1)   The applicant has failed to pay false alarm fees
required by this chapter for different protected premises under the
applicant's ownership or control.



      (2)   The applicant has failed to comply with the provisions
of this or any other ordinance of the village.



   (D)   The Itasca Police Department shall be responsible for
processing and issuing alarm user permits.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98)



§ 97.05  MONITORING PROCEDURES.



   An alarm company performing monitoring services relative to an alarm
service or local alarm system shall:



   (A)   Report alarm signals to the Itasca Police Department using
telephone numbers designated by the Alarm System Coordinator.



   (B)   Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except duress or hold up
alarm activation, before requesting the dispatching a Police Department
response.



   (C)   Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the Police Department
in a manner and form determined by the Alarm System Coordinator.



   (D)   Communicate verified cancellations of alarm dispatch requests
to the Police Department in a manner and form determined by the Alarm System
Coordinator.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98)



§ 97.06  ALARM ACTIVATIONS AT A PREMISES WHERE AN ALARM USER PERMIT HAS NOT
BEEN ISSUED.



   Any alarm user who does not have a valid alarm user permit will be
assessed a fine in the amount of $200.  This fine will be assessed 72 hours
after an initial alarm is received. This 72 hour period will allow the alarm
user to obtain an alarm user's permit from the village. If the protected
premises does not comply within the 72 hour period, a $200 fine will be
assessed for all false alarms received, in addition to any other fines
assessed in accordance with §§97.10, 97.11 and § 97.99 of this chapter.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.07  UPDATING ALARM USER APPLICATION.



   It is unlawful for any alarm user to fail to amend its alarm user
permit application within 14 days after any of the information required and
contained therein becomes outdated or inaccurate.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.08  AUDIBLE ALARM SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.



   An alarm system that emits an audible alarm signal that may be heard by
persons outside the protected building, structure, or facility shall conform
to the following requirements:



   (A)   Audible alarm systems shall automatically discontinue emitting
an audible alarm within 30 minutes after it has activated.



   (B)   With respect to systems in existence prior to the adoption of
this chapter, the owner or operator thereof shall have 30 days from the date
of notification to effect the necessary modifications to comply with the
foregoing requirements.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.09  AUTOMATIC DIALING TELEPHONE ALARM REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No person will install, cause to be installed, maintain, or
cause to be maintained, any automatic dialing telephone alarm that dials any
Itasca Police Department telephone line. The caller, a natural person, must
be able to convey the nature of the call. Prerecorded voice messages are
prohibited.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to allow any automatic alarm,
automatic dialing device or automatic alerting device which causes an Itasca
Police Department telephone line to be dialed, and whose purpose is to
establish an open phone line with the specific intent that a conversation
between parties not actively speaking into the telephone instrument be heard
by the Police Department in order to directly access emergency services based
on an overheard conversation, or lack of conversation.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.10  FALSE ALARMS PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly activate an alarm system for
the purpose of summoning the Police Department except if such person knows or
has reasonable belief that there is an actual or attempted burglary or
robbery on the alarmed premises. A fine of $250 shall be assessed for a
deliberate false activation of an alarm outside of the parameters set forth
in this chapter.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.11  FALSE ALARMS FINES; NOTIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Any licensed alarm user who has more than three false alarms
within a calendar year at a single protected location, will be assessed fines
according to the following fine schedule:



 

1-3 false alarms
 
no charge


4-5 false alarms
 
$75.00 per false alarm


6-7 false alarms
 
$150.00 per false alarm


8-9 false alarms
 
$350.00 per false alarm


10 or more false alarms
 
$500.00 and initiation of permit revocation process



 



   (B)   No false alarm shall be deemed chargeable within the first
seven days of initial activation so as to provide the alarm company and alarm
user a reasonable time period to properly install, train, and modify the
system.



   (C)   Any alarm user permit holder who fails to pay fines or charges
provided for under this chapter within 30 days from the date of the invoice
requesting payment of same, shall have the subject Alarm User Permit revoked.
In addition to revocation, any unpaid fines outstanding for 60 days or more
shall be forwarded to a collection authority designated by the Chief of
Police. Any such alarm user permit shall not be reinstated until all unpaid
fines and fees are paid in full.



   (D)   The Alarm System Coordinator shall notify the alarm user in
writing, of each instance wherein the Police Department recorded a false
alarm. The alarm user shall have the opportunity within 14 days from the date
of mailing or personal delivery, to submit a report or to meet with the Alarm
System Coordinator for the purpose of showing cause as to whether
circumstances exist to warrant voiding the penalty of the false alarm. The
Alarm System Coordinator shall review the alarm user's report and/or meet
with the alarm user and issue a written finding to the alarm user as to
whether or not the false alarm will be voided. The finding of the Alarm
System Coordinator shall be final.



   (E)   After three false alarm dispatches, the alarm user must have a
properly licensed alarm business modify the alarm system to be less
susceptible to false activation, or provide additional user training as
appropriate.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98; Am. Ord. 1099-01, passed 8-21-01)  Penalty, see
§ 97.99



§ 97.12  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   Any alarmed premises which has ten or more false alarms within a
calendar year shall result in revocation of the alarm user permit. If village
records show ten or more false alarms within a calendar year for any alarmed
premises, the alarm permit shall be revoked and the user shall be subject to
the following procedures:



   (A)   The Alarm System Coordinator shall notify the alarm user by
certified mail or personal delivery, that their alarm permit shall be revoked
30 days from the date of mailing or personal delivery. The alarm user shall
have 14 days from the date of mailing or personal delivery to submit a
written report to the Alarm System Coordinator describing actions taken, or
to be taken to identify and eliminate the cause of the false alarms, and to
request that their Alarm Users Permit be reinstated.



   (B)   If the alarm user submits a report requesting reinstatement of
their alarm users permit, the Alarm System Coordinator shall determine if the
action taken or to be taken will substantially reduce the likelihood of false
alarms. If the Alarm System Coordinator determines that the action will
substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms, he shall notify the
alarm user via certified mail or personal delivery that the request to
reinstate the Alarm User's Permit has been approved.



   (C)   If the alarm user's permit is reinstated, and the Police
Department responds to a subsequent false alarm activation in the same
calendar year at the protected premises, the Alarm System Coordinator shall
proceed with the permit revocation process again as described in this
section. The alarm user shall also be assessed a fine of $750 for each
subsequent false alarm through the remainder of the calendar year.



   (D)   If the Alarm System Coordinator determines that the action
taken, or to be taken, will not substantially reduce the likelihood of false
alarms, the request for reinstatement shall be denied. The Alarm System
Coordinator shall give notice by certified mail or personal delivery to the
user that the permit will be revoked without further notice.



   (E)   An alarm user whose permit has been revoked by the Alarm
System Coordinator may, within 14 days of receipt of the notice of
revocation, appeal this decision by filing a written request for a review
meeting with the Chief of Police.



   (F)   If a review meeting with the Chief of Police is requested,
written notice of the time and place of the review meeting will be served on
the alarm user by the Chief of Police by certified mail or personal delivery
within 14 days of the request by the alarm user.



   (G)   The Alarm System Coordinator and the alarm user shall have the
right to present written and oral evidence, subject to the right of
cross-examination by both parties.



   (H)   If the Chief of Police determines that the user has not taken
action which substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms, the Chief
of Police shall issue written findings to the effect and an order denying
reinstatement of the alarm user's permit.



   (I)   If the Chief of Police determines that the alarm user has
taken action which substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms, the
Chief of Police shall issue written findings to the effect and an order
approving reinstatement of the alarm users permit.



   (J)   If the alarm user's permit is reinstated, pursuant to the
proceeding subdivision (9), and the Police Department responds to a
subsequent false alarm activation in a calendar year at the protected
premises, the Alarm System Coordinator shall proceed with the permit
revocation process again as described in § 97.11.  The alarm user shall
also be assessed a fine in the amount of $750 for each subsequent false alarm
activation through the remainder of the calendar year. If the alarm user's
request for reinstatement of their alarm permit has been denied by the Chief
of Police, the alarm user may within 14 days of receipt of notice of
revocation, appeal this decision by filing a written request for a review
meeting with the President of Itasca.



   (K)   If the President of Itasca determines that the user has not
taken action that would substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms,
the President of Itasca shall issue written findings to that effect and an
order denying reinstatement of the alarm user's permit. The decision of the
President of Itasca shall be final.



   (L)   If the President of Itasca determines that the alarm user has
taken action which substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms, the
President of Itasca shall issue written findings to that effect and an order
approving reinstatement of the alarm user's permit.



   (M)   If the alarm user's permit is reinstated pursuant to the
preceding division (L), and the Police Department responds to a subsequent
false alarm activation in the same calendar year at the protected premises,
the Alarm System Coordinator shall proceed with the permit revocation process
again as described in § 97.11.  The alarm user shall also be assessed a
fine in the amount of $750 for each subsequent false alarm activation through
the remainder of the calendar year.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98; Am. Ord. 1038-99, passed 10-19-99)



§ 97.13  TESTING EQUIPMENT.



   No person shall conduct or cause to be conducted any test or
demonstration of any alarm system or signaling device that is directly
connected to the Police Department Emergency Communications Center without
first obtaining permission from the Police Department Emergency
Communications Center personnel. Permission to test shall not be required
when the alarm system or signaling device is connected to an intermediary
receiver and is not relayed to the Police Emergency Communications Center.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.14  NO LIABILITY OF VILLAGE.



   The village assumes no liability for any defects in the operation of
any alarm system or signal line system, for any failure or neglect of any
person associated with the installation, operation or maintenance of any
alarm system, for any failure or neglect of any alarm user, for the
transmission or receipt of alarm signals of any failure or neglect to respond
upon receipt of an alarm from any source. In the event that the village finds
it necessary to revoke an alarm user permit or otherwise provide for the
disconnection of any alarm system, the village shall have no liability for
such action. No special duty other than that owed to the general public shall
be created by virtue of the issuance of an alarm system permit, the direct
connection of an alarm system with the Police Department, or as a result of
the transmission to or receipt of alarm signals by the Police Department.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98)



§ 97.99  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.



   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall be assessed a fine in the amount of $50 per violation unless
otherwise provided in this chapter. Each day during which a violation of this
chapter continues, or is permitted to exist, shall be considered a separate
and distinct offense.



(Ord. 993-98, passed 6-2-98)



CHAPTER 98:  PARADES AND OPEN AIR MEETINGS



Section



   98.01   Permit required



   98.02   Definitions



   98.03   Permit application



   98.04   Times permitted



   98.05   Size



   98.06   Issuance, denial of permit, reapplication



   98.07   Conflicting events



   98.08   Multiple permits



   98.09   Late applications



   98.10   Public liability insurance



   98.11   Nuisance



   98.12   Report to Village Board



 



   98.99   Penalty



Cross reference:



   Please see Title VII, §§ 71.120 through 71.131, for further
provisions regarding parades.



§ 98.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall hold, operate, or participate in a parade, open air
meeting, or other special event within the village unless a permit is first
obtained from the village.



(Ord. 999-98, passed 6-16-98; Am. Ord. 1706-14, passed 9-16-14)  Penalty,
see § 98.99



§ 98.02  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   PARADE.  Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or
processing of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park,
or other public place in the village.



   OPEN AIR MEETING.  Any congregation of people held outdoors and upon
any public property for the purpose of entertainment, including but not
limited to concerts, musical exhibitions, movie presentations, and plays,
hearing speakers, or discussing some matter of common interest where the
number of participants expected may reasonably be assumed to exceed 50.



   SPECIAL EVENT.  Any organized activity including, but not limited to,
festivals, carnivals, marches, outdoor sales, races, walk-a-thons, concerts,
fundraisers, or other similar celebrations or festivities sponsored by a
person, group of persons, or an organization, which meet any of the following
criteria:



      (1)   Are conducted in whole or in part on village property or
on village rights-of-way;



      (2)   Involve the sale of merchandise, food or beverages
outdoors where not already permitted by village ordinance;



      (3)   May attract a large crowd of a size that is
significantly larger than what is expected for the typical day to day use of
the property under usual conditions;



      (4)   Use of structures including, but not limited to, a tent
or stage;



      (5)   Use of village services including, but not limited to,
closing of a village street or right-of-way, providing parking or traffic
detail, or providing security.



(Ord. 999-98, passed 6-16-98; Am. Ord. 1706-14, passed 9-16-14)



§ 98.03  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   An application to conduct a parade, open air meeting, or special event
shall be made in writing by a representative of the group seeking the permit
on an application form provided by the village to the Village President or
his/her designee not less than 14 ten days prior to the event. Subject to §
98.06, if a potential parade, open air meeting, or special event will require
significant involvement from village staff, including but not limited to
planning, street closures, or police presence, any such application should be
submitted as far in advance as reasonably possible so as to allow village
staff the time and opportunity to make any necessary arrangements or plans.
Any application form must be completed in its entirety.



(Ord. 999-98, passed 6-16-98; Am. Ord. 1706-14, passed 9-16-14)



§ 98.04  TIMES PERMITTED.



   All parades shall be held during daylight hours at times other than
peak traffic periods (7:30 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. to 6 p.m.) Monday
through Saturday and not before noon on Sundays. All open air meetings and
special events shall conclude by midnight and shall not be held before noon
on Sunday, except as authorized by the Village Board.



(Ord. 999-98, passed 6-16-98; Am. Ord. 1706-14, passed 9-16-14)  Penalty,
see § 98.99



§ 98.05  SIZE.



   Parades, open air meetings, and special events shall be limited to such
numbers as will not obstruct traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, in an
unreasonable manner.



(Ord. 999-98, passed 6-16-98; Am. Ord. 1706-14, passed 9-16-14)  Penalty,
see § 98.99



§ 98.06  ISSUANCE, DENIAL OF PERMIT, REAPPLICATION.



   Following receipt of an application or reapplication, the Village
President or his/her designee shall within ten days either issue a permit for
the holding of a parade, open air meeting, or special event or reject the
application. Permits may be rejected on the basis of improper or incomplete
application; a substantial, unworkable, or unnecessary interference with
traffic in the area of the parade, open air meeting, or special event; the
unavailability of sufficient village resources so as to maintain the public
health, safety or welfare; insufficient advance preparation time for village
staff; or because of a conflicting event as described in §§ 98.07 and
98.08.  The reasons for rejection shall be made known to the applicant, in
writing, at the time of rejection. The applicant shall have five days to
correct or complete an improper application and resubmit it to the Village
President or his/her designee, if the corrected application is resubmitted at
least five days prior to the event.  If a corrected application is not
received by the village within five days prior to the event, a new period of
14 days shall be imposed prior to which the event may not be held. Such 14
day period shall commence upon receipt of the corrected application. Any
person or group denied a permit shall have the right to appeal the denial to
the Village Board of Trustees. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days after
notice of denial. The Village Board of Trustees shall act on the appeal
within 30 days after its receipt.



(Ord. 999-98, passed 6-16-98; Am. Ord. 1706-14, passed 9-16-14)



§ 98.07  CONFLICTING EVENTS.



   If the Village President or his/her designee receives more than one
application for a parade, open air meeting, or special event at the same time
and the same place, or on the same day, the application filed first in time
shall take precedence. An application shall be considered to be "at the same
time" if the event is scheduled to commence within two hours before or after
the holding of another event. An application shall be considered to be "at
the same place" if the requested parade route comes at any point within six
blocks or any equivalent distance from the route of another parade or if the
open air meeting or special meeting is to be conducted within one-half mile
of another open air meeting or special event. If the Village President or
his/her designee receives an application for more than one parade, open air
meeting, or special event in a single day, he/she may set a time for the
duration of each parade, open air meeting, or special event, which time shall
not, without the consent of the group seeking the permit, be less than three
hours.



(Ord. 999-98, passed 6-16-98; Am. Ord. 1706-14, passed 9-16-14)



§ 98.08  MULTIPLE PERMITS.



   The Village President or his/her designee may issue permits for more
than a single parade, open air meeting, or special event during one day in
accordance with the above requirements provided, however, that he/she may not
issue multiple permits beyond the point at which the issuance of an
additional permit would require the continuing diversion of so great a number
of police officers or other municipal personnel so as to prevent normal
police protection, other services to the municipality, or to be potentially
injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare.



(Ord. 999-98, passed 6-16-98; Am. Ord. 1706-14, passed 9-16-14)



§ 98.09  LATE APPLICATIONS.



   In those circumstances where application deadlines are not met due to
circumstances which make the application deadlines inapplicable or
unreasonable to meet, the Village President or his/her designee shall utilize
his/her best efforts to accommodate the application. In circumstances under
this section the village shall respond to the application request or appeal
to an application denial in writing and within 72 hours. If circumstances
dictate that a 72 hour turnaround is not applicable or practical, the village
shall be allowed a reasonable time to respond as dictated by the
circumstances. Applications under this section shall be treated with time of
the essence.



(Ord. 999-98, passed 6-16-98)



§ 98.10  PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   An application for a parade permit shall be accompanied by a
certificate of public liability insurance issued by a company having at least
an "A" rating from Best's Insurance Guide, naming the village, its officers,
employees, agents, consultants, and volunteers while acting on behalf of the
village as additional parties insured in the amount of $1,000,000 for
injuries to one or more persons in any one occurrence and $100,000 property
damage on such forms as shall be approved by the corporate authorities.



(Ord. 999-98, passed 6-16-98; Am. Ord. 1706-14, passed 9-16-14)



§ 98.11  NUISANCE.



   Any parade, open air meeting, or special event shall utilize
appropriate measures to prevent sound, light, or other disturbances from
unreasonably interfering with the use and enjoyment of property near the
location of the parade, open air meeting, or special event.



(Ord. 1706-14, passed 9-16-14)



§ 98.12  REPORT TO VILLAGE BOARD.



   All applications under this chapter shall be reported to the Village
Board by the Village President or his/her designee.



(Ord. 999-98, passed 6-16-98)



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates this chapter shall be punished as provided by
ordinance and shall be fined up to $750.  The violation of this chapter is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance to be abated in the manner provided
by law.



(Ord. 999-98, passed 6-16-98)



CHAPTER 99:  GRAFFITI



Section



   99.01   Definitions



   99.02   Declaration of nuisance



   99.03   Graffiti prohibited



   99.04   Abatement



   99.05   Recovery of costs



 



   99.99   Penalty



§ 99.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GRAFFITI. Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure or design or
collection thereof, which is marked, etched, scratched, painted, drawn or
printed on any structural component of any building, structure or other
facility, regardless of the nature of the material of that structural
component also including sidewalks, bridges and abutments.



   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT. Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint
container, a broad- tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick,
etching equipment, brush or other device capable of scarring or leaving a
visible mark on any natural or manmade surface.



(Ord. 1378-07, passed 4-17-07)



§ 99.02  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.



   The existence of graffiti on buildings, or on structures, including but
not limited to fences or walls, located upon any property in the village, is
declared to be a public nuisance.



(Ord. 1378-07, passed 4-17-07)



§ 99.03  GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or
manmade surface on any village-owned property or, without the permission of
the owner or occupant, on any non-village-owned property.



(Ord. 1378-07, passed 4-17-07)



§ 99.04  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Inspection of premises. Whenever any police officer or
employee of the Itasca Police Department observes a public nuisance under
this chapter, or whenever a complaint is made to the Village President or
other village official that a public nuisance under this chapter exists, the
Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall forthwith inspect or cause to
be inspected the premises, and shall make a written report of his or her
findings. Whenever practicable, the inspecting officer shall cause
photographs to be made of the premises and shall file the same with the
Village Clerk.



   (B)   Summary abatement.



      (1)   Notice to the owner. Upon a finding that a public
nuisance under this chapter exists, the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, shall issue a notice directed to the owner of record of the
property on which the nuisance exists. The notice shall describe the nuisance
and shall establish a reasonable time for the abatement thereof by such
owner, which time shall be no less than two days nor more than five days
after service of such notice. Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant or
person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate the nuisance
and state that, unless such nuisance is so abated, the village will cause the
same to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or
person causing, permitting or maintaining the same, as the case may be. The
notice shall also specify clearly that graffiti established on a painted
surface shall be painted over with a color consistent with the predominant
tone of the building or structure, and that graffiti established on an
unpainted masonry or wood surface shall be removed so that such unpainted
surface is returned.



      (2)   Service and return of notice.



         (a)   The police officer or police department employee
issuing the notice to abate a nuisance under this section shall personally
serve the notice upon the owner of the property where such nuisance exists,
and shall make his/her return upon a copy of such notice showing the date of
service and the person upon whom it was served.



         (b)   In lieu thereof, the police officer or police
department employee issuing the notice shall mail a copy thereof to the
above-described owner at the last known mailing address of the owner or, if
not known, the address of the property where the nuisance exists, by proof of
mail. If the name of the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained or if
service of the owner cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the owner
by posting or nailing a copy of the notice on the front door of the structure
where the violation was found.



      (3)   Investigation to determine compliance with notice.
Immediately upon the termination of the time allowed in any notice for the
abatement of a nuisance under this section, the police officer or police
department employee shall investigate to determine whether or not the
nuisance has been abated.



      (4)   Abatement by village. In the event that the owner of the
property where such nuisance exists has failed to abate such nuisance within
the prescribed time, or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance
cannot be found, the Chief of Police or his or her designee shall have the
authority to cause the removal of the graffiti through any available public
agency, or by contract with any appropriate private entity. Express authority
to enter upon the premises where such public nuisance exists is hereby
conferred upon the village.



(Ord. 1378-07, passed 4-17-07)



§ 99.05  RECOVERY OF COSTS.



   The cost of such removal shall be collected as a debt in accordance
with § 94.10, and shall be a lien upon the affected property if not paid
within 60 days after billing thereof.



(Ord. 1378-07, passed 4-17-07)



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   Any owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining a
nuisance as described by this chapter, and who has received an order or
notice of an alleged violation of this chapter, shall be subject to a penalty
of $250 for a first offense, and $500 for each subsequent offense upon
conviction thereof, with each day constituting a separate offense.



(Ord. 1378-07, passed 4-17-07)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   BUSINESS LICENSE REGULATIONS





         111.   SOLICITORS





         112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES





         113.   COIN-OPERATED; VENDING MACHINES





         114.   SELF-SERVICE GAS STATIONS





         115.   TAXICABS





         116.   TOBACCO





         117.   CONTRACTORS





         118.   CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE





         119.   VIDEO GAMING




CHAPTER 110:  BUSINESS LICENSE REGULATIONS



Section



   110.01   Applications



   110.02   Persons subject to license



   110.03   Fees



   110.04   Forms



   110.05   Signatures required



   110.06   Investigation of application before issuance of license or
permit



   110.07   Posting of licenses



   110.08   Termination of licenses



   110.09   Change of location



   110.10   Location requirements



   110.11   Building and premises



   110.12   Inspection of premises



   110.13   Vehicle tag



   110.14   Business as nuisance prohibited



   110.15   Revocation and suspension



   110.16   Businesses subject to annual license fees



   110.17   Garage sales



 



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for all licenses and permits required by this chapter
shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk in the absence of provision to
the contrary.  Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the
permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered
and the fee to be paid; and each application shall contain such additional
information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the village officials
in the issuing of the permit or license applied for.



('52 Code, § 179)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.02  PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE.



   Whenever in this chapter a license is required for the maintenance,
operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business
or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person, firm or corporation
shall be subject to the requirement if, by himself or through an agent,
employee or partner, he holds himself forth as being engaged in the business
or occupation; solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or
performs or attempts to perform any part of such business or occupation in
the village.



('52 Code, § 180)



§ 110.03  FEES.



   In the absence of any provision to the contrary, all fees and charges
for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application
therefor is made to the Village Comptroller.  When an applicant has not
engaged in the business until after the expiration of part of the current
license year, the license fee shall be prorated by quarters and the fee paid
for each quarter or fraction thereof during which the business has been or
will be pursued.  Except as otherwise provided, all license fees shall
become a part of the corporate fund.



('52 Code, § 184)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.04  FORMS.



   Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the Village Clerk.



('52 Code, § 181)



§ 110.05  SIGNATURES REQUIRED.



   Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the President
and Clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary.



('52 Code, § 182)



§ 110.06  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION BEFORE ISSUANCE OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.



   (A)   Upon the receipt of an application for license or permit where
this chapter or any other ordinances of the village necessitate an inspection
or investigation before the issuance of such permit or license, the Village
Comptroller shall refer such application to the proper officer to make such
investigation within 48 hours of the time of such receipt. 



   (B)   The officer charged with the duty of making such investigation
or inspection required by division (A) above shall make a report thereon,
favorable or otherwise, within ten days after receiving the application or a
copy thereof.  The Health Officer shall make or cause to be made an
investigation in regard to such licenses in connection with the care and
handling of food and the prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease,
for the protection of health; and the Building Inspector shall make or cause
to be made any such inspections relative to the construction of buildings or
other structures. All other investigations, except where otherwise provided,
shall be made by the Chief of Police or some other officer designated by the
President.



('52 Code, § 183)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.07  POSTING OF LICENSES.



   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in
the village to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises
used for such business at all times.



('52 Code, § 193)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.08  TERMINATION OF LICENSES.



   (A)   All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the
fiscal year of the village, where no provisions to the contrary are made.



   (B)   The Village Comptroller shall mail to all licensees of the
village a statement of the time of the expiration of the license held by the
licensee.  If the license is annual, this notice shall be given three weeks
prior to the date of such expiration, provided that a failure to send out
such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it, shall not excuse
the licensee from a failure to secure a new license, or a renewal thereof,
nor shall it be a defense in action for operation without a license.



('52 Code, § 185)



§ 110.09  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any
permitted act, may be changed, provided that ten days' notice thereof is
given to the Village Comptroller, in the absence of any provision to the
contrary, provided that the building, zoning and frontage consent
requirements of this chapter are complied with.



('52 Code, § 187)



§ 110.10  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning



   BLOCK.   That portion of the street between two intersections with
other public streets nearest the specified location on each side; provided
that if, on either or both sides of such location, there is no intersection
within 300 feet of the center of the specified location, the block shall be
considered as terminating a point 300 feet from such center.



   STREET.   Such highways as have been dedicated by either common law or
statutory dedication as public streets and are actually in use as such;
STREET shall not be construed to include or mean merely service highways
which are commonly known as alleys.



   (B)   Location requirements.  No person, firm or corporation shall
locate, build, construct, operate or maintain any business or structure of
any kind, for which frontage consents are required, in any block in the
village where a majority of the houses abutting on both sides of the street
in the block are used exclusively for residential purposes without having
first secured the written consent of the owners of a majority of the frontage
abutting on such street on both sides within such block.



('52 Code, § 188)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.11  BUILDING AND PREMISES.



   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no
permit shall be issued for any thing or act, if the premises and building to
be used for this purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of this
code or any ordinances of the village.  No such license or permit shall be
issued for the conduct of any business or performance of any act which would
involve a violation of the zoning code of the village.



('52 Code, § 186)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.12  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.



   (A)   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection
with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or
required by this chapter, or are reasonably necessary thereto to secure
compliance with any code or ordinance provision or to detect violations
thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the
premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the
inspection any officer or employee of the village who is authorized or
directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is
requested.



   (B)   Whenever any analysis of any commodity or material is
reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any code or ordinance
provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee of the village whose business is governed by the provision to give
any authorized officer or employee of the village requesting the same
sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon
request.



   (C)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the
President and Board of Trustees may revoke the license of any proprietor of
any licensed business in the village who refuses to permit any such officer
or employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such sample to
make the inspection, or take an adequate sample of the commodity, who
interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty
in making such inspection, provided that no license shall be revoked for such
cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of
the premises, in the name of the village, stating that such inspection or
sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or to
obtain the sample.



('52 Code, § 191)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.13  VEHICLE TAG.



   Whenever the number of vehicles used is a basis of a license fee, the
Village Comptroller shall furnish each licensee with a tag or license sticker
for each vehicle covered by the license, and such tag or sticker shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle while it is in use.



('52 Code, § 194)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.14  BUSINESS AS NUISANCE PROHIBITED.



   No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to
amount to a nuisance.



('52 Code, § 190)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.15  REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Suspension of business operation. When the conduct or
operation of any business shall constitute a nuisance or a clear and present
danger to the public health, safety, or general welfare, the Village 
Administrator shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of
business, the closing of the premises and the suspension of any license for a
period not to exceed ten days. Within five days after the Village
Administrator has so acted, the Village Administrator shall call a hearing
for the purpose  of determining whether the license should be suspended for
an additional period of time or revoked.



   (B)   Revocation of license.



      (1)   Licenses issued under the ordinances of the Village of
Itasca, unless otherwise provided, may be suspended for up to 30 days or
revoked by the Village Administrator after notice and hearing as provided
below for any of the following causes:



         (a)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement
contained in the application for the license;



         (b)   Any violation by the licensee of ordinance
provisions relating to the license, the subject matter of the license, or the
premises occupied;



         (c)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor when such conviction indicates his or her inability to operate a
safe, honest, or legitimate business operation;



         (d)   Failure of the licensee to pay any outstanding
fines, fees or monies due the village;



         (e)   Refusal to permit an inspection or investigation
or, take sample or interference with an authorized village officer or
employee while in the performance of his or her duties in making such
inspections, as provided in village ordinances;



         (f)   Any violation of the zoning regulations pertaining
to the premises;



         (g)   Finding that the business license was issued in
error;



         (h)   Finding that the public health, welfare or safety
would be adversely affected by the continuation of the license; or



         (i)   Any other violation of any village ordinances,
resolutions, or regulations or any state or federal law, rule or regulation.



      (2)   Such suspension or revocation, if ordered, shall not
preclude prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the
violation of other applicable village ordinances or state
statutes/regulations.



   (C)   Hearing.



      (1)   Notice of the hearing for suspension or revocation of a
license shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of
the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be
either sent by certified mail to the licensee at his or her last known
address or delivered by personal service. All notices shall be served at
least three days prior to the date set for the hearing.



      (2)   At the hearing, which shall take place before the
Village Administrator, the Village  Attorney shall present the complaint and
shall represent the village. The licensee shall be permitted counsel and
shall have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The
Village  Administrator may examine any books, papers, records or memorandum
bearing upon the business or  activities of the licensee, take testimony and
make rulings as to the admissibility of evidence, although  the Village
Administrator is not bound by the technical rules of evidence. A stenographic
or electronically recorded record of the hearing shall be kept. The Village
Administrator shall render a  decision within a reasonable time after the
conclusion of the hearing, but not later than 15 days thereafter. The
decision shall be in writing and shall summarize the evidence and state the
reasons for the decision. Said decision shall be mailed to the licensee’s
last known address.



      (3)   Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked shall
pay to the village the costs of the hearing before the Village Administrator.
The Village Administrator  shall determine the costs incurred by the village
for the hearing, including, but not limited to, court reporter fees, the
costs of transcripts or records, attorneys’ fees, the cost of preparing and
mailing notices and orders, and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by
the village, or such lesser sum as the Village Administrator may allow. The
licensee shall pay said costs to the village within 30 days of notification
of the costs by the Village Administrator. Failure to pay these costs within
30 days of notification is a violation of this section and may be cause for
license suspension or revocation or the levy of a fine.



   (D)   Appeal.



      (1)   Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the
Village Administrator to suspend or revoke a license under the provisions of
this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to the
Village President within ten days after the notice of action or decision has
been mailed to the licensee’s last known address. An appeal shall be taken
by filing with the Village Clerk a written  statement setting forth the
grounds for appeal. The Village Clerk shall transmit the written statement to
the Village President within ten days of receipt, and the Village President
shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal, but such hearing
shall be set not later than ten days from the date of receipt of the
licensee’s written statement. Notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be served on the licensee in the same manner as provided for the
initial hearing. The Village President shall serve a decision on the licensee
within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing on appeal. The licensee
may  seek administrative review of a suspension or revocation order in a
court of competent jurisdiction.



      (2)   Any licensee who unsuccessfully appeals to the Village
President shall pay to the village the costs of the appeal before the Village
President. The Village Administrator shall determine the costs incurred by
the village for the appeal, including, but not limited to, court reporter
fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorneys’ fees, the cost of
preparing and mailing notices and orders, and all other miscellaneous
expenses incurred by the village, or such lesser sum as the Village
Administrator may allow. The licensee shall pay said costs to the village
within thirty 30 days of notification of the costs  by the Village
Administrator. Failure to pay these costs within 30 days of notification is a
violation of this section and may be cause for license suspension or
revocation or the levy of a fine.



('52 Code, § 192)  (Am. Ord. 1657-13, passed 5-21-13)



§ 110.16  BUSINESSES SUBJECT TO ANNUAL LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   Where a business is subject to a license fee based upon square
footage, the following license fees shall apply:



 

Total Square Footage
 
License Fees




5,000 square feet or less
 
$75


5,001 - 10,000 square feet
 
$90


10,001 - 50,000 square feet
 
$200


50,001 - 100,000 square feet
 
$400


100,001 - 200,000 square feet
 
$500


200,001 - 300,000 square feet
 
$800


300,001 - 400,000 square feet
 
$1,200


400,001 square feet or more
 
$1,600




 



   (B)   All persons, partners, firms or corporations engaged in the
businesses in the village which are described and set forth below shall file
an application on the forms provided by the village, and shall furnish the
information requested thereon, and shall pay the calendar year license fees
provided for said business as set forth opposite the business activities
described below.



 

Business Activities Licensed
 
Annual License Fees (Unless otherwise noted)




AMUSEMENT CENTERS
 
Based upon square footage


ANIMALS
 


   Hospital or clinic
 
Based upon square footage


   Grooming shop
 
Based upon square footage


   Kennels
 
Based upon square footage


   Veterinarian
 
Based upon square footage


AUCTIONEER
 


   Annual
 
$75


   Each day
 
$15


BANKS, SAVINGS AND LOANS, AND OTHER FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
 


   Each facility or premises location
 
Based upon square footage


BILLIARD HALLS OR PARLORS
 
Based upon square footage


CARNIVALS
 


   Per day
 
$50


   Plus each concession, per day
 
$15


CONTRACTORS
 


   (with facility or office located in village, including but not limited
to, general, concrete, heating, ventilating and air conditioning, electrical,
plumbing, landscaping, masonry, sewer, and water)
 
Based upon square footage


COUNTRY CLUBS OR GOLF COURSES
 


   (includes usual accessory services)
 
Based upon square footage


DISTRIBUTION CENTERS, MANUFACTURING, WAREHOUSING
 
Based upon square footage


DRY CLEANERS AND LAUNDRIES
 


   (including coin-operated washers and dryers, agency or plant)
 
Based upon square footage


ENTERTAINMENT, LIVE
 


   Single performer, annually
 
$  40


   Single performer, per day
 
$  25


   Multiple performers, annually
 
$600


   Multiple performers, per day
 
$  40


EXHIBITION HALLS, FLEA MARKETS
 


   General, per day
 
$  36


   Food facilities, per day
 
$  24


   Each booth, in addition, per day
 
$  36


GARAGES
 


   Repair and service of motor vehicles
 
$  50


HOSPITALS
 
$300


HOTELS AND MOTELS
 
Based upon square footage


MOBILE FOOD TRUCK, per vehicle
 
$300


RESTAURANTS AND EATING FACILITIES
 


   (includes drive-in, carry-out, counter service and table service)
 
Based upon square footage


RETAIL SHOPS
 


   (including, but not limited to, bakery, book, butcher, clothing, drugs,
dry goods, groceries, furniture, hardware)
 
Based upon square footage


SERVICE STATIONS, MOTOR VEHICLES
 
Based upon square footage


SERVICE, SALES, REPAIR
 


   (personal and consumer goods, including barber, shoe repair, real
estate and tailoring)
 
Based upon square footage


 


SHELTERED CARE, NURSING HOMES, DAY CARE CENTERS
 
Based upon square footage


SPORTS, GYMNASIUMS, EXERCISE, AND RECREATION FACILITIES (if operated separate
from principal business activity)
 
Based upon square footage


TAXICABS
 


   Per cab   
 
$  54


   Cab stand
 
$  30


TOBACCO SALES
 
$100


VENDORS, ITINERANT
 


   (retail, from vehicles)
 


   Per vehicle
 
$  50


VENDING MACHINES
 
$  25


   (coin-operated dispensers of goods and games)
 




 



   (C)   For those business activities not otherwise listed above, the
business license fee shall be that which is nearest to a defined business
activity.



   (D)   (1)   If a business license is not renewed, or the
appropriate business license fee is not paid, within 30 days of when any such
business license renewal or license fee is due, the business in question
shall be subject to an additional fee based upon the following schedule:



 

If after
 
But on or before
 
Additional Fee


30 days
 
60 days
 
$20


60 days
 
90 days
 
$50


90 days
 
120 days
 
$100



 



      (2)   After 120 days, any business that has not renewed its
business license or paid the license fee due shall be subject to a fine in
the amount of $750 upon conviction thereof, and each day of non-compliance
shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.



      (3)   In no case shall the amount of the additional fee
provided for in this division be greater than the amount of the underlying
business license fee for the business in question.



      (4)   Nothing in this division shall in any way limit or
impair the ability of the village to prosecute violations of this chapter, as
provided in § 110.99.



(Ord. 521-81, passed 12-15-81; Am. Ord. 820-94, passed 9-6-94; Am. Ord.
1119-02, passed 3-19-02; Am. Ord. 1179-03, passed 10-21-03; Am. Ord. 1238-05,
passed 3-15-05)



§ 110.17  GARAGE SALES.



   (A)   Registration Required. It shall be unlawful for any applicant
to sponsor, conduct, have or operate a garage sale within a residential
zoning district without prior registration with the Village of Itasca in
compliance with the following terms and conditions:



      (1)   The applicant must be an owner or tenant of the premises
where such sale is to be held.



      (2)   There shall be no fee for this registration.



      (3)   Applicants shall register with the Village of Itasca by
contacting the Itasca Village Hall during regular business hours at least 24
hours in advance of the garage sale.



      (4)   Applicants shall provide their full name, address, phone
number, and dates and times of the garage sale.



   (B)    Time Restrictions. No more than three garage sales shall be
allowed within any one calendar year. Sales shall be limited to a consecutive
period of no more than three days and shall be conducted only during the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.



   (C)   Additional Restrictions. The following restrictions also apply
to garage sales:



      (1)   No sale items shall be located on public property,
parkway area, or sidewalks.



      (2)   No sale activities shall be conducted on public
property, parkway, or sidewalks.



      (3)   All signs advertising such sale shall be located on
private property only and in accordance with sign regulations of the Itasca
Zoning Ordinance.



      (4)   The sale shall be conducted without the use of outdoor
speakers or other amplification equipment.



      (5)   The sale shall be conducted in accordance with all other
laws or ordinances in effect in the Village of Itasca.



(Ord. 1403-07, passed 10-16-07; Am. Ord. 1818-16, passed 10-4-16)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, partnership, firm or corporation, or any other
entity, violating any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is
not provided shall be fined, on conviction thereof, not less than $20 nor
more than $750 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



('52 Code, § 195)



   (B)   Any person, partnership, firm or corporation, or other entity,
which violates § 110.16, including nonpayment of license fee, shall be fined
on conviction thereof not less than $20 nor more than $750, and each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 521-81, passed 12-15-81)



(Am. Ord. 1238-05, passed 3-15-05)



CHAPTER 111:  SOLICITORS



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Declaration of village policy



   111.03   Form of notice prohibiting solicitors



   111.04   Duty of solicitors



   111.05   Uninvited soliciting prohibited



   111.06   Limitations on soliciting



   111.07   Fraud prohibited



   111.08   Loud noises and speaking devices



   111.09   Soliciting on highways and streets restricted



   111.10   Use of streets



   111.11   Obscene materials



   111.12   Unlawful solicitation



   111.13   Prohibition of further solicitation



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTRIBUTION.   The promise or grant of any donation, money, alms,
food, clothing or property of any kind or value.



   OBSCENITY.   Any material that:



      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult
community standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the
prurient interest; and



      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult
community standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently
offensive way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory
functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and



      (3)   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



   SOLICIT.   To go to any private premises in the village without prior
appointment or prearrangement with the occupant of such premises or to go
upon any public street, sidewalk or other property owned by the village:



      (1)   To ask for a contribution, or



      (2)   To sell, offer for sale, barter or exchange, or to take
orders for the present or future delivery of any good, service, ware,
merchandise or other article or thing whatsoever.



   SOLICITOR.   Any person who goes to any premises in the village
without prior appointment or prearrangement with the occupant of such
premises, or goes upon any public street, sidewalk or other property owned by
the village:



      (1)   To ask for a contribution, or



      (2)   To sell, offer for sale, barter or exchange, or to take
orders for the present or future delivery of any good, service, ware,
merchandise or other article or thing whatsoever.



(Ord. 1263-05, passed 9-20-05)



§ 111.02  DECLARATION OF VILLAGE POLICY.



   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village President and
Board of Trustees that the occupants of premises in the village shall have
the opportunity to elect whether solicitors will be invited to solicit at
such premises, or whether solicitors will be prohibited from soliciting at
such premises under any circumstances. Such election shall be made by posting
a notice in the manner set forth in § 111.03.



(Ord. 1263-05, passed 9-20-05)



§ 111.03  FORM OF NOTICE PROHIBITING SOLICITORS.



   (A)   Each resident who desires to secure the protection intended to
be provided by the regulations pertaining to solicitors contained in this
chapter may elect to prohibit solicitors at his or her residence or place of
business by posting upon or within 30 inches of the main entrance door to his
or her residence or place of business a weatherproof card, approximately
three inches by four inches in size, stating as follows:




NO SOLICITORS INVITED




   (B)   Such notice shall be printed with letters at least one-half
inch in height. The Village Clerk shall keep and maintain cards of the kind
herein described, to be provided to persons requesting them for the cost
thereof.



   (C)   Any card so exhibited that complies with the criteria set
forth herein, whether or not provided by the Village Clerk, shall constitute
sufficient notice to any solicitor of the election by the occupant of such
premises to prohibit solicitation at the residence or place of business where
such card is posted.



   (D)   If no such card is posted, it shall be presumed that the
occupant has elected not to prohibit solicitors.



(Ord. 1263-05, passed 9-20-05)



§ 111.04  DUTY OF SOLICITORS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor, upon going onto any
premises in the village, to first determine whether the notice specified in
§ 111.03 is exhibited as set forth therein, and to be governed by any
prohibitions contained in such notice. If a notice stating "NO SOLICITORS
INVITED " is exhibited at the premises, then the solicitor shall immediately
and peacefully leave the premises.



   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any premises, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from such premises
when requested to do so by its occupant.



(Ord. 1263-05, passed 9-20-05)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.05  UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful, and shall constitute a nuisance,
for any person to go upon any premises and ring the door bell upon or near
any door, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other
manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such premises,
for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof in order to
solicit, as herein defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited at such
premises in accordance with § 111.03 or oral notice given in accordance with
the provisions of § 111.04 herein.



(Ord. 1263-05, passed 9-20-05)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.06  LIMITATIONS ON SOLICITING.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance
for any person to go upon any premises and ring the door bell upon or near
any door, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other
manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence
for the purpose of securing any audience with the occupant thereof and to
solicit, as herein defined, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. local time
Monday through Saturday, or at any time on a Sunday, or on any state or
national holiday.



(Ord. 1263-05, passed 9-20-05)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.07  FRAUD PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to cheat or deceive any person,
or to make any fraudulent misrepresentation, whether through himself or
through an employee or agent, while acting as a solicitor in the village.



(Ord. 1263-05, passed 9-20-05)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.08  LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES.



   No solicitor, nor anyone acting on his behalf, shall blow a horn or use
any other sound device, including any loud-speaking radio or amplifying
system, upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the
village, or upon any private premises in the village, for the purposes of
attracting attention to his solicitation or to any goods, where the volume of
sound emitted or produced therefrom unreasonably interferes with the
enjoyment of life by any resident of the village.



(Ord. 1263-05, passed 9-20-05)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.09  SOLICITING ON HIGHWAYS AND STREETS RESTRICTED.



   (A)   (1)   No solicitor shall stand upon any highway or public
street for the purpose of soliciting contributions from the occupant of any
vehicle in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1006. Solicitation on
public highways or streets in the village shall be permitted only at the
following intersections:



         (a)   The intersection of Irving Park Road and Prospect
Avenue;



         (b)   The intersection of Irving Park Road and Walnut
Street;



         (c)   The intersection of Irving Park Road and Rohlwing
Road.



      (2)   Any such solicitation shall only be authorized between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. daily, and only upon the following
conditions:



   (B)   Any solicitor engaged in solicitation upon a public street
shall be at least 18 years of age and shall wear a high-visibility vest.
Solicitors shall stand on or so near to the curbside of the street as to
avoid creating a traffic hazard. In no event shall solicitors obstruct or
impede the flow of traffic on any street.



   (C)   Any such soliciting person or agency shall be registered with
the Illinois Attorney General as a charitable organization as provided by the
Solicitation for Charity Act, as amended, being ILCS Ch. 225, Act 460.



   (D)   The soliciting person or agency shall be liable for any
injuries to any person or property during such solicitation which is causally
related to any act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent.



   (E)   Prior to soliciting on any highway or public street in the
village as provided in this section, the soliciting agency shall obtain a
highway solicitation permit and shall file with the Village Clerk at the time
of application for such permit, the date or dates on which said highway
solicitation will occur within the village. Prior to issuance of the highway
solicitation permit, the soliciting agency shall file with the following with
the Village Clerk:



      (1)   A release and indemnification agreement, in a form
acceptable to the village, whereby the soliciting agency and its successors
agrees to release the village from any liability, and to indemnify, defend
and hold the village, its President and Board of Trustees, and its officials,
officers, employees, agents and volunteers, harmless from and against any and
all liability arising out of claims for bodily injury, including personal
injury and accidental death and property damage or any such claim for damage
arising out of the acts or omissions of the soliciting agency and any of the
individuals soliciting on its behalf in connection with solicitation upon any
public streets or highways; and



      (2)   A certificate of insurance demonstrating that the
soliciting agency, person or entity has commercial general liability and
property damage insurance in full force and effect covering the days on which
the soliciting agency intends to solicit on the said highways or public
streets in the village to protect it from claims for bodily injury, including
personal injury and accidental death, as well as claims for property damage,
in an amount not less than $1,000,000 for bodily injury on account of any one
occurrence, and property damage of not less than $300,000 on account of any
one occurrence, with combined aggregate limits of not less than $1,000,000.
Said certificate of insurance shall name the village as additional insured
thereon and shall provide that the insurance policy is non-cancelable unless
the village is given 30 days prior written notification.



(Ord. 1263-05, passed 9-20-05)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.10  USE OF STREETS.



   No solicitor shall have any exclusive right to any location in the
public streets, right-of-way, or other public property, nor shall he or she
be permitted to operate in any congested area where his or her operations
unreasonably impede or obstruct use of the same by the public. For the
purpose of this section, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good
faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the
public is unreasonably impeded or obstructed.



(Ord. 1263-05, passed 9-20-05)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.11  OBSCENE MATERIALS.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance
for any person to go upon any premises and ring the door bell upon or near
any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of such premises, for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof in order to solicit any obscene writing,
picture, record or other representation or embodiment of the obscene, as
defined in § 111.01 herein, provided that said solicitor has knowledge of
the nature of the obscene content thereof, or recklessly fails to exercise a
reasonable inspection thereof which would have disclosed the nature of the
obscene content. Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing
the prior restraint of the solicitation of any allegedly obscene materials.



(Ord. 1263-05, passed 9-20-05)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.12  UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit within the corporate
limits of the village if he or she has been convicted of any felony or a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has been found to have violated any
consumer fraud law of the State of Illinois, or any other state or of the
United States, by any court or administrative agency within the five years
preceding any such solicitation.



(Ord. 1263-05, passed 9-20-05)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.13  PROHIBITION OF FURTHER SOLICITATION.



   The Village Clerk shall notify a solicitor by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and the Village Attorney shall be and hereby is authorized
to apply to either the United States District Court for the Northern District
of Illinois or the Circuit Court of DuPage County, Illinois for a judicial
determination as to whether further solicitation in the village by such
solicitor may be prohibited if any of the following occur:



   (A)   Violating any of the provisions of §§ 111.04 through 111.11;



   (B)   The Village Clerk or any other agent or employee of the
village receives ten or more bona fide, sworn complaints setting forth facts
showing a violation of any provision of this chapter or of the laws of the
State of Illinois;



   (C)   Engaging in fraud or misrepresentation to obtain money or
property;



   (D)   Promising any person that the proceeds of a solicitation of
funds will be refunded upon request and thereafter willfully failing to honor
a refund request within 60 days of any such request;



   (E)   Promising any person that he or she will receive a refund upon
request without providing a written statement of the refund terms and
conditions;



   (F)   Knowingly misrepresenting that a donor will obtain a federal
tax deduction;



   (G)   Willfully using solicited funds to commit a crime.



(Ord. 1263-05, passed 9-20-05)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who solicits within the corporate limits of the village in
violation of this chapter is, upon conviction thereof, subject to a fine of
not less than $50 nor more than $750, and each act of solicitation in
violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 1263-05, passed 9-20-05) 



CHAPTER 112:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



General Provisions



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Local Liquor Control Commissioner



Retail Liquor Dealer's License



   112.15   License required



   112.16   Application



   112.17   Restrictions on licenses



   112.18   License fees



   112.19   Term; pro rata



   112.20   Number of licenses



   112.21   Disposition of fees



   112.22   Records of licenses issued to be kept



   112.23   Transfer of license



   112.24   Change of location



   112.25   Location restrictions



   112.26   Renewal of license



   112.27   Revocation, suspension and fines



   112.28   Basset Training required



   112.29   Compliance enforcement



   112.30   Corkage license restrictions



Retail Sale of Alcoholic Beverages



   112.35   Consumption on premises



   112.36   Restricted areas



   112.37   Closing hours



   112.38   Premises to be kept in sanitary condition



   112.39   Employees having contagious diseases prohibited



   112.40   View of premises from street



   112.41   Underage persons tending bar prohibited



   112.42   Sales to and consumption by persons under the age of 21
years



   112.43   Sales to unfit persons prohibited



   112.44   Peddling alcohol prohibited



 



   112.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.   Any spirits, wine, beer, ale and any other liquid
containing more than .5% of alcohol by volume which is fit for beverage
purposes.



   BEER. A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion
or concoction of barley, or other grain, malt, and hops in water, and
includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the
like.



   CATERER RETAILER.   Any restaurant or establishment that meets the
requirements and possesses a Class A, B, or E liquor license within the
village and that serves alcoholic beverages as an incidental part of a food
service on the premises of an off-site location of a catered event, and that
is not served from a vehicle.  Further, the village adopts by incorporation
the state statutes and all regulations of the State Liquor Control Commission
regarding the dispensing and sale of alcohol by a caterer retailer.



   CLUB.   A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than
the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used, and maintained by
its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing
a building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be
suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and
accommodation of its members and their guests.



   RESTAURANT.   Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals
actually are served and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations,
such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and
kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.



   RETAIL SALE.   Sale for use or consumption and not for resale in any
form.



   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the
natural contents of fruits, or vegetables, containing sugar, including such
beverages when fortified by the addition of alcoholic liquor, as defined
above.



('52 Code, § 271)  (Am. Ord. 948-97, passed 4-8-97; Am. Ord. 1668-13,
passed 8-20-13)



§ 112.02  LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.



   The Village President shall serve as the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of the laws of the
state and the ordinances of the village pertaining to the sale of alcoholic
beverages.



(Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13)



RETAIL LIQUOR DEALER'S LICENSE



§ 112.15  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, or give away
in the village any alcoholic liquor either by himself or herself or through
an agent, employee or partner, without having a retail liquor dealer’s
license or a special event license, or in violation of the terms of such
license. Nothing herein shall prevent the possession, transportation and
consumption of alcoholic liquor for the lawful, personal use of the
possessor, his or her family and his or her guests.



('52 Code, § 272)  (Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13) Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.16  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Applications for retail liquor dealer’s licenses shall be
made to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner in writing, signed by the
applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club
or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the
following statements and information:



      (1)   The name, age and home address of the applicant in the
case of an individual; in the case of a copartnership, the name and home
address of each partner or person entitled to a share in the profits thereof;
and in the case of a corporation or limited liability corporation, the
objects for which organized and the names and home addresses of the officers,
directors and any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more
than 5% of the stock of such corporation or limited liability corporation;
and in the case of a club, the names and home addresses of its Board of
Directors, Executive Committee or other similar body chosen by its members.



      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of
birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her
naturalization;



      (3)   The name and character of business of the applicant; and
in case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed;



      (4)   The length of time said applicant has been in business
of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter
was issued;



      (5)   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at
the time the application is made;



      (6)   The location and description of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated under such license;



      (7)   A statement whether the applicant and all of the
individuals required to be identified in the application have made
application for a similar or other license on premises other than those
described in this application, and the disposition of such application.



      (8)   A signed statement that the applicant and all the
individuals required to be identified in the application have never been
convicted of a felony and are not disqualified to receive a license by reason
of any matter or thing contained in this chapter, any laws of this state, or
any ordinances of this village.



      (9)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision
thereof, or by the federal government, has been revoked, and the reason
therefor;



      (10)   A signed statement that the applicant and all the
individuals required to be identified in the application will not violate any
of the laws of the state, or of the United States, or any ordinances of the
village in the conduct of his or her place of business;



      (11)   A statement that the applicant is the owner of premises
from which the business is to be conducted or that the applicant has a lease
from the owner of said premises, the term of which is not less than the
period of the license. The name and address of the owner or owners of the
leased premises shall be stated.



      (12)   A statement that the business for which a liquor
license is requested is covered by dram shop insurance for a term not less
than the period of the license. A memorandum copy of such policy shall
accompany the application. The applicant shall promptly furnish any notices
of cancellation or renewals of policies, and shall otherwise keep the dram
shop insurance in force for the full period of the license.



      (13)   If applicable, the name, age, home address and
telephone number of the person(s) who will manage the business of the
applicant within the village.



      (14)   The class of license applied for.



   (B)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may require such
additional information or identification as he or she may deem necessary in
order to establish the character of the applicant. Such information shall
include a requirement that the applicant, if a natural person, submit his or
her fingerprints to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. In case of a
copartnership, a corporation or limited liability corporation, the partners,
or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of
the stock of such corporation or limited liability corporation, shall be
required to furnish such information, including fingerprints. The Local
Liquor Control Commissioner may cause to have a criminal background check
performed on any such applicant or individual.



('52 Code, § 273)  (Ord. 238-65, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed
8-20-13)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.17  RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSES.



   No retail liquor dealer's license shall be issued to:



   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the village.



   (B)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal
or state law unless it has been more than five years since the individual’s
completion of probation or parole, and the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
determines that such person has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant
the public trust. The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be
upon the applicant.



   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.



   (D)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he or she resides.



   (E)   A person who has been convicted of keeping a place of
prostitution.



   (F)   A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.



   (G)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or any crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality.



   (H)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any
license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.



   (I)   A copartnership, unless all of the members of such
copartnership shall be qualified to obtain a license.



   (J)   A corporation or limited liability company, if any officer,
manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the
aggregate more than 5% of the stock of the corporation or limited liability
company, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason
other than citizenship and residence within the political subdivision.



   (K)   A corporation or limited liability company unless it is
incorporated or organized in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation
or foreign limited liability company which is qualified under the Business
Corporation Act of 1983 or the Limited Liability Company Act to transact
business in Illinois. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall permit and
accept from an applicant for a license proof prepared from the Secretary of
State’s website that the corporation or limited liability company is in
good standing and is qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 or
the Limited Liability Company Act to transact business in Illinois.



   (L)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or
agent unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required
of the licensee.



   (M)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any state or
federal law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic
liquor, or who shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court in
answer to charges for such violations.



   (N)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is
sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which a
license is sought.



   (O)   Any law-enforcing public official, the Village President, or
any member of the Board of Trustees; and no such official shall have a direct
interest in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except
a  member of the Board of Trustees may have a direct interest in the
manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor as long as he or she
is not a law enforcing public official. To prevent any conflict of interest,
a member of the Board of Trustees with either a direct or indirect interest
in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor shall not
participate in any meetings, hearings, or decisions on matters impacting the
manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor.



   (P)   A person, firm or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor dealer’s license.



   (Q)   A person who is not the owner or a beneficial owner of the
business to be operated by the licensee.



   (R)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as
proscribed by any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of section 28-1 or,
or as proscribed by section 28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the Criminal Code of 1961 or
the Criminal Code of 2012 (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 28-1(a)(3) through
(a)(11), 28-1.1 or 28-3, respectively), or as proscribed by a statute
replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions.



   (S)   A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been
issued by the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to
be issued a license under the Raffles Act or the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar
Games Act.



('52 Code, § 274)  (Ord. 468-77, passed 6-28-77; Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed
8-20-13)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.18  LICENSE FEES.



   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor in the village shall pay an annual license fee.  Such
licenses shall be divided into the following classes:



   (A)   A Class “A” license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors for consumption only on the premises specified.  The fee
for such license shall be $1,500 per year.



   (B)   A Class “A-1” license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors for consumption only on the premises specified. The fee for
such license shall be $2,000 per year.



   (C)   A Class “B” license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises specified and for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquors in their original package not for
consumption on the premises where sold.  The fee for such combination
licenses shall be $1,700 per year.



   (D)   A Class “B-1” license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises specified and for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquors in their original package not for
consumption on the premises where sold. The fee for such combination licenses
shall be $2,200 per year.



   (E)   A Class “C” license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors in their original package not for consumption on the
premises where sold and shall authorize the retail sale of beer manufactured
on the premises for consumption on the premises, provided that no individual
serving of beer exceed 16 fluid ounces and that no individual customer be
served more than 48 fluid ounces per 24-hour period. All consumption on the
premises shall be had at a bar with customer seating, at a designated seating
area with tables and chairs, or while participating in an official tour of
the premises. Consumption on the premises shall be in no other area, and no
other customer seating shall be provided or permitted. The fee for such
license shall be $1,100 per year.



   (F)   A Class "C-1" license shall authorize (i) the manufacture of
beer in the amount specified by ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1-3.33 only on the
premises specified in the license; (ii) the retail sale of the beer
manufactured on the premises for consumption on and off the premises where
sold; and (iii) the retail sale of alcoholic beverages not manufactured on
the premises for consumption on the premises. The fee for such licenses shall
be $2,200 per year.



   (G)   A Class “D” license shall authorize solely the retail sale
of alcoholic liquors in their original package but not for consumption on the
premises where sold.  The fee for such license shall be $1,050 per year.



   (H)   A Class “E” license shall authorize the retail sale of
beer and wine only for consumption on the premises where sold, provided that
the sale and service of food items is the principal business activity
conducted on the premises.  The fee for such license shall be $1,050 per
year.



   (I)   A caterer retailer license shall be designated as a Class
“F” license, which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors,
for consumption on the premises of a catered event, provided that the event
includes a food service.  The fee for a Class “F” license, for a caterer
retailer, shall be $1,050 per year.



   (J)   A Class “G” license shall authorize the sale or giving
away of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of a special
occasion or event hosted by an educational, fraternal, political, civic,
religious or not-for-profit organization. Such special occasion or event
shall not exceed seven days in duration. The location of each special
occasion or event shall be described in the license application, and each
organization requesting a Class “G” license shall have dram shop
insurance for a term not less than the period of the special occasion or
event. A Class “G” license shall be required for all special occasions or
events with the village hosted by an educational, fraternal, political,
civic, religious or not-for- profit organization where alcoholic liquor will
be sold. Any Class “G” license shall expire by operation of law at the
conclusion of any special occasion or event. The fee for such license shall
be $25 per day.



   (K)   A Class “H” corkage license shall authorize restaurants,
without liquor licenses, to permit the consumption of wine on the premises
that is carried in by its patrons. It shall be unlawful for any restaurant to
permit the consumption of wine on the premises without a corkage license or
other liquor license. A Class “H” corkage license shall be subject to the
restrictions found in § 112.30. The fee for such license shall be $250 per
year.



('52 Code, § 276)  (Ord. 174-62, passed 4-10-62; Am. Ord. 543-83, passed
2-15-83; Am. Ord. 545-83, passed 3-1-83; Am. Ord. 948-97, passed 4-8-97; Am.
Ord. 1130-02, passed 3-19-02; Am. Ord. 1634-12, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord.
1668-13, passed 8-20-13; Am. Ord. 1807-16, passed 7-5-16)  Penalty, see §
112.99



§ 112.19  TERM; PRO RATA.



   Each retail liquor dealer’s license shall terminate on April 30
following the date of issuance. The fee to be paid shall be reduced in
proportion to the full calendar months which have expired in the year prior
to the issuance of the license.



('52 Code, § 275)  (Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13)



§ 112.20  NUMBER OF LICENSES.



   The number of liquor licenses available for issuance within the village
shall be as follows:



   (A)   Class “A”:  six licenses.



   (B)   Class “A-1”:  two license.



   (C)   Class “B”:  one license.



   (D)    Class “B-1”:  five licenses.



   (E)   Class “C”:  one license.



   (F)   Class “C-1”:  one license.



   (G)   Class “D”:  six licenses.



   (H)   Class “E”:  one licenses.



   (I)   Class “F”:  zero licenses.



   (J)   Class “G”:  as determined by the Village Board of
Trustees.



   (K)   Class “H”:  zero licenses.



('52 Code, § 277)  (Ord. 174-62, passed 4-10-62; Am. Ord. 223-64, passed
9-22-64; Am. Ord. 318-70, passed 7-7-70; Am. Ord. 370-71, passed 10-5-71; Am.
Ord. 386-72, passed 5-16-72; Am. Ord. 420-75, passed 6-5-73; Am. Ord. 513-81,
passed 4-7-81; Am. Ord. 528-82, passed 4-6-82; Am. Ord. 543-83, passed
2-15-83; Am. Ord. 545-83, passed 3-1-83; Am. Ord. 585-85, passed 5-28-85; Am.
Ord. 600-85, passed 10-8-85; Am. Ord. 625-87, passed 3-10-87; Am. Ord.
749-92, passed 9-1-92; Am. Ord. 788-93, passed 5-11-93; Am. Ord. 948-97,
passed 4-8-97; Am. Ord. 973-97, passed 10-8-97; Am. Ord. 1181-03, passed
9-2-03; Am. Ord. 1199-04, passed 4-20-04; Am. Ord. 1200-04, passed 4-20-04;
Am. Ord. 1221-04, passed 9-21-04; Am. Ord. 1254-05, passed 5-3-05; Am. Ord.
1255-05, passed 5-3-05; Am. Ord. 1259-05, passed 6-7-05; Am. Ord. 1260-05,
passed 6-7-05; Am. Ord. 1307-06, passed 4-18-06; Am. Ord. 1308-06, passed
4-18-06; Am. Ord. 1312-06, passed 5-2-06; Am. Ord. 1383-07, passed 5-1-07;
Am. Ord. 1445-08, passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 1453-08, passed 9-2-08; Am. Ord.
1478-09, passed 2-10-09; Am. Ord. 1519-10, passed 2-16-10; Am. Ord. 1522-10,
passed 5-4-10; Am. Ord. 1523-10, passed 5-4-10; Am. Ord. 1617-12, passed
4-3-12; Am. Ord. 1618-12, passed 4-3-12; Am. Ord. 1624-12, passed 6-19-12;
Am. Ord. 1625-12, passed 6-19-12; Am. Ord. 1635-12, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord.
1648-13, passed 4-2-13; Am. Ord. 1649-13, passed 4-2-13; Am. Ord. 1658-13,
passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord. 1659-13, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord. 1666-13, passed
8-20-13; Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13; Am. Ord. 1672-13, passed 10-15-13;
Am. Ord. 1673-13, passed 10-15-13; Am. Ord. 1692-14, passed 4-15-14; Am. Ord.
1707-14, passed 10-7-14; Am. Ord. 1708-14, passed 10-7-14; Am. Ord. 1721-14,
passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 1722-14, passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 1737-15, passed
4-21-15; Am. Ord. 1738-15, passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord. 1739-15, passed 4-21-15;
Am. Ord. 1740-15, passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord. 1741-15, passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord.
1742-15, passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord. 1764-15, passed 10-20-15; Am. Ord. 1765-15,
passed 10-20-15; Am. Ord. 1766-15, passed 10-20-15; Am. Ord. 1771-15, passed
10-20-15; Am. Ord. 1792-16, passed 3-1-16; Am. Ord. 1799-16, passed 4-19-16;
Am. Ord. 1806-16, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 1808-16, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord.
1843-17, passed 5-2-17; Am. Ord. 1844-17, passed 5-16-17)



§ 112.21  DISPOSITION OF FEES.



   All license fees required by § 112.18 shall be paid to the village at
the time the application is made, and shall forthwith be turned over to the
Village Treasurer.  In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee
shall be returned to the applicant; if the license is granted, then the fee
shall be deposited in the general corporate fund or in such other fund as
shall have been designated by the Board of Trustees by proper action.



('52 Code, § 278)  (Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13)



§ 112.22  RECORDS OF LICENSES ISSUED TO BE KEPT.



   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a
complete record of all such licenses issued by him or her.



('52 Code, § 279)  (Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13)



§ 112.23  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   (A)   A license shall be purely a person privilege, good for no more
than one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as provided in § 112.27,
and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. 



   (B)   Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and
shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, provided
that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee and
the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such may exercise the
privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death
of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of
such license but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of such licensee.



   (C)   Any sale, transfer, assignment or infusion of capital, by any
person, copartner or corporation not presently on an existing license, of
more than 50% interest in the case of a co-partnership or 50% of stock in the
case of a corporation, shall be deemed a sale under this section. Any such
sale will require the new owner to apply for a new license and payment of all
fees.



   (D)   Any changes in partnership, officers, directors, or managers
of establishments licensed to sell alcoholic liquor in the village shall be
reported in writing to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner within ten days
of the change. All such personnel shall meet all the standards of this
chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license.



   (E)   Changes in stock ownership.



      (1)   A corporation licensed to sell alcoholic liquor in the
village shall advise the Local Liquor Control Commissioner at least 30 days
prior to any contemplated change of stock ownership involving 5% or more of
the stock of the corporation.



      (2)   Each individual seeking to acquire 5% or more of the
stock of a corporation licensed to sell alcoholic liquor in the village shall
comply with the provisions of §§ 112.16 and 112.17 of this chapter as
though he or she were applying for a license as an individual.



      (3)   The provisions of this division (E) shall not apply to
corporations whose stock is traded publicly and listed on recognized stock
exchanges.



   (F)   A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees
paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating
under the license in accordance with the provisions of this section.



('52 Code, § 280)  (Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13)  Penalty, see §
112.99



§ 112.24  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   A retail liquor dealer’s license shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquors only on the premises described in the application and license. Such
location may be changed only upon a written permission to make such change
issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. No change of location shall
be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor under this code, the laws of this state and any
other ordinances of the village.



('52 Code, § 281)  (Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13)  Penalty, see §
112.99



§ 112.25  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.



   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, other than an institution of
higher learning, hospital, home for the aged, indigent persons or veterans,
their spouses or children, or any military or naval station. This prohibition
shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, to regularly organized
clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where the sale of
alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on; nor to the
renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises
within 100 feet of any church or school where that church or school has been
established within such 100 feet since the issuance of the original license.
In the case of a church, the distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the
nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational
programs and not to property boundaries.  Nothing in this section shall
prohibit the issuance of a Class “G” license to a church, private school
or village-based community organization to sell at retail or give away
alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited to periods when groups are
assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common object
other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors.



('52 Code, § 285)  (Ord. 174-62, passed 4-10-62; Am. Ord. 1042-99, passed
10-19-99; Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.26  RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   Any licensee, except a Class “G” licensee, wishing to renew a
liquor license shall do so upon expiration of the term stated in the license.
At least 30 days prior to the expiration, the licensee shall file with the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner an application form in conformance with §
112.16, but shall only answer those portions of the application for which the
answers have changed from the last application. Prior to renewing a license,
the Liquor Control Commissioner shall determine that the licensee remains
qualified to receive a license and that the premises for which such renewal
license is sought are suitable for the purpose. The renewal privilege
provided herein shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any
case prevent the Village Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of
licenses to be issued within this jurisdiction. All license fees shall be due
and payable at the time a license renewal is sought.



('52 Code, § 284)  (Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13)



§ 112.27  REVOCATION, SUSPENSION AND FINES.



   (A)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend
any license, or fine any licensee, if he or she determines that cause exists
for such revocation, suspension, or fine by reason that such licensee, or
licensee’s agent or employee, has:



      (1)   Violated any provision of this chapter; or



      (2)   Violated any village ordinance or state law; or



      (3)   Violated any applicable rules or regulations established
by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or the State Commission; or



      (4)   Violated Chapter 119 of this code or any provision of
the Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.) or any rules,
regulations or restrictions imposed by the Illinois Gaming Board; or



      (5)   Been convicted of a felony charge under the laws of the
State of Illinois or the United States; or



      (6)   Provided a misstatement or withheld material information
in a license application or renewal or in a hearing before the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner; or



      (7)   Failed to pay any license fee, fine imposed under this
chapter, or tax imposed on alcoholic liquor or the sale thereof; or



      (8)   Failed to pay the village’s food and beverage tax; or



      (9)   Failed to correct any violations of the village’s
zoning or building codes for the premises for which the business is
conducted; or



      (10)   Failed to pay water and sewer fees to the village.



   (B)   No license shall be suspended or revoked and no fine shall be
imposed except after written notice to the licensee and a hearing before the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner in accordance with the provisions of the
Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934 (ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.)
as amended.



   (C)   If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner elects to fine such
licensee or suspend any license, the fine or suspension imposed shall not
exceed the limitations set forth in the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934
(ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.) as amended.  All fines imposed by
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be paid to the Village Clerk
within five business days of their imposition.  Failure to pay any fines or
costs imposed within five business days of notification is a violation of
this chapter and may be cause for license suspension or revocation.



   (D)   If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe
that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will
immediately threaten the welfare of the community he or she may, upon the
issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion, and
without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more
than seven days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that
period, except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of
another business or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not
be applicable to such other business or businesses.



   (E)   In addition to any fine, revocation, or suspension of any
license, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may require the licensee to
reimburse the village for any and all out-of-pocket costs associated with a
violation hearing in which there has been a finding of guilty. These costs
include, but are not limited to, the Village Attorney’s fees, court
reporter fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders, and all
other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village.



   (F)   For the purposes of this section, every licensee shall be
deemed responsible for the unlawful acts of his or her agents or employees
whether or not such licensee knowingly permits or has actual knowledge of
such unlawful acts.



('52 Code, § 294)  (Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13)



§ 112.28  BASSET TRAINING REQUIRED.



   (A)   For licenses issued on or after April 23, 2007, all original
or renewal applications for Class A, A-1, B, B-1, C, E, F and H liquor
licenses shall be accompanied with proof of completion of a state-certified
Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training (BASSET) Program
for all persons who sell or serve alcoholic beverages, all management
personnel working on premises, and anyone whose job description entails the
checking of identification for the purchases of alcoholic beverages, pursuant
to that license.



   (B)   A STATE-CERTIFIED BASSET  PROGRAM shall be defined as a
BASSET Program licensed by the State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission
(ILCC) as required by ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 3-12(a)(11.1) and 6-27 and
Title 77 of Illinois Administrative Code, Ch. XVI, § 3500. All licensed
BASSET providers shall be required to have on file all licenses and
certificates to prove current qualifications and provide a certificate of
course completion and a card (a photo ID is optional), to participants as
proof of completion.



   (C)   After April 23, 2007, any new owner, manager, employee or
agent requiring BASSET training, shall, within 90 days of the beginning of
his or her employment with that licensee, complete an ILCC BASSET approved
seller/server training program, and shall upon completion of the BASSET
Program work under the supervision of a person who has completed BASSET
training.



   (D)   Any persons requiring BASSET training shall be required to
complete an ILCC BASSET approved seller/server training program on an annual
basis. Such BASSET training shall be completed within one year from the date
of completion of any previous training program.



   (E)   The Chief of Police shall have the discretion to waive the
annual training requirement contained in division (D) above if there have
been no violations of the provisions of this section by a licensee in the
preceding year.



   (F)   A photocopy of certificate of completion for all owners,
managers, employees, or agents required by this section to have BASSET
training shall be maintained, by the establishment, in a manner that will
allow inspection, upon demand, by any designee of both the state or local
liquor control authorities.



   (G)   The village and liquor selling/serving establishments shall
honor all State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission (ILCC) BASSET approved
programs.



   (H)   Failure to comply with the BASSET training required in this
section can result in a fine in accordance of § 112.99, revocation or
suspension of a liquor license or failure to issue or renew a liquor
selling/serving establishment’s license.



(Ord. 1367-07, passed 2-6-07; Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13)



§ 112.29  COMPLIANCE ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Itasca Police Department shall ensure that each retail
vendor of alcoholic beverages is inspected for compliance on an annual basis.
Such inspections shall be performed at reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to hinder compliance inspection
in any manner.



   (B)   It shall not be a violation of this chapter for the Itasca
Police Department or other law enforcement agency to use persons under the
age of 21 to purchase alcoholic beverage products for the purpose of
monitoring compliance with this section, if those underage persons are
supervised by personnel of the Itasca Police Department or other law
enforcement agency and the consent of a parent or guardian has been obtained.



   (C)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee is to report to the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner any violation of this chapter by a license
holder.



(Ord. 1366-07, passed 2-6-07; Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13)



§ 112.30  CORKAGE LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.



   A Class “H” corkage license shall be subject to the following
conditions:



   (A)   Each applicant for a Class “H” corkage license must meet
all conditions in this chapter required of other license applicants.



   (B)   No more than 750 milliliters of wine per patron over the age
of 21 shall be permitted to be uncorked.



   (C)   Only patrons seated at tables or booths shall be permitted to
consume wine that has been provided by the patron.



   (D)   Wine may only be consumed by individuals who order and are
served a meal by the licensee.



   (E)   Every container of wine brought onto the premises by a patron
must be opened by licensee personnel at least 21 years of age.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any patron to leave the premises with
a partially consumed container of wine unless it is securely sealed by
licensee personnel prior to removal from the premises and placed in a
transparent onetime use tamperproof bag, as required by state law.



   (G)   Wine may not be uncorked by restaurant personnel between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 12:00 noon.



   (H)   Possession and/or consumption of alcoholic liquor by any
person under age 21 is prohibited.



   (I)   Licensees at their discretion may charge corkage fees.



(Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13)



RETAIL SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



§ 112.35  CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone not having a license providing for
consumption on the premises where sold, to offer for sale or to sell any
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, or to permit the same to be
consumed on the premises where sold.



('52 Code, § 282)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.36  RESTRICTED AREAS.



   It is hereby determined that the following described portions of the
village are predominantly residential in character, that is, all that
territory designated as R-1 Single-Family Residence District, R-2 Single
Family Residence District, or R-3 General Residence District under the Zoning
Code of the village. It shall be unlawful to sell or to offer for sale at
retail any alcoholic liquor within any such residence district of the village
unless the owner or owners of at least two-thirds of the frontage feet along
the streets adjacent to such place of business for which a license is sought,
for a distance of 200 feet in each direction from the proposed place of
business, shall file with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, their
written consent to the use of such place for the sale of alcoholic liquor. 
This provision shall not apply to any licensee whose place of business is
located in any such residence district as of August 20, 2013.



('52 Code, § 283)  (Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13)  Penalty, see §
112.99



§ 112.37  CLOSING HOURS.



   (A)   Except only as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
sell, offer for sale or allow the consumption of any alcoholic liquor at
retail in the village between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any
weekday, or between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday, or
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sunday.



   (B)   A licensee with a Class “A-1” or Class “B-1” license
shall be permitted to sell, offer to sell, or allow the consumption of
alcoholic liquors on the premises specified for one hour later than provided
in division (A) above, or until 1:00 a.m. Monday through Friday mornings and
until 2:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday mornings, and for one hour earlier
than provided in division (A) above on Sundays, or from 11:00 a.m.



('52 Code, § 286)  (Ord. 143-60, passed 7-5-60; Am. Ord. 238-65, passed - -
; Am. Ord. 1547-10, passed 9-21-10; Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13) 
Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.38  PREMISES TO BE KEPT IN SANITARY CONDITION.



   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the
storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with the
ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale
of food for human consumption.



('52 Code, § 288)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.39  EMPLOYEES HAVING CONTAGIOUS DISEASES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of
any contagious, infectious or venereal disease, and it shall be unlawful for
any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such disease to work
in or about any premises or to be engaged in any way in the handling,
preparation or distribution of such alcoholic liquor.



('52 Code, § 289)  (Ord. 174-62, passed 4-10-62; Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed
8-20-13)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.40  VIEW OF PREMISES FROM STREET.



   (A)   No premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises is licensed, other than a restaurant, hotel or
club, shall be permitted to have any screen, blind, curtain, partition,
article or thing in the windows or upon the doors or inside the premises
which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises
from the street or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen, partition, or
other obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be
permitted in or about the interior of such premises which shall prevent a
clear view of the entire interior from the street, road or sidewalk.



   (B)   All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption on the premises
shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or
artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises
shall be clearly visible.



   (C)   In case the view into any such licensed premises required by
the foregoing provisions shall be willfully obscured by the licensee or by
him or her willfully permitted to be obscured or in any other manner
obstructed, then such licensee shall be subject to revocation of his or her
license in the manner otherwise provided in this chapter.  In order to
enforce the provisions of this section, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
shall have the right to require the filing with him or her of plans, drawings
and photographs showing the clearance of the view required in division (A)
above.



('52 Code, § 291)  (Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13)  Penalty, see §
112.99



§ 112.41  UNDERAGE PERSONS TENDING BAR PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any persons under the age of 21 to draw, pour,
uncap or mix any alcoholic liquor as an employee of any retail licensee, and
it shall further be prohibited for any persons under the age of 21 to draw,
pour, uncap or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retailed premises.



('52 Code, § 289)  (Ord. 174-62, passed 4-10-62; Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed
8-20-13)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.42  SALES TO AND CONSUMPTION BY PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any officer,
associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to
sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21
years. If a licensee or his or her agent or employee believes or has reason
to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because of the non-age of the prospective recipient, he or she shall, before
making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive
identification, containing proof of age, issued by a federal, state, county,
or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years
to purchase or obtain any alcoholic liquor in any place in the village where
alcoholic liquor is sold.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years
to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor in any place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to transfer, alter, or deface any
identification card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a
false identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase or
possess alcoholic liquor by any person under the age of 21 years.



   (E)   In every place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold
there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed card
which shall be supplied by the Village Clerk and which shall read
substantially as follows:



      “WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE YOU are subject to a
fine up to $500.00 under the ordinances of the Village of Itasca if you
purchase alcoholic liquor or misrepre-sent your age for the purpose of
purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.”



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor
dealer’s license, or his or her agent or employee, to suffer or permit any
persons under the age of 21 to be or remain in any room or place in which
alcoholic liquor inclusive of beer and/or wine is served, which principal
business is the sale of the aforementioned; provided that this section shall
not apply to any person who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
This section shall not apply to restaurants or other establishments with
principal business other than serving alcoholic liquor. Such exclusion as to
restaurants shall not apply in the event that food is no longer being
consumed, specifically offered for sale, and/or the kitchen area is closed,
and the premises are dispensing alcoholic liquor in any room or place in the
premises.



   (G)   In addition to all other fines and penalties, the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner may suspend or revoke the retail liquor dealer's license
for any violation of division (F) above.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any
child under the age of 21 of which he or she may be parent or guardian to
violate any provision of this section.



   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom the sale, gift, or
delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age to purchase or
to accept as a gift such alcoholic liquor, or to have such alcoholic liquor
in his or her possession.



   (J)   It shall be unlawful to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor
to any person under the age of 21 years, except for small quantities of less
than one ounce in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.



('52 Code, § 292)  (Ord. 238-65, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 435-1974, passed
4-2-74; Am. Ord. 501-1980, passed 1-8-80; Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed 8-20-13) 
Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.43  SALES TO UNFIT PERSONS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail dealer’s license to
sell, deliver, or give any alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated person,
habitual drunkard, or to any person known by him or her to be under legal
disability, mentally ill, or mentally deficient.



('52 Code, § 293)  (Ord. 501-1980, passed 1-8-80; Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed
8-20-13)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.44  PEDDLING ALCOHOL PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the village.



('52 Code, § 287)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
or section shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $750 for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.



('52 Code, § 295)  (Ord. 218-64, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1668-13, passed
8-20-13)



CHAPTER 113:  COIN-OPERATED VENDING MACHINES



Section



Coin-Operated Vending Machines



   113.01   Coin-operated machines deemed a business



   113.02   Classification of machines; fees



   113.03   License required



   113.04   Term of license



   113.05   License decals



   113.06   Premises to be licensed



 



   113.99   Penalty



COIN-OPERATED VENDING MACHINES



§ 113.01  COIN-OPERATED MACHINES DEEMED A BUSINESS.



   The operation of coin-operated machines which vend services or
merchandise or are used for amusement purposes, are hereby deemed the
conducting of a business, and are classified according to § 113.02.



(Ord. 343-71, passed 1-5-71)



§ 113.02  CLASSIFICATION OF MACHINES; FEES.



   There are hereby established classifications for coin-operated vending
machines according to use and amounts of deposit, and license fees
therefor.  The owner or operator of each such machine located within the
village shall obtain an annual license and pay the fee set forth opposite the
classification in § 110.17, before any such machine shall be operated.



(Ord. 343-71, passed 1-5-71) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No such machine shall be operated within the village without first
having license obtained and paying the appropriate license fee set forth in
§ 113.02.



(Ord. 343-71, passed 1-5-71)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.04  TERM OF LICENSE.



   All licenses and the license fees issued hereunder shall be for the
calendar year.



(Ord. 343-71, passed 1-5-71)



§ 113.05  LICENSE DECALS.



   The Village Clerk shall obtain appropriate license decals for each
year, which shall be affixed to each machine for which a license is obtained.



(Ord. 343-71, passed 1-5-71)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.06  PREMISES TO BE LICENSED.



   The owner of premises, or party entitled to possession, shall not
permit any such machine to be operated on the premises unless properly
licensed.



(Ord. 343-71, passed 1-5-71) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation which operates any such machine without
obtaining a license or who violates §§ 113.02, 113.03, 113.05 and 113.06
shall be fined, on conviction, not less than $20 and not more than $50.



(Ord. 343-71, passed 1-5-71)



CHAPTER 114:  SELF-SERVICE GAS STATIONS



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Permit required



   114.03   Filing of application



   114.04   Issuance of permit; applications and plans



   114.05   Rules of operation



   114.06   Term; renewal



   114.07   Inspection of stations



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVED SELF-SERVICE DISPENSING DEVICE.   Any device for the
dispensing of gasoline or any high volatile fuels into the fuel tanks of
motor vehicles as approved by the State Fire Marshall pursuant to these rules
and regulations, but shall not include dispensing devices which are coin- or
card-operated.



   ATTENDANT.   The owner or any person who is paid wages by an owner of
a service station to dispense motor fuel at such service station.



   OWNER.   Any individual or legal entity holding title, lease, license
or any interest in a service station or self-service station.  The legal
name, residence, address and county of any individuals who are owners shall
be filed with the Village Clerk.



   SELF-SERVICE STATION.   That portion of property of a service station
where gasoline or any high volatile fuels used as motor fuels are stored and
subsequently dispensed from fixed approved dispensing equipment into the fuel
tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than the service station attendant.



   SERVICE STATION.   Any place of business where gasoline or any high
volatile fuels for motor vehicles or internal combustion engines are sold or
offered for sale.



(Ord. 478-78, passed 1-24-78)



§ 114.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person other than the service station owner or an authorized
employee shall use or operate any motor fuel dispensing equipment at any
service station except at service stations which hold a current and valid
self-service station permit issued pursuant to this subchapter by the Village
President and Board of Trustees. No owner or attendant of a service station
shall permit any person to violate the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 478-78, passed 1-24-78)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.03  FILING OF APPLICATION.



   Applications for self-service permits shall be filed in the office of
the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 478-78, passed 1-24-78)



§ 114.04  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; APPLICATIONS AND PLANS.



   (A)   Self-service station permits may be issued by the Village
President and Board of Trustees, upon written application in form to be
established by said President and Board of Trustees, accompanied by complete,
detailed plans, for each service station sought to be used for a
self-service, or a combination of self-service and full service. Such plans
shall be drawn to scale and shall include the following:



      (l)   Lot lines and dimensions.



      (2)   Building lines and dimensions.



      (3)   Location and size of tanks and pump islands.



      (4)   Location of control station.



      (5)   Type, make, model and location of dispensing devices or
equipment.



      (6)   Fire extinguisher locations.



      (7)   Clearances.



      (8)   Such other relevant information as may be requested by
the President and Board of Trustees, or as required of full service stations.



   (B)   No construction of a self-service station or modification of
an existing service station to conduct self-service business shall be
commenced until such application and plans are given written approval by the
President and Board of Trustees. No such station shall open for business
until inspected by the Fire Prevention Bureau of the Village Fire Protection
District and approved by the President and Board of Trustees, and until the
President and Board of Trustees issue a self-service station permit, which
must be displayed prominently, at all times, at such self-service station.



(Ord. 478-78, passed 1-24-78)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.05  RULES OF OPERATION.



   The following rules shall be followed at all self-service stations, and
violation of any said rules shall constitute good and just cause for
suspension or revocation of a self-service station permit by the Village
President and Board of Trustees:



   (A)   The installation or use of unattended self-service dispensing
devices for motor fuel of any kind is hereby prohibited.



   (B)   No dwelling unit or sleeping facilities of any kind for the
owner, attendant or any person shall be permitted at a self-service station.



   (C)   Dispensing of gasoline or any high volatile fuels at locations
not open to the public does not require an attendant or supervisor. Such
locations may be used by com-mercial, industrial, governmental or
manufacturing establish-ments for fueling vehicles used in connection with
their businesses. However, this does not include private fraternal clubs or
associations.



   (D)   Special dispensing devices for motor fuel are not to be
installed or used without prior written approval of the President and Board
of Trustees.



   (E)   (1)   Approved self-service dispensing devices are
permitted at service stations available and open to the public provided that
all dispensing of gasoline or any high volatile fuels by a person other than
the service station attendant is under the supervision and control of a
qualified attendant and the dispensing nozzle is a listed automatic closing
type without a hold open latch, and must be of a type approved by the State
Fire Marshall.



      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the attendant to
dispense gasoline or any high volatile fuels into approved portable
containers, control sources of ignition and immediately handle accidental
spills and fire extinguishers if needed. The attendant on duty shall be
mentally and physically capable of performing the functions and assuming the
responsibility prescribed in this section.



   (F)   One type ABC fire extinguisher with a capacity of ten pounds
shall be provided for each pump island containing four or less dispensing
pumps; on pump islands containing more than four dispensing pumps, an
additional extinguisher shall be provided for each additional dispensing pump
or fraction thereof. Such extinguishers shall be located at points approved
by the State Fire Marshal, away from the dispensing area but close enough to
the dispensing area to be readily available. Such extinguishers shall be
plainly marked, shall be protected from the weather and shall be maintained
in operable condition and available at all times when the self-service
station is open to the public.  All employees of the self-service station
shall be thoroughly instructed as to the location and proper use of such
extinguishers, and shall, upon request, demonstrate their ability in such use
to the approval of representatives of the State Fire Marshal.



   (G)   (1)   Signs giving instructions for the operation of
gasoline dispensing equipment must be conspicuously posted at each
self-service station offering self-service.



      (2)   Signs bearing the following words must be conspicuously
posted on each gasoline pump island where self-service is offered:



         (a)   Self-Service Island:  "Warning"



         (b)   "Stop Engine";



         (c)   "No Smoking";



         (d)   "It is unlawful and dangerous for anyone other
than the attendant to dispense gasoline into approved containers";



         (e)   "It is unlawful and dangerous to dispense gasoline
without an attendant on duty";



         (f)   "It is unlawful and dangerous for any person other
than a licensed driver to dispense gasoline or any high volatile fuels into
vehicles."



      (3)   The signs shall be made of all weather rigid material
and the wording, lettering, size, design, material, mounting and location of
said sign shall be subject to the approval of the State Fire Marshal and of
the Fire Prevention Bureau of the Village Fire Protection District.



      (4)   All fuel dispensing units shall be mounted or protected
against collision damage by suitable means in a manner approved by the State
Fire Marshal.



   (I)   All self-service fuel dispensing units shall have a key
starter, which shall be reset by the attendant after each purchase, and/or a
reset unit in control station, which shall be reset by the attendant after
each purchase.



   (J)   Every self-service station shall maintain a control station in
a location approved by the State Fire Marshal, equipped in such manner that
the flow of liquid fuel from any or all fuel dispensing units may be stopped
from such control station; a master electric switch shall be maintained at
such control station so that electric power and pump lighting to all pumps
may be disconnected, at one time, and said switch shall be plainly marked and
easily accessible. The control station shall be located at ground level not
more than 100 feet from the farthest pump. The control station shall be so
located that the attendant of such control station shall have a clear and
unobstructed view of all pumps.  The attendant shall at all times be able to
communicate with persons in the dispensing area. The self-service pump island
shall be closer to the control station in service stations which are a
combination self-service and full service station. The President and Board of
Trustees in their discretion may require a communication system between the
control station and each pump island.



   (K)   At all times when a self-service station is open for public
use, not less than one attendant shall be on duty, and no motor fuel shall be
dispensed at any time when such attendant is not at or near the control
station or pump island. The attendant's primary duty shall be to supervise
the dispensing of motor fuels, motor oils and services normally related to
such dispensing. Such attendant shall refuse service to any person who is
smoking or who appears for any reason to be unable to dispense fuel safely,
or is not a licensed driver, and shall shut off the dispensing unit if a
patron fails to follow instructions in compliance with the rules. All
attendants and other employees of the service station shall be thoroughly
instructed in the operation and use of the communication system, the control
station, and fire extinguishing equipment, the operation of the dispensing
units, and safety regulations for the dispensing of motor fuels.



(Ord. 478-78, passed 1-24-78)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.06  TERM; RENEWAL.



   Self-service permits and renewals shall be for a calendar year period.



(Ord. 478-78, passed 1-24-78)



§ 114.07  INSPECTION OF STATIONS.



   The Fire Prevention Bureau of the Village Fire Protection District
shall inspect periodically self-service stations and combination of
self-service and full service stations, and any violations of these rules
shall be reported to the village officials for prompt action. The village
may, for failure to comply with these rules, for violation thereof, or for
other good and just cause, refuse to issue or renew or suspend or revoke a
self-service station permit.



(Ord. 478-78, passed 1-24-78)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $500 for each
offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.



('52 Code, § 431)



CHAPTER 115:  TAXICABS



Section



   115.01   License required



   115.02   Application; fee



   115.03   Financial responsibility



   115.04   Drivers license



   115.05   Register of licenses to be kept; display of sticker



   115.06   Revocation of license



   115.07   Taxicab meters; inspection



   115.08   Equipment



   115.09   Name on vehicle



   115.10   Rates of fare; overcharge prohibited



   115.11   Advance payment



   115.12   Refusal to carry passengers



   115.13   Soliciting trade



   115.14   Cab stands; parking on streets



 



   115.99   Penalty



§ 115.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct or engage in the business
of taxicab, hackman, cabman or operating a public passenger vehicle for hire,
other than a bus operating on a fixed route, and other than a school bus
transporting passengers under contract or arrangement with a school district,
without first obtaining a license therefor, as herein provided.  The picking
up of any passengers for hire within the village limits shall constitute the
conducting of and engaging in such business.  Every person, firm or
corporation conducting such business shall comply with the provisions
contained herein.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.02  APPLICATION; FEE.



   Application for an annual calendar year license to conduct such
business in the village shall be made to the Village Clerk.  The application
shall specify the number of vehicles owned and to be operated by the
applicant, the type and make of the vehicle and the state license number.  A
nonrefundable license fee of $15 for each vehicle shall accompany the
application.  In addition, each such vehicle shall obtain a current village
vehicle license or tag.  If any license is issued after June 30 of a year,
the license fee shall be one-half of the annual fee.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)



§ 115.03  FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   No such cab license shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation
unless the applicant has obtained and filed proper proof of financial
responsibility required by statute.  A copy of such proof filed with or from
the Secretary of State shall accompany the application.  It is the duty of
the applicant to file renewal copies of proof of financial responsibility
with the Village Clerk prior to the expiration of the license term.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)



§ 115.04  DRIVERS LICENSE.



   No such vehicle licensed hereunder shall be driven by any person who
does not have a valid drivers license issued by the Secretary of State,
permitting the driver to transport passengers for hire.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.05  REGISTER OF LICENSES TO BE KEPT; DISPLAY OF STICKER.



   It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep a register of the
names, addresses and telephone numbers of all licensees, including the number
of the license and the description of the vehicle or vehicles so licensed. 
A taxicab license sticker shall be issued with each license issued, and
displayed prominently in the center of the top portion of the windshield.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.06  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The Village Board of Trustees may revoke any license issued hereunder
or otherwise discipline the licensee for violation of or failure to comply
with any of the provisions of this subchapter or the Illinois Vehicle Code,
or for a violation and conviction of any state or village traffic statute or
ordinance.  The Village Board of Trustees shall cause a hearing to be held
by the Chief of Police respecting such proceedings, with written notice of
same, respecting the charges and time and place of hearing, to be given to
the licensee, not less than ten days prior to the hearing.  Notice of such
hearing may be given by regular U.S. Mail, sent to the address shown in the
application, shall be sufficient.  The Chief of Police shall provide written
findings of fact to the Village Board of Trustees within 14 days after
conclusion of the hearing, with copy to the licensee.  The Village Board of
Trustees shall make its determination within 21 days after receipt of the
findings from the Chief of Police; a copy of such determination shall be
mailed to the licensee within three business days.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)



§ 115.07  TAXICAB METERS; INSPECTION.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation
owning, controlling or operating any taxicab licensed hereunder, to equip and
maintain on every taxicab an approved taxicab meter which shall be in use at
all times when passengers are being carried for hire in said taxicab.  The
meter shall be positioned so as to be visible to passengers in the rear seat
of the vehicle.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to test or cause
to be tested, at such intervals as he deems necessary, all taxicab meters
licensed hereunder.  It shall be the duty of every owner, operator or person
in control of such taxicab to permit such inspection at any reasonable
time.  Each taxicab meter shall be tested to determine the accuracy of its
recording mechanism with respect to the fare charged and distance travelled,
either by running the taxicab with its attached meter over a prescribed
course of a standard mile in length, or by any other approved mechanical
testing device.  In the event that the taxicab meter is found defective or
inaccurate, the taxicab cannot be used for transporting passengers until it
has been repaired and the accuracy of its recording system restored.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.08  EQUIPMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the licensee and the driver of the taxicab to
keep and maintain the taxicabs and their equipment in a safe physical
condition at all times, for the safe carriage of passengers.  If any taxicab
licensed hereunder shall be in an unsafe condition for transporting
passengers, it shall be removed from taxicab service until the vehicle is
again in a safe condition.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.09  NAME ON VEHICLE.



   Every vehicle licensed hereunder shall bear in a conspicuous place on
the outside thereof, the name of the owner, in letters not less than two
inches high, which letters shall be of a color in contrast to the color of
the vehicle, and shall be properly proportioned and legible.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.10  RATES OF FARE; OVERCHARGE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   (1)   The prices or rates of fare to be asked or demanded
by the operator or owner of any such vehicle shall be reasonable.  The
maximum rate may be set by ordinance.



      (2)   The distance to which the rates apply shall be the
nearest traveled route from the point where the passenger enters the vehicle
to the point where the passenger shall alight therefrom, unless otherwise
directed by the passenger.



      (3)   There shall be affixed on the inside of each vehicle in
a conspicuous place and in such manner that the same may be easily read by
any person riding in such vehicle, a card upon which shall be printed in
plain, legible type, the rates of fare provided for in this subchapter.



      (4)   Any passenger shall be allowed to have conveyed upon any
of the vehicles aforesaid without additional charge, his ordinary traveling
baggage; provided, that ordinary hand baggage shall not be construed to mean
trunks or large sample cases.



      (5)   Upon request of any passenger, the driver of such
vehicle shall give the person requesting the same a receipt for the amount of
fare demanded and paid.



   (B)   The owner, driver or operator of any vehicle licensed as
aforesaid, who may have demanded and received any fare in excess of what is
provided for in this subchapter shall return the excess received, and in
addition, be liable to a fine and may have his license revoked.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.11  ADVANCE PAYMENT.



   Every such owner, operator or driver shall have the right to demand in
advance his fare of the person or persons so employing him or entering his
vehicle, and may refuse to convey any person who shall not comply with said
command.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)



§ 115.12  REFUSAL TO CARRY PASSENGERS.



   No owner, operator or driver of any vehicle licensed as aforesaid,
shall refuse to convey in said village, any person (without or with hand
baggage as aforesaid) when requested to do so for that purpose; or having
undertaken to convey such person, shall omit or neglect to do so, under
penalty for each offense.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.13  SOLICITING TRADE.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or driver of any such
vehicle licensed hereunder to solicit by word, gesture or otherwise, the
patronage of any such person at any railroad station, or upon any public
street in the village.  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle
aforesaid to stand or be upon the railway platform longer than three minutes
after the departure of such train, except to assist persons who have
indicated a desire to patronize the vehicle in his charge.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.14  CAB STANDS; PARKING ON STREETS.



   (A)   No vehicle of any kind shall stand upon, be parked on or make
use of any public cab stand in the village unless the owner thereof has
obtained a license therefor.  Cab stands on public streets, and on private
drive areas with the owner's consent, shall be established from time to time
by the Village Board of Trustees.  The license fee for each such cab stand
shall be $30 per year and a cab stand license shall be obtained by all
persons, firms or corporate users of a cab stand.



   (B)   No person in charge of any public taxicab, or vehicle carrying
passengers for hire shall permit the same to stand on any street, avenue or
alley in said village for any period longer than five minutes, except when
receiving or discharging passengers or when instructed by their passengers to
do so.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of §§
115.01 through 115.14 shall, on conviction thereof, be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $500.



(Ord. 674-89, passed 8-15-89)



CHAPTER 116:  TOBACCO



Section



General Provisions



   116.01   Purpose



   116.02   Definitions



Tobacco Retail Sale License



   116.10   License required



   116.11   Application



   116.12   Fee and enforcement



   116.13   Compliance enforcement



Tobacco Retail Sale Requirements



   116.30   Prohibited sales, delivery



   116.31   Signs



   116.32   Minimum age to sell tobacco products or e-cigarettes



   116.33   Purchase by minors prohibited



   116.34   Possession by minors prohibited



   116.35   Proximity to certain institutions



   116.36   Certain free distributions prohibited



   116.37   Other sales prohibited



   116.38   Vending machines



   116.39   Responsibility for agents and employees



   116.40   Smoking ban - public places



Penalties



   116.50   Penalties



   116.51   Suspension; revocation of license; fines cost



   116.52   Use of premises after revocation



   116.53   Ineligibility



   116.54   Applicability



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 116.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter pertains to and is in furtherance of the health, welfare
and safety of the residents of the village, particularly those residents
under 18 years of age.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99)



§ 116.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE (E-CIGARETTE).  An electronic device that (1)
typically includes a mouthpiece, a heating element or atomizer, a battery,
and electronic circuits; (2) provides a gas derived from a liquid that
includes nicotine, propylene glycol, or similar substance and perhaps other
substances; and (3) is inhaled by a user in a manner that simulates or
resembles smoking.  The term E-CIGARETTE includes all manner of these
devices, regardless of the details of a device's appearance or marketed name,
that are manufactured to resemble a cigarette, cigar, pipe, or other smoking
device. The term E-CIGARETTE includes the cartridges and component parts of
an e-cigarette.



   LICENSE.  Any person, as defined below, obtaining a Tobacco Seller's
License under this chapter.



   PERSON.  Any natural person, company, corporation, firm, partnership,
organization, or other legal entity.



   TOBACCO PRODUCTS.  Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco
or dipping tobacco.



   VENDING MACHINES.  Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-
service device, which must be housed indoors, and which upon insertion of
money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses tobacco products.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 1714-14, passed 12-16-14)



TOBACCO RETAIL SALE LICENSE



§ 116.10  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away,
deliver to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or
delivering tobacco products or e-cigarettes within the village without having
first obtained a Tobacco Seller's License.  Any violation of this section
shall be punishable by fine.  Such license shall be in addition to any other
license required by any other village ordinance.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 1714-14, passed 12-16-14)



§ 116.11  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Application for a Tobacco Seller's License shall be made in
writing to the Village Clerk, on a form provided by the Village Clerk, signed
by the applicant (as owner or legal representative) and verified by oath.



   (B)   Each application must be accompanied by a non-refundable
filing fee of $100.00.



   (C)   Each applicant shall provide the following information as part
of the applicant:



      (1)   Date,



      (2)   Name of business,



      (3)   Address of business,



      (4)   Number of years at location,



      (5)   Description of business conducted,



      (6)   Photo I.D. proving that the applicant is at least 18
years of age,



      (7)   Permanent parcel number, and



      (8)   The applicant's tax identification number.



      (9)   If vending machine, name of person responsible for
overseeing premises where machine is located.



   (D)   All applications for renewal of any license shall be made on
or before 30 days prior to the expiration thereof.  Failure to make timely
application shall cause the license not to renew.  The license period shall
be from January 1 to December 31.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99)



§ 116.12  FEE AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   An annual license fee and renewal fee of $100 payable to the
Village Clerk shall be charged to obtain a license to sell tobacco products
or e-cigarettes in the village.



   (B)   A separate license must be obtained for each point of sale
maintained by the seller within the village.  Point of sale means a store,
stand, vending machine or other place of business maintained by the seller
from which tobacco products or e-cigarettes are made available.  Point of
sale does not include separate cash registers, service counters, or vending
machines within the same store at the same location.



   (C)   The Tobacco Seller's License shall be displayed prominently at
the point of sale for which it is issued.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 1714-14, passed 12-16-14)



§ 116.13  COMPLIANCE ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Itasca Police Department shall ensure that each retail
vendor of tobacco products or e-cigarettes is inspected for compliance on an
annual basis.  Such inspection shall be made at reasonable times and in a
reasonable manner.  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to hinder
compliance inspection in any manner.



   (B)   It shall not be a violation of this chapter for the Itasca
Police Department to use persons under 18 years of age to purchase or attempt
to purchase tobacco products or e-cigarettes for the purpose of monitoring
compliance with this section, if those underage persons are supervised by
personnel of the Itasca Police Department and the consent of a parent or
guardian has been obtained.



   (C)   The Chief of Police is to report to the President any
violation of this chapter by a licensee holder.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 1714-14, passed 12-16-14)



TOBACCO RETAIL SALE REQUIREMENTS



§ 116.30  PROHIBITED SALES, DELIVERY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee,
to sell, offer for sale, buy for, give away or deliver tobacco products or
e-cigarettes to any person under the age of 18 years of age.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee,
to sell, offer for sale, buy for, give away or deliver any cigarette papers
or any other paraphernalia that is designed for the smoking or ingestion of
any tobacco or e-cigarettes to any person under the age 18 years of age.



   (C)   It shall be an affirmative defense that the seller of a
tobacco product, or other prohibited item, to a person under 18 years of age
in violation of this section had requested and examined a government-issued
photographic identification from such person establishing that person's age
to be at least 18 prior to selling that person a tobacco product or
e-cigarette.  The failure of the seller to request and examine photographic
identification from a person under 18 years of age prior to the sale of a
tobacco product, or e-cigarette, or other prohibited item, to that person
shall be construed against the seller and form a conclusive basis for the
sellers violation of this section.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 1714-14, passed 12-16-14)



§ 116.31  SIGNS.



   (A)   Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided
for herein shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of
tobacco products, or e-cigarettes and on or upon every vending machine which
offers tobacco products or e-cigarettes for sale.  Each such sign shall be
plainly visible and shall state:




THE POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY PERSONS
UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS, AND THE SALE OF
TOBACCO PRODUCTS E-CIGARETTES, CARTRIDGES OR
E-CIGARETTE COMPONENTS TO SUCH
PERSONS IS PROHIBITED BY LAW




   (B)   The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white
background, said letters to be at least one inch high.  The signs shall be
provided by the Village Clerk's Office.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 1714-14, passed 12-16-14)



§ 116.32  MINIMUM AGE TO SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent or employee  of such licensee,  to engage, 
employ or permit any person under  18 years of age to sell tobacco products
or e-cigarettes in any licensed premises unless such person is supervised by
someone over 21 years of age.  Any violation of this section shall be
punishable by fine.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 1714-14, passed 12-16-14)



§ 116.33  PURCHASE BY MINORS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to
purchase tobacco products or e-cigarettes, or to misrepresent their identity
or age, or to use false or altered identification for the purpose of
purchasing tobacco products or e-cigarettes.  Any violation of this section
shall be punishable by fine.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 1714-14, passed 12-16-14)



§ 116.34  POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age 18 years to possess
any tobacco products or e-cigarettes; provided that the possession by a
person under the age of 18 years under the direct supervision of the parent
or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home
shall not be prohibited.  Any violation of this section shall be punishable
by fine.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 1714-14, passed 12-16-14)



§ 116.35  PROXIMITY TO CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away
or deliver tobacco products or e-cigarettes within 100 feet of any school,
child care facility or other building used for education or recreational
programs for persons under the age of 18 years.  Any violation of this
section shall be punishable by fine.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 1714-14, passed 12-16-14)



§ 116.36  CERTAIN FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any other person in the
business of selling or otherwise distributing, promotion or advertising
tobacco products or e-cigarettes, or any employee or agent of any such
licensee or person, in the course of such licensee's or person's business, to
distribute, give away or deliver tobacco products or e-cigarettes free of
charge to any person on any right-of-way, park, playground or other property
owned by the village, any school district or any public library.  Any
violation of this section shall be punishable by fine.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 1714-14, passed 12-16-14)



§ 116.37  OTHER SALES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, business or organization including
any licensee to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products
other than in the original manufacturer's packaging, sealed and with the
required health warning or to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver
cigarettes.  This subsection does not apply to cigars.  Single sales of
cigarettes are expressly prohibited.  Any violation of this section shall be
punishable by fine.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99)



§ 116.38  VENDING MACHINES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for
sale, give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving
away or delivering tobacco products or e-cigarettes by use of a vending
machine, unless such vending machine is equipped with a manual, electric or
electronic locking device controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its
operation by persons under the age of 18 years.  Any violation of this
section shall be punishable by fine.



   (B)   In such cases where the licensee places a vending machine
within the premises of another, the licensee must identify in the license the
location of the vending machine and the name of the individual responsible
for overseeing the premises.  Both the licensee and the person responsible
for overseeing the premises may be fined for violations of this chapter.



   (C)   Any premises where access by persons under the age of 18 years
is prohibited by law, places where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed
on the premises, or premises where the public is generally not permitted and
where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of a business
located at such premises, shall be exempt from application of the provisions
of subsection (A) of this section.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 1714-14, passed 12-16-14)



§ 116.39  RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES.



   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of
any of the provisions stated herein by any officer, director, manager or
other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the
act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same
manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee
personally.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99)



§ 116.40  SMOKING BAN - PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BAR .  An establishment that is devoted to the serving of
alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that
derives no more than 10% of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed
on the premises. BAR includes, but is not limited to taverns, nightclubs,
cocktail lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.



      EMPLOYEE.  A person who is employed by an employer in
consideration for direct and indirect monetary wages or profits or a person
who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity.



      EMPLOYER.  A person, business, partnership, association, or
corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity,
that employees the services of one or more individual persons.



      ENCLOSED AREA .  All space between a floor and a ceiling
enclosed or partially enclosed with solid walls or windows, exclusive of
doorways, that extend from the floor to ceiling, including, without
limitation, lobbies and corridors.



      ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA.  Any sports
pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller
rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the
general public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in
athletic competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports,
cultural, recreational or other events.



      HEALTHCARE FACILITY.  An office or institution providing care or
treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other
medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not
limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics,
nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and
offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians,
dentists, and all specialists within these professions. HEALTHCARE FACILITY
includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and
wards within healthcare facilities.



      PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.   Any area under the control of a public or
private employer that employees are required to enter, leave or pass through
during the course of employment, including, but not limited to entrances and
exits to places of employment, including a minimum of 15 feet from entrances,
exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area
where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference
and classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private
residence or home-based business, unless used to provide licensed child care,
foster care, adult care, or other social service care on the premises, is not
a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT .



      PRIVATE CLUB.   A not for profit association that has been
active and continuous for at least three years prior to January 1, 2008
whether incorporated or not; is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building
or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times; is
operated solely for recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political,
benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain; and only sells
alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. PRIVATE CLUB means an
organization that is managed by a board of directors, executive committee, or
similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established
bylaws, a constitution, or both to govern its activities, and has been
granted an exemption of payment of federal income tax as a club under 26
U.S.C. 501.



      PRIVATE RESIDENCE.   The part of a structure used as a dwelling,
including without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium,
apartment, mobile home, vacation home, cabin or cottage. For purposes of this
definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast, nursing
home, or assisted living facility shall not be considered a private residence.



      PUBLIC PLACE.   The portion of any building or vehicle used by
and open to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is
owned in whole or in part by private persons or entities, the State of
Illinois, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is
charged for admission, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from
entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.



         (a)   A PUBLIC PLACE includes but is not limited to:



            1.   Hospitals, restaurants, retail stores,
offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries,
museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing
homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting
rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places,
private clubs, gaming facilities, all government owned vehicles and
facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased and operated by
the state or state subcontract, health care facilities or clinics, enclosed
shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions,
educational facilities, ticket arenas, public hearing facilities, public
restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating
rinks, reception areas, and no less than 75% of the sleeping quarters within
a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar
public accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private
residences.



            2.   A PUBLIC PLACE does not include:



               a.   Private residences, except when used as
a licensed childcare facility, adult day care facility, health care facility
or a home-based business of any kind open to the public.



               b.   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are
rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms provided that all
smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms
must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is
prohibited. Not more than 25% of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or
motel may be so designated. The status of rooms as smoking and nonsmoking may
not be changed, except to permanently add additional non-smoking rooms.



               c.   Private and semi-private rooms in
nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one or more
persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed
or to remain, as the case may be, in a room where smoking is permitted.



               d.   Private clubs that are a not for profit
association that has been active and continuous for at least three years
prior to January 1, 2008 whether incorporated or not; is the owner, lessee,
or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club
purposes at all times; is operated solely for recreational, fraternal,
social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for
pecuniary gain; and only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its
operation. "Private club" means an organization that is managed by a board of
directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an
annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution, or both to govern its
activities, and has been granted an exemption of payment of federal income
tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. 501.



      RESTAURANT .  An eating establishment, including, but not
limited to coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public
school cafeterias, that gives or offers, for sale food to the public, guests,
or employees, and a kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on
premises for serving elsewhere. RESTAURANT includes a bar area within the
restaurant.



      SMOKE or SMOKING .  The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or
exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs,
or any other lighted smoking equipment. SMOKE also means the gaseous products
and particles created by the use of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any
kind or any other lighted smoking equipment.



   (B)   Prohibition of smoking in public places. Smoking shall be
prohibited in all public places and places of employment within the village.
Such owner or other person in control shall also remove all ashtrays and
other smoking paraphernalia from within the public place.



   (C)   Prohibition of smoking in vehicles. No person may smoke in any
vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the state or a political subdivision of
the state.



   (D)   Prohibition of smoking in outdoor venues and events.



      (1)   It is unlawful to smoke in the following outdoor venues
and/or events:



         (a)   Public parks and recreation areas within 15 feet
of any play area, any playground, or any scheduled activity group of any kind
including but not limited to a game, show, party, event or similar activity,
but excluding, however, parades and picnics.



         (b)   Public or private school grounds.



         (c)   Public sidewalks within 15 feet of a main entrance
to a public place, but excluding any person who is temporarily in such area
for the purpose of walking or traversing through such area.



         (d)   At any scheduled outdoor event to which the public
is permitted or invited, including but not limited to games, shows,
festivals, parties or any similar event or activity, excluding, however,
parades and picnics.



      (2)   It is unlawful to smoke in or within 15 feet of an
outdoor venue during the time that an outdoor event (as described above) is
taking place.



   (E)   Prohibition of smoking in open air dining areas except as
designated.



      (1)   It is unlawful to smoke in any open air dining area,
except such area, or portion thereof, designated for smoking by the owner or
other person in control of the open air dining area.



      (2)   It is unlawful for the owner or other person in control
of an open air dining area knowingly to permit smoking in that open air
dining area, unless such area or portion thereof has been designated for
smoking.



      (3)   The owner or other person in control of an open air
dining area who has designated all or a portion thereof for smoking must
clearly display signage, in form and content approved by the village,
indicating the portion of the open air dining area where smoking is permitted.



   (F)   Reasonable distance.  Smoking is prohibited within 15 feet of
any main entrance and exits to a public place; windows that open, and
ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.



   (G)   Non-retaliation. No person or employer shall discharge, refuse
to hire or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for
employment or customer because that employee, applicant or customer exercises
any rights afforded by this section or reports or attempts to prosecute a
violation of this section.



   (H)   Each public place or place of employment shall post a clear
and conspicuous sign, in form and content supplied by the Village Clerk, at
every main entrance to the public place stating that smoking therein is
prohibited. The international "No Smoking" symbol, consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed with a red bat across it.
Additionally, the sign shall indicate the telephone number of the Itasca
Police Department for the reporting of violations.



(Ord. 1413-07, passed 12-18-07)



PENALTIES



§ 116.50  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person found guilty of violating § 116.11 of this chapter
shall be fined $500.



   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating § 116.30 of this chapter
shall be fined $200 for a first offense, $400 for a second offense in a
12-month period, and $750 for a third or subsequent offense in a 12 month
period.



   (C)   Any licensee found guilty of violating § 116.31 of this
chapter shall be fined an amount not to exceed $50.



   (D)   Any license found guilty or violating § 116.32 of this
chapter shall be fined $50 for a first offense, $100 for a second offense in
a 12-month period, and $200 for a third or subsequent offense in a 12-month
period.



   (E)   Any person found guilty of violating § 116.33 of this chapter
shall be fined $25 for a first offense, $50 for a second offense in a
12-month period, and $100 for a third or subsequent offense in a 12 month
period.



   (F)   Any person found guilty of violating § 116.34 of this chapter
shall be fined $25 for a first offense, $50 for a second offense in a
12-month period, and $100 for a third or subsequent offense in a 12-month
period.



   (G)   Any person found guilty of violating § 116.35 of this chapter
shall be fined $200 for a first offense, $400 for a second offense in a
12-month period, and $750 for a third or subsequent offense in a 12-month
period.



   (H)   Any person found guilty of violating § 116.36 of this chapter
shall be fined $200 for a first offense, $400 for a second offense in a
12-month period, and $750 for a third or subsequent offense in a 12-month
period.



   (I)   Any person, business, organization or licensee found guilty of
violating § 116.37 of this chapter shall be fined $500.



   (J)   Any person, business, organization or licensee found guilty of
violating § 116.38 of this chapter shall be fined $500.



   (K)   (1)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is
prohibited by § 116.40 shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a
fine not less than $100 nor more than $250.



      (2)   A person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise
controls a public place and who fails to comply with the provisions of §
116.40 shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by:



         (a)   A fine not less than $250 for the first violation.



         (b)   A fine not less than $500 for the second violation
within one year of the first violation.



         (c)   A fine not more than $2,500 for each additional
violation within one year.



      (3)   Each day on which a violation of this section occurs
shall be considered a separate and distinct violation.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 1413-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 116.51  SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE, FINES COST.



   (A)   The President shall make all determinations with respect to
revocation or suspension of any Tobacco Seller's License.  The President may
designate a person or persons to assist in the performance of these duties.



   (B)   Upon a determination made by the President that the licensee
has violated any of the provisions of the chapter for a first time, the
President may levy a fine on the licensee.  The fine imposed shall not
exceed $750 for each violation.  Each day on which a violation continues
constitutes a separate violation.



   (C)   For a second violation of this chapter occurring after
conviction of a first within a 12-month period, the President shall suspend
the license of the violator for up six months.  For a third violation
occurring after the second and within 12 months, the President shall suspend
the license of the violator for not less than six months nor more than one
year.



   (D)   However, no such licensee shall be so revoked or suspended and
no licensee shall be administratively fined without an administrative hearing
held by the President or the appointed designee.  The licensee shall receive
written notice by certified mail or personal service from the President at
least seven days prior to the hearing so that said licensee may appear and
defend against the charges or admit to said charges in writing and waive a
right to an administrative hearing.  Such admission and waiver must be in
writing and submitted to the President.



   (E)   The President may designate an administrative hearing officer
to conduct hearings on the alleged violations and to conduct
revocation/suspension hearings.



   (F)   The President shall within seven days after such hearing, if
he/she determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or
suspended, or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such
determination in a written order and either the amount of the fine, the
period of suspension, or that the license has been revoked and serve a copy
of such order within the seven days upon the licensee.



   (G)   Any licensee determined by the President to have violated any
of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the village the costs of the
hearing before the President on such violation.  The President shall
determine the costs incurred by the village for said hearing, including, but
not limited to: court reporter's fees, the costs of transcripts or records,
attorney's fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all
other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum as
the President may allow.



   (H)   The licensee shall pay said costs to the village within 30
days of the notification of the costs by the President.  Failure to pay said
costs within 30 days of notification is a violation of this chapter and may
be cause for license suspension or revocation, or levy of a fine.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99)



§ 116.52  USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION.



   When any license shall be revoked for any cause, no license shall be
granted to said licensee or owner of the premises for the period of six
months thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling tobacco products.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99)



§ 116.53  INELIGIBILITY.



   Any person, corporate or private, found guilty of violating § 116.11
of this chapter shall be ineligible to apply for a Tobacco Seller's License
under this chapter for at least six months following the date of conviction.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99)



§ 116.54  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall not be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending in court, or any rights acquired or a liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing prior to the effective date of
this chapter; nor shall any right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired, or affected by this ordinance.



(Ord. 1019-99, passed 3-2-99)



CHAPTER 117: CONTRACTORS



Section



   117.01   Definitions



   117.02   Registration of contractors required



   117.03   Fees



 



   117.99   Penalty



§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTRACTOR. A contractor is any person engaged in the business of
contracting with an owner of land to build, improve, alter, repair or
ornament the land, or a structure thereon, through the furnishing of
materials, fixtures, apparatus, machinery, labor or services.



   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR.   Any contractor that is so defined under ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-33-1.



(Ord. 1265-05, passed 6-21-05)



§ 117.02  REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS REQUIRED.



   Any contractor that performs work within the village, or any person
that performs the work of a contractor for compensation within the village,
during a given calendar year shall register with the Building Department
prior to performing any such work; provided, however, that an electrical
contractor that is already registered in another municipality shall not be
required to be registered with the village or to pay a registration fee for
such calendar year. The registration shall specify the name of the
contractor, the name of the contractor's employer, and the business address
and telephone number of the contractor and the contractor's employer.



(Ord. 1265-05, passed 6-21-05)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.03  FEES.



   An annual, non-refundable registration fee of $100 shall be paid at the
time of a contractor's registration; provided, however, the registration fee
for an electrical contractor shall be $25. If a contractor registers after
the last day of June in a given calendar year, then the registration fee
shall be one-half of the annual fee.



(Ord. 1265-05, passed 6-21-05)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violations any provision of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction thereof, subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$750, and each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 1265-05, passed 6-21-05)



CHAPTER 118: CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE



Section



Cable/Video Service Provider Fee



   118.01   Definitions



   118.02   Imposition of cable/video provider fee



   118.03   Applicable principles



   118.04   No impact on other taxes due from holder



   118.05   Audits of cable/video service provider



Cable and Video Customer Protection



   118.20   Intent



   118.21   Adoption



   118.22   Amendments



   118.23   Penalties



   118.24   Customer credits



CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE



§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this subchapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:



      CABLE SERVICE. The term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



      COMMISSION.   The Illinois Commerce Commission.



      GROSS REVENUES.  All consideration of any kind or nature,
including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind
contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video
system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable
service or video service area within the village.



      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:



         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video services.



         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video
services, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand
charges.



         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or
video service equipment.



         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable
service or video service, including but not limited to activation,
installation, and repair charges.



         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of
cable service or video service, including but not limited to service order
and service termination charges.



         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds
check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting
delinquent payments.



         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the
holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services
derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service
or video service within the village. The allocation shall be based on the
number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of
subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation
arrangement.



         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is
derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service
or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder
as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on
the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject
to division (i).



         (i)   In the case of cable service or video service that
is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or
applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other
services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross
revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion
of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course
of business.



         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by ILCS Chapter
220, Act 5, § 21-801(b).



      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:



         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed,
such as bad debt, subject to ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(l)(vi).



         (b)   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments
that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the
state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or
discount is attributable to cable service or video service.



         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled,
packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any
revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video
service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of
directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues
attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in
accordance with the holder's books and records kept in the regular course of
business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.



         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for
resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee
from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in
writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee
permitted by ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b).



         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed
upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any
other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including
sales and use taxes.



         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers.



         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or
similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel
offered as part of the cable service or video service.



         (h)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be
included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of
the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect
of evading the payment of the fee permitted by ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, §
21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.



      HOLDER.   A person or entity that has received authorization to
offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



      SERVICE.   The provision of "cable service" or "video service"
to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity
that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service
from the Commission pursuant to ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



      SERVICE PROVIDER FEE .  The amount paid under this chapter and
ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, § 21-801 by the holder to a village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.



      VIDEO SERVICE .  Video programming and subscriber interaction,
if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming
services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least
in part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology,
including internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any
video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in
47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and
via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail, or other services offered over the public internet.



(Ord. 1418-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 118.02  IMPOSITION OF CABLE/VIDEO PROVIDER FEE.



   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing
cable service or video service with the village.



   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be
5% of the holder's gross revenue.



   (C)   Notice to the village. The holder shall notify the village at
least ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable
service or video service in the village.



   (D)   Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the
service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall
commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after
receipt of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance
adopting this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage pre-paid, to the address
listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS Chapter
220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6) to the village.



   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be
due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.



   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing
cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise
agreement with the village in which a fee is paid.



   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Chapter 220, Act
5, § 21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement
may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
division (B) above of this section.



(Ord. 1418-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 118.03  APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.



   All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.



(Ord. 1418-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 118.04  NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder
from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any
tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with
respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it
applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued
authorization shall not effect any requirement of the holder with respect to
payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911] fees, taxes, or
charges.



(Ord. 1418-07, passed 12-18-07)



§ 118.05  AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.



   (A)   Audit Requirement. The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village.



   (B)   Additional Payments. Any additional amount due after an audit
shall be paid within 30 days after the village submission of an invoice for
the sum.



(Ord. 1418-07, passed 12-18-07)



CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION



§ 118.20  INTENT.



   The village, pursuant to ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, § 70-501 et seq.,
hereby declares its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy
protection standards of the Cable and Video Protection Law with respect to
complaints received from residents within the village except where village
staff determines that it does not have the necessary resources to effectively
prosecute such protections. Village staff shall refer customer complaints to
the Illinois Attorney General when they have made the determination that
there are not necessary village resources for prosecution.



(Ord. 1419-07, passed 12-18-08)



§ 118.21  ADOPTION.



   The regulations of ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, § 70-501 are hereby
adopted by reference and made applicable to cable or video providers offering
services within the village boundaries.



(Ord. 1419-07, passed 12-18-08)



§ 118.22  AMENDMENTS.



   Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that
becomes effective after the effective date of this subchapter shall be
incorporated into this subchapter by reference and shall be applicable to
cable or video providers offering services within the village boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this subchapter by reference
without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village.



(Ord. 1419-07, passed 12-18-08)



§ 118.23  PENALTIES.



   The village, pursuant to ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, § 70-501(r)(l), does
hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the
Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the
penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed $750 for each day of the
material breach, and shall not exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a
material breach per customer.



   (A)   Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or
video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified
in any provision of the law.



   (B)   The village shall give the cable or video provider written
notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at
least 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material
breach.



   (C)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties,
shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been
remedied by the cable video service provider after the notice in division (B)
above.



(Ord. 1419-07, passed 12-18-08)



§ 118.24  CUSTOMER CREDITS.



   The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for
violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of ILCS
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 70-50l(s) and applied on the statement issued to the
customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the
discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for
providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the
credit.



(Ord. 1419-07, passed 12-18-08)



CHAPTER 119:  VIDEO GAMING



Section



   119.01   Video gaming permitted



   119.02   Definitions



   119.03   License; fee



   119.04   Video gaming sticker required



   119.05   General provisions



   119.06   Violation; revocation



§ 119.01  VIDEO GAMING PERMITTED.



   Nothing contained in the Village of Itasca Code of Ordinances shall
prohibit video gaming in an establishment licensed by the Illinois Gaming
Board pursuant to the Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.)
and in compliance with this chapter and Chapter 112 (Alcoholic Beverages) of
this code, as well as any rules, regulations or restrictions imposed by the
Illinois Gaming Board.



(Ord. 1506-09, passed 11-3-09; Am. Ord. 1669-13, passed 8-20-13)



§ 119.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game,
including but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as
authorized by the Illinois Gaming Board utilizing a video display and
microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or credits that
can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that directly
dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.



(Ord. 1669-13, passed 8-20-13)



§ 119.03  LICENSE; FEE.



   (A)   Any establishment within the village which holds a liquor
license and has obtained a license to operate a video gaming terminal from
the Illinois Gaming Board shall, upon application and fee payment to the
village, be issued a video gaming sticker(s) from the village. The video
gaming sticker shall serve as a license from the village.



   (B)   The fee to operate a video gaming terminal in the village
shall be $25 per video gaming terminal.



   (C)   The fee for each video gaming terminal shall be paid annually
and shall be due at the same time as all fees related to liquor license
renewal.



(Ord. 1669-13, passed 8-20-13)



§ 119.04  VIDEO GAMING STICKER REQUIRED.



   (A)   A video gaming sticker issued from the village shall be
affixed in a conspicuous place to every video gaming terminal in operation in
the village.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate a video gaming terminal in the
village without a valid video gaming sticker affixed thereto.



   (C)   Video gaming stickers shall not be transferrable.



(Ord. 1669-13, passed 8-20-13)



§ 119.05  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Video gaming terminals shall not be operated on any premise
that is either located within 1,000 feet of a horse racing or riverboat
gambling facility or located within 100 feet of a school or a place of
worship. These distances shall be determined by measuring the distance from a
proposed or existing video gaming terminal establishment to a preexisting
facility by drawing a straight line between the closest part of any building
used for the proposed or existing video gaming terminal and the closest part
of any building used for the facility. When located within a subsection of
property (e.g., a shopping center), measurement shall be from the boundaries
of the establishment’s leased building premises.



   (B)   There shall not be more than five video gaming terminals on
any premises licensed to sell liquor.



   (C)   Video gaming terminals shall be located in an area that is
restricted to persons over the age of 21. It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of 21 to play or operate a video gaming terminal.



   (D)   Video gaming terminals shall only be operated during the legal
hours of operation provided for alcoholic liquor sales under Chapter 112 of
this code.



   (E)   Every establishment operating video gaming terminals shall
comply with all provisions of the Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40,
§§ 1 et seq.), and all rules, regulations and restrictions imposed by the
Illinois Gaming Board.



(Ord. 1669-13, passed 8-20-13)



§ 119.06  VIOLATION; REVOCATION.



   If an establishment operating a video gaming terminal violates any
provision of the Video Gaming Act, any rules, regulations or restrictions
imposed by the Illinois Gaming Board, or any provision related to video
gaming terminals contained in this chapter, such violation shall be deemed a
violation of the liquor license for that establishment and may subject the
liquor license for that establishment to the penalties provided for in §§
112.27 and 112.99 of Chapter 112 of this code.



(Ord. 1669-13, passed 8-20-13)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY





         131.   DRUG OFFENSES




CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



Section



   130.01   Curfew for minors



   130.02   Construction noise



   130.03    Trespassing at wastewater treatment plant



   130.04   Air and spring guns



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used
in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning:



      EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.



      ESTABLISHMENT.  Any privately-owned place of business operated
for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any
place of amusement or entertainment.



      GUARDIAN.



         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian
of the person of a minor; or



         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has
been placed by a court.



      MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.



      OPERATOR.  Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation, operating, managing, or conducting any establishment.  The term
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.



      PARENT.  A person who is:



         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent
of another person; or



         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a
parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses,
office buildings, transport facilities, shops and other establishments.



      REMAIN.



         (a)   Linger or stay; or



         (b)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by
a peace officer or the owners, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.



      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.



   (B)   Offenses.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to knowingly be
present, remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about, in or upon any public
place in the village between the hours of:



         (a)   11:00 p.m. Sunday evening and 6:00 a.m. Monday
morning;



         (b)   11:00 p.m. Monday evening and 6:00 a.m. Tuesday
morning;



         (c)   11:00 p.m. Tuesday evening and 6:00 a.m. Wednesday
morning;



         (d)   11:00 p.m. Wednesday evening and 6:00 a.m.
Thursday morning;



         (e)   11:00 p.m. Thursday evening and 6:00 a.m. Friday
morning;



         (f)   12:01 a.m. Saturday morning and 6:00 a.m. Saturday
morning; and



         (g)   12:01 a.m. Sunday morning and 6:00 a.m. Sunday
morning.



      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he
knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village
during curfew hours.



      (3)   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment
commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours.



   (C)   Defenses.



      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution under divisions (B)(1),
(2) and (3) that the minor was:



         (a)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;



         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's
parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;



         (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



         (d)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



         (e)   Involved in an emergency or on an errand made
necessary by an emergency;



         (g)   Attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for
the minor, or going to or returning home therefrom, without any detour or
stop;



         (h)   Going to or returning from the residence of
another with the knowledge and consent of the minor's parent or guardian
without any detour or stop;



         (i)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly;



         (j)   Married or had been married, or has had the
disabilities of minority removed in accordance with the "Emancipation of
Minors Act," ILCS Ch. 750, Act 30, § 1 et seq.



      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B)(3)
that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified
the Police Department or a peace officer, that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.



   (D)    Enforcement.   Before taking any enforcement action under
this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and
reason for being in the public place.  The officer shall not issue a warning
or citation or take further action under this section unless the officer
reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based upon any
response and other circumstances, no defense in division (C) is present.



(Ord. 1228-04, passed 10-19-04)



§ 130.02  CONSTRUCTION NOISE.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for developers, owners of
property, construction contractors, or other similarly situated persons to
operate, or permit to be operated, upon premises under their control, any
construction equipment, or otherwise create or permit upon premises under
their control, construction noise within 1,000 feet of an occupied residence,
motel, hotel, or similar establishment between the following hours:



         (a)   Before 7:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday;



         (b)   Before 8:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m., Saturday,
Sunday and holidays that are observed by the village.



      (2)   The above time limitations shall not apply to
construction work that is of an emergency nature; provided, however, that the
Director of Community Development shall be notified as soon as possible of
the nature and the cause of the emergency.



   (B)   (1)   Requests to modify or deviate from the above
requirements shall be filed with the Director of Community Development in
writing.



      (2)   A request to modify or deviate from the above
requirements shall be allowed for good cause, and must be approved in writing
by the Village Administrator before any modifications or deviations can occur.



   (C)   Any person having a beneficial or ownership interest in
property upon which construction is occurring and any developer, contractor,
or other person engaged in construction work who permits the operation of
construction equipment thereon in violation of this section shall be subject
to the fine provision contained in § 10.99 of this code.



(Ord. 1124-02, passed 2-19-02)



§ 130.03  TRESPASSING AT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to, without
authorization, enter or go upon the premises of the wastewater treatment
plant within the village.



(Ord. 1614-12, passed 3-20-12)



§ 130.04  AIR AND SPRING GUNS.



   (A)   AIR GUN means and includes any air rifle, air pistol, spring
gun, spring pistol, B-B gun, pellet gun, paint ball gun, or any other
implement that is not a firearm and which impels a pellet constructed of hard
plastic, steel, lead, or other hard material or paint with a force that
reasonably may be expected to cause bodily harm or damage to property.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess an air
gun in any vehicle or on or about his/her person within the village unless:



      (1)   Such air gun is unloaded and/or broken down in a
non-functioning state and enclosed in a suitable case, box, or transportation
package;



      (2)   While on the person's own land or in his/her own abode
or fixed place of business or while on the private property of another with
the express consent of the property owner;



      (3)   While on public property, if the person is an invitee on
public property for the purpose of display of the air gun or lawful commerce
of such air gun;



      (4)   The person possessing such air gun is a law enforcement
officer, or a student carrying or possessing the air gun for use in training
courses, parades, hunting, or target shooting on school or park district
ranges, or otherwise with the consent of school or park district authorities
and when the air gun is transported unloaded and enclosed in a suitable case,
box or transportation package.



   (C)   No person shall be permitted to fire or discharge in the
village any air gun unless such discharge is done with the express consent of
the property owner and is done on a safely constructed target range or in
such a manner as to prevent the projectile from passing over any grounds or
space outside the limits of such property.



   (D)   Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to a fine as established in § 130.99.



(Ord. 1729-15, passed 2-17-15)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person convicted of a violation of any provision of §
130.01 shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than
$10 nor more than $100.  The village fine schedule shall be as follows:



      (1)   First offense punishable by a fine of $25.



      (2)   Second offense punishable by a fine of $50.



      (3)   Third and all subsequent offenses punishable by a fine
of $100.



   (B)   A person convicted of a violation of § 130.03 shall be guilt
of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $200.



(Ord. 766-93, passed 2-16-93; Am. Ord. 1614-12, passed 3-20-12)



CHAPTER 131:  DRUG OFFENSES



Section



   131.01   Possession of cannabis



   131.02   Drug paraphernalia control



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, the term CANNABIS shall include
marijuana, hashish, and other substances which are identified as including
any part of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds
thereof the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its
seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction,
or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of
extraction and chemical synthesis. However, this term shall not include the
mature stalks of such plant; fiber produced from such stalks; oil or cake
made from the seeds of such plant; any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin
extracted therefrom); fiber; oil cake; or the sterilized seed of such plant
which is incapable of germination.



   (B)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person
knowingly to possess any quantity of any substance containing cannabis,
except that the effect of this section shall be limited to persons knowingly
possessing more than 10 grams and less than 30 grams of any substance
containing cannabis.



   (C)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person
knowingly to possess any quantity of any substance containing cannabis,
except that the effect of this section shall be limited to persons knowingly
possessing less than 10 grams of any substance containing cannabis.



   (D)   It shall not be a violation of this section for a person to
possess and use medical cannabis from an authorized medical cannabis
dispensary as authorized under the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act.



(Ord. 1512-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord. 1705-14, passed 6-16-15; Am. Ord.
1840-17, passed 3-7-17)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.02  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA CONTROL.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:



      (1)   CANNABIS.   This term shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in § 131.01(A) as if that definition were incorporated herein.



      (2)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.   This term shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, ILCS Ch.
720, Act 570, § 102, as if that definition were incorporated herein.



      (3)   DELIVER or DELIVERY.   The actual, constructive or
attempted transfer of possession, with or without consideration, whether or
not there is an agency relationship.



      (4)   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.   All equipment, products and
materials of any kind, other than methamphetamine manufacturing materials, as
defined in the Illinois Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act,
ILCS Ch. 720, Act 646, § 10, which are intended to be used unlawfully in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body
cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the laws of the State of
Illinois or the Village Code. It includes, but is not limited to:



         (a)   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
cannabis or a controlled substance;



         (b)   Isomerization devices intended to be used
unlawfully in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is
cannabis or a controlled substance;



         (c)   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully
in a private home for identifying or analyzing the strength, effectiveness or
purity of cannabis or controlled substances;



         (d)   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used
unlawfully for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;



         (e)   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil into the human body, including but not limited to, the following
items:



            1.   Water pipes;



            2.   Carburetion tubes and devices;



            3.   Smoking and carburetion masks;



            4.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



            5.   Carburetor pipes;



            6.   Electric pipes;



            7.   Air-driven pipes;



            8.   Chillums;



            9.   Bongs;



            10.   Ice pipes or chillers; or



            11.   Glass pipes.



         (f)   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described
by the seller, is for use in violation of this section.



   (B)   Sale or delivery.  It is unlawful for any person, business,
corporation, place, business, premises, company or other legal entity to keep
for sale, offer for sale, sell or deliver for any commercial consideration
any item of drug paraphernalia.



   (C)   Possession of drug paraphernalia.  It is unlawful for any
person to knowingly possess an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to
use it in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis or a
controlled substance into the human body or in preparing cannabis or a
controlled substance for that use. In determining intent under this division
(C), the trier of fact may take into consideration the proximity of the
cannabis or controlled substances to drug paraphernalia or the presence of
cannabis or a controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia.



   (D)   Exemptions.  This chapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Items marketed for use in the preparation, compounding,
packaging, labeling or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an
incident to lawful research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale;



      (2)   Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used
in connection with, the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful
substance. Items exempt under this division (D)(2) include, but are not
limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes and
cigarette-rolling papers.



      (3)   Items defined in division (A)(4) of this section, which
are used for decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered
completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit purpose
prohibited by this section. In determining whether or not a particular item
is exempt under this division, the trier of fact should consider, in addition
to all other logically relevant factors, the following:



         (a)   The general, usual, customary, and historical use
to which the item involved has been put;



         (b)   Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or
customary use of the item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or
engineering of the device upon its functioning;



         (c)   Any written instructions accompanying the delivery
of the item concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be
put;



         (d)   Any oral instructions provided by the seller of
the item at the time and place of sale or commercial delivery;



         (e)   Any national or local advertising concerning the
design, purpose or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which
such advertising occurs;



         (f)   The manner, place and circumstances in which the
item was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale
or otherwise exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made;



         (g)   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the
object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community,
such as, a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; and



         (h)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.



      (4)   A possessor of drug paraphernalia authorized/licensed
under the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.



   (E)   Seizures.



      (1)   When drug paraphernalia has been seized and held as
evidence subsequent to a charge brought pursuant to this chapter, if found
not guilty, or the charge is non-suited, the person shall have 30 days from
the court ruling or dismissal of the charge to contact the Police Department
Property Custodian and arrange for the return of their property. If no such
claim is made, notice shall be given to the person at his/her last known
address that his/her property will be available for return. If any such
property remains unclaimed 30 days after notice is provided herein, the
Police Department Property Custodian shall be authorized to destroy the
property in question.



(Ord. 1512-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord. 1562-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord.
1705-14, passed 6-16-15; Am. Ord. 1840-17, passed 3-7-17)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of § 131.01(B) or §
131.02 of this chapter shall be fined not more than $750 for each offense.



   (B)   Any person found violating § 131.01(C) of this chapter or
possessing any drug paraphernalia seized during the violation of § 131.01(C)
shall be fined not more than $200 for each offense.



   (C)   In addition to, or in lieu of any fines imposed under this
chapter, the presiding judge may in each case exercise his or her discretion
to further issue and order such other corrective measures of the defendant as
may be reasonable, equitable and appropriate, including court supervision,
and/or drug abuse, psychiatric or social service counseling.



(Ord. 1512-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord. 1840-17, passed 3-7-17)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDING CODE





         151.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN





         152.   FEE SCHEDULE FOR LAND USE ACTIVITIES





         153.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION





         154.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION





         155.   SIGNS AND AWNINGS





         156.   SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL





         157.   SUBDIVISION CODE





         158.   SWIMMING POOLS





         159.   ZONING CODE




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING CODE



Section



Adoption of Building Regulations



   150.01   2006 International Residential Code adopted by reference



   150.02   International Building Code adopted by reference



   150.03   2006 International Property Maintenance Code adopted by
reference



   150.04   [Reserved]



   150.05   National Electric Code adopted by reference



   150.06   International Mechanical Code adopted by reference



   150.07   International Fire Code adopted by reference



   150.08   International Fuel Gas Code adopted by reference



   150.09   International Wildland-Urban Interface Code adopted by
reference



Building Code Amendments



   150.11   Revisions to the current adopted edition of the
International Building Code



   150.12   Revisions to the International Property Maintenance Code



   150.13   [Reserved]



   150.14   [Reserved]



   150.15   [Reserved]



   150.16   [Reserved]



   150.17   [Reserved]



   150.18   [Reserved]



   150.19   [Reserved]



   150.20   [Reserved]



   150.21   Revisions to the International Residential Code



   150.22   [Reserved]



   150.23   [Reserved]



   150.24   [Reserved]



   150.25   Revisions and amendments to the 2004 Illinois Plumbing Code
and the 2006 International Plumbing Code



   150.26   [Reserved]



   150.27   [Reserved]



   150.28   [Reserved]



   150.29   [Reserved]



   150.30   [Reserved]



   150.31   Revisions to the National Electric Code



   150.32   [Reserved]



   150.33   [Reserved]



   150.34   [Reserved]



   150.35   Revisions to the 2006 International Mechanical Code



   150.36   Revisions to the 2006 International Fuel Gas Code



   150.37   Revisions and amendments to the International Fire Code



   150.38   [Reserved]



   150.39   Revisions to the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code



Special Provisions or Requirements



   150.40   [Reserved]



   150.41   [Reserved]



   150.42   Exterior wall materials for industrial and manufacturing
buildings



   150.43   Permits for landmarks or structures within historic
districts



   150.44   [Reserved]



   150.45   [Reserved]



   150.46   [Reserved]



   150.47   [Reserved]



   150.48   [Reserved]



   150.49   [Reserved]



   150.50   [Reserved]



   150.51   Special requirements for the construction of multi-unit
residential structures



   150.52   Protection of village pavements



Schedule of Fees



   150.80   Fees for building permits and other activities



   150.81   Fire protection district fees



   150.82   [Reserved]



   150.83   [Reserved]



   150.84   [Reserved]



   150.85   [Reserved]



   150.86   Fees for the cleaning, restoration or repair of village
streets and public property



   150.87   General liability and property damage insurance



Building Permits



   150.90   Building permit time limits



Violations



   150.99   Penalty



ADOPTION OF BUILDING REGULATIONS



§ 150.01 § 2006 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The 2006 International Residential Code, published by the International
Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as the building code of the
village for the control of and regulation of the construction, alteration,
movement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and
demolition of detached one and two family dwellings and townhouses which are
not more than three stories above-grade in height, and which have eight or
less individual dwelling units per structure with a separate means of egress
and their accessory structures as hereby provided, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the 2006 International
Residential Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as
though fully set forth in this chapter, with the additions, deletions and
changes provided in § 150.21.



(Ord. 954-97, passed 4-29-97; Am. Ord. 1080-01, passed 3-20-01; Am. Ord.
1464-08, passed 11-4-08)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.02  INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   A certain document, copies of which are on file in the Office of the
Building Department, being marked and designated as the 2006 International
Building Code, as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted by reference as the building code of the village for the
control of buildings and structures as hereby provided, and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the 2006 International
Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as
though fully set forth in this chapter, with the additions, deletions and
changes provided in § 150.11.



(Ord. 1080-01, passed 3-20-01; Am. Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08)  Penalty,
see § 150.99



§ 150.03 § 2006 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED BY
REFERENCE.



   A certain document, copies of which are on file in the Office of the
Building Department, being marked and designated as the 2006 International
Property Maintenance Code, as published by the International Code Council, be
and is hereby adopted by reference as the property maintenance code of the
village for the control of buildings and structures as hereby provided, and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the 2006
International Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter, with the
additions, deletions and changes provided in § 150.12.



(Ord. 1080-01, passed 3-20-01; Am. Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08)  Penalty,
see § 150.99



§ 150.04  [Reserved]



Editor's Note:



   This section will be amended by future ordinance to reflect current
legislation.



§ 150.05  NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   A certain document, copies of which are on file in the Office of the
Building Department, being marked and designated as the 2008 National
Electric Code, be and is hereby adopted by reference as the electrical code
of the village for the control of buildings and structures as hereby
provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of the 2008 National Electric Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter, with the
additions, deletions and changes provided in § 150.31.



(Ord. 1080-01, passed 3-20-01; Am. Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08)  Penalty,
see § 150.99



§ 150.06  INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   A certain document, copies of which are on file in the Office of the
Building Department, being marked and designated as the 2006 International
Mechanical Code, be and is hereby adopted by reference as the mechanical code
of the village for the control of buildings and structures as hereby
provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of the 2006 International Mechanical Code are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter,
with the additions, deletions and changes provided in § 150.35.



(Ord. 1080-01, passed 3-20-01; Am. Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08)  Penalty,
see § 150.99



§ 150.07  INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   A certain document, copies of which are on file in the Office of the
Building Department, being marked and designated as the 2006 Fire Code, be
and is hereby adopted by reference as the fire code of the village for the
control of buildings and structures as hereby provided, and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the 2006 Fire Code are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as though fully set forth
in this chapter, with the additions, deletions and changes provided in §
150.37.



(Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08)



§ 150.08  INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   A certain document, copies of which are on file in the Office of the
Building Department, being marked and designated as the 2006 Fuel Gas Code,
be and is hereby adopted by reference as the fuel gas code of the village for
the control of buildings and structures as hereby provided, and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the 2006 Fuel Gas
Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as though fully
set forth in this chapter, with the additions, deletions and changes provided
in § 150.36.



(Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08)



§ 150.09  INTERNATIONAL WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   A certain document, copies of which are on file in the Office of the
Building Department, being marked and designated as the 2006 Wildland-Urban
Interface Code, be and is hereby adopted by reference as the wildland-urban
interface code of the village for the control of buildings and structures as
hereby provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions
and terms of the 2006 Wildland-Urban Interface Code are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter,
with the additions, deletions and changes provided in § 150.38.



(Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08)



BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS



§ 150.11  REVISIONS TO THE CURRENT ADOPTED EDITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL
BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   The following revisions and amendments are based on the 2006
Edition, and are intended for application to the most recent adopted edition.
If conflicts of application or interpretation exist between this section and
the most recently adopted code, the Code Official shall refer to the 2006
Edition for any revision or amendment in conflict.



   (B)   The following revisions or amendments supersede the actual
text of the code as published as it pertains to that section only.



   (C)   The following specific sections have been revised in part or
total to read as follows for general adoption of the printed code.



   101.1      (INSERT) The Village of Itasca, Illinois.



   106.1      (DELETE) one or more sets (Insert) five copies.



   108.2      (INSERT) Refer to sections 150-80 through 150.87
schedule of fees.



   113.4      (INSERT) See penalty for violations section 150.99.



   114.3      (INSERT) See penalty for violations section 150.99.



   3410.2      (INSERT) 1st Village Building Code Ordinance #102-52
adopted in 1952.



   (D)   The following specific sections have been revised in part or
total to read as follows:



   105.2      Permits (DELETE from the exceptions list) storage
sheds, fences, water tanks, sidewalks, driveways.



   112.0      (DELETE) the section and insert the following;



         All requests for appeals shall be submitted to the Building
Official within thirty (30) days of the plan review or inspection. All
appeals shall be submitted in writing with an explanation of the basis for
the appeal.



         The Building Official shall review the appeal to determine
the validity and correct application of the related code requirements. After
the Building Official has determined the validity of the appeal, it shall be
forwarded to the International Code Council for an interpretation of the code
section.



         The interpretation of the International Code Council shall
be used as the basis for the final decision of the appeal.



         Any appeals of the application of any local amendments to
the adopted codes shall be made by the Building Official.



   201.5      Building Official: Whenever the term building
official, code official or fire code official is shown, it shall refer to the
Building Commissioner.



   201.6      ZONING: (ADD) The Zoning Ordinance shall apply in all
cases which are more restrictive than the building code.



   201.7      (INCLUDE) Zoning Ordinance, when applicable.



   403.1.1      (OMIT) seventy-five (75) feet (INSERT) Fifty-five
feet (55') or over four (4) stories above grade.



   419.2      Separation walls (DELETE) entire text and insert the
following: Walls separating dwellings in the same building and sleeping units
in the same building shall be continuous up to the floor or roof deck and
have a minimum of a two hour fire rating. There is no allowable reduction in
ratings.



   419.3      Horizontal separation (DELETE) entire text and insert
the following: Floor/ceiling assemblies separating dwellings in the same
building and sleeping units in the same building shall be continuous and have
a minimum of a two hour fire rating. There is no allowable reduction in
ratings.



   503      (DELETE) Type V construction from Table 503.



   506.2      (ADD) All fire lanes shall be capable of supporting an
eighty thousand pound (80,000 lb.) fire vehicle. Specifications for all fire
lanes shall be approved by the local Fire Protection District.



   601      (DELETE) Type V construction from Table 601.



   602.5      (DELETE) Entire section.



   603.1#1   (DELETE) Entire item.



   707.5      (ADD) Stairs which do not continue to the exit
discharge and have a stair extension or grade passageway shall maintain the
rating of the stair to the discharge. All penetrations of the extension or
passageway shall maintain the rating.



   901.6   Supervisory service. All new and existing fire alarm systems
shall transmit trouble, supervisory, and fire signals through a wireless
transmitter which connects to an approved supervisory station in accordance
with NFPA 72. The authority having jurisdiction under NFPA 72 shall approve
the supervisory station connection.



   903.2      (ADD) All new buildings require a fire sprinkler
system.



         Exception: Detached structures, which comply with all of
the following, do not require automatic fire sprinklers:



         1.   Less than five hundred (500) square feet in area



         2.   Single story



         3.   Not used as a dwelling or sleeping area



         4.   Not a High Hazard Group



         5.   Not used for high hazard products or hazardous
materials



         6.   No basements



         7.   Minimum separation to other buildings twenty (20)
feet



         Additions to any building or structure equal to or
exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the original
building construction as identified on the permit records and construction
drawings approved by the Village when the structure was first constructed
shall require the installation of an approved automatic sprinkler system
throughout the entire existing and proposed building or structure.



         Note: This applies to attached single family residences
(townhouses) but not detached single family homes.



   903.2.1.3   (DELETE) exception.



   903.2.1.4   (DELETE) exception.



   903.2.2      (DELETE) exception.



   903.2.10   Windowless Stories (DELETE section and INSERT) An
automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all windowless
stories or basements.



   903.2.14   (ADD SECTION) Transformer vaults. Within Commonwealth
Edison Transformer vaults and main switch gear rooms which are enclosed by
three (3) hour fire resistance rated walls, floors and ceiling assemblies and
are also equipped with an approved automatic fire alarm system, the automatic
fire sprinkler system is not required in the vault or room. The doors shall
have Commonwealth Edison locks.



   905.2 .1   (ADD) Open parking structures in which the highest floor
is located not more than one hundred fifty feet (150') above the lowest level
of fire department vehicle access shall be permitted to use a dry standpipe
system.



   905.3      (REVISE SECTION TO READ) All buildings over two (2)
stories above grade shall have a Class I standpipe system.



   905.4#1   (REVISE SECTION TO READ) Hose connections are required at
both sides of the doors at the stairway (one) 1 connection inside the
stairway, (one) 1 connection outside the stairway.



   905.7      (ADD) Hose valve/fire extinguisher cabinets shall be
mounted on the floor side of stairway doors.



   907.1.2      (ADD) When fire alarm systems are required,
detection is required throughout the entire building unless approved in
writing by the Building Official.



         When a fire alarm system is installed, smoke detection
shall be installed in all mechanical and electric rooms.



   907.2      (ADD) A complete fire alarm system shall be installed
in all buildings or occupancies over two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet.



         Additions or remodeling to any building or structure equal
to or exceeding two thousand five (2,500) hundred square feet or fifty
percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the original building construction
as identified on the permit records and construction drawings approved by the
Village when the structure was first constructed shall require the
installation of an approved fire alarm system throughout the entire existing
and proposed building or structure.



         Manual pull stations shall be provided in all multi-level
parking structures. The manual pull stations shall be located at each level
inside of each enclosed stair tower. All pull stations shall be connected
into the main building alarm panel and separately zoned.



         The following table will apply to buildings, which have a
complete automatic fire sprinkler system installed.



 

Group
 
Manual pull stations
 
Complete smoke detection




A
 
Required
 
Not required


B
 
Required
 
Not required


E
 
Required
 
Required


F
 
Required
 
Not required


H
 
Required
 
Not required


I
 
Required
 
Required


M
 
Required
 
Not required


R-1
 
Required
 
Required common areas


R-2
 
Required
 
Required common areas


R-3
 
Required
 
Not required


R-4
 
Required
 
Required common areas


S
 
Required
 
Not required


U
 
Not required
 
Not required




 



   907.5.1      (ADD) All conductors for the fire alarm system,
accessories and related equipment shall be in conduit. All conduit for fire
alarms shall be red.



   907.8      Zones (DELETE) 22,500 square feet and 300 feet
(INSERT) ten thousand (10,000) square feet and one hundred fifty (150) feet.



   909.20      (DELETE) and an open stairway that conforms to
Section 1020.1 and an open exterior balcony or ventilated vestibule meeting
the requirements of this section. All opposing HVAC systems shall shut down
upon activation of the system.



   909.20.3   (DELETE) entire section.



   909.20.4   (DELETE) entire section.



   909.20.5   (DELETE) word alternate (INSERT) "requirements"
pressurized stairways are required.



   909.20.6   (DELETE) Alternatives in section 909.20.4.



   1008.1.8.3   (DELETE) #2,3,4.



   1008.1.8.3   (ADD) unless approved by the Building Official.



   1011.5.3   (ADD) Photo luminescent exit signs are not allowed.



   1016.2      Roof vent increase (DELETE SECTION).



   1020.1.7   Smokeproof enclosures (REVISE SECTION TO READ) In
buildings, each of the exits that serves stories where the floor surface is
located more than fifty-five feet (55') in height or over four (4) stories
above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.



   1101.1      (ADD) The stricter of the requirements shall apply
when there is a conflict between this code and the Illinois Accessibility
Code.



   1206.3.1   (ADD) The access door to the court shall be a means of
egress from the court.



   1505.5      (ADD) and shall not be allowed.



   1507.8      (ADD) Wood shingles shall only be allowed when
approved in writing by the Building Official.



   1507.9      (ADD) Wood shakes shall only be allowed when approved
in writing by the Building Official.



   1509.5      (DELETE) eighty-five (85) feet (INSERT) fifty-five
feet (55')



   1704.1      # 3 exception (ADD) unless requested by the Building
Official.



   1704.4      Under exceptions (ADD) unless requested by the
Building Official.



   1805.1      (ADD) Timber footing and foundation and wood footings
and foundations are not permitted.



   1805.2      (ADD) The frost depth for the Village of Itasca shall
be forty two inches (42") below grade.



   1807.1.2   (ADD) Foundation drain lines, sumps, and pumps are
required for all crawl spaces and basements unless approved in writing by the
Building Official.



   1807.4.2   (ADD) A minimum of four inch (4") diameter perforated
pipe is required to surround all crawl spaces or basements.



   2304.6      (ADD) Particle board shall not be used for floor or
roof sheathing.



   2801.2      (ADD) The space between studs or joists shall not be
used as a plenum for supply or return air. Sheet metal ductwork is required.



   2901.1      (ADD) and the most recent edition of the Illinois
State Plumbing Code. The most stringent code shall apply.



   3001.2      (ADD) Addenda-05S Supplement - Al 8.1 2005



   3001.3      (ADD) ASME A17.1 2004 Section 8.7 alterations



   3002.1.3   (ADD) Provide key access holes in all hoist way doors on
all levels



   3002.4      (DELETE THE FOLLOWING) four or more stories above the
grade plane or four or more stories below the grade plane.



   3003.2      (ADD) and NFPA 72.



   3006.1      (CHANGE AS FOLLOWS) An approved means of access shall
be provided to elevator machine rooms and overhead machinery spaces. This
means is not to be used as a passageway through the machine room to other
areas of the building or roof.



   3007.0      (Add new section) EXISTING ELEVATORS.



   3007.1      All existing elevators to comply with ASME 2005 17.3,
Safety Code for existing elevators and escalators.



   3008.0      (ADD NEW SECTION) MAINTENANCE AND ACCIDENTS.



   3008.1      Owner responsibility: The owner or owner's agent for
the building in which the equipment is located shall be responsible for the
care, maintenance and safe operation of all equipment covered by this section
after the installation thereof and acceptance by such owner or agent. The
owner or legal agent shall make or cause to be made all periodic tests and
inspections, and shall maintain all equipment in a safe operating condition,
as required by this section.



   3008.2      Contractor responsibility: The person installing any
device covered by this section shall make all acceptance tests and shall be
responsible for the care and safe operation of such equipment during its
construction and until temporarily or finally accepted by the Itasca
inspector or his or her designee.



   3008.3      Maintenance items: All operating and electrical parts
and accessory equipment or devices subject to this section shall be
maintained in a safe operating condition. The maintenance of elevators,
dumbwaiters and escalators shall conform to ASME A 17.1



   3008.4      Unsafe conditions: If, upon inspection, any equipment
covered by this section is found to be in an unsafe condition, or not in
accordance with the provisions of this code, the Building Official shall
thereupon serve a written notice of such finding upon the building owner or
lessee, stating the time when recommended repairs or changes shall be
completed. After the service of such notice, it shall be the duty of the
owner to proceed within the time allowed to make such repairs or changes as
are necessary to place the equipment in safe condition. It shall be unlawful
to operate such equipment after the date stated in the notice unless the
recommended repairs or changes have been made and the equipment has been
approved, or unless an extension of time has been secured from the Building
Official in writing. Time duration to be twenty-four (24) hours, seven (7)
days, fifteen (15) days or a maximum of thirty (30) days.



   3008.4.1   Power to seal equipment: In cases of emergency, the
Building Official, in addition to any other penalties herein provided, shall
have the power to seal out any device or equipment covered by this section
when in the opinion of the Building Official, the condition of the device is
such that the device is rendered unsafe for operation: or for willful failure
to comply with recommendations or orders.



   3008.4.2   Notice for sealing out of service: Before sealing any
device out of service, the Building Official, except in case of emergency,
shall serve written notice upon the building owner or lessee stating
intention to seal the equipment out of service and reasons thereof.



   3008.4.3   Unlawful to remove seal: Any device sealed out of service
by the Building Official, shall be plainly marked with a sign or tag
indicating the reason for such sealing. Any tampering with, defacing or
removal of the sign, tag or seal without approval shall constitute a
violation of this section.



   3008.5      Accidents reported and recorded: The owner of the
building shall immediately notify the Building Official of every accident
involving personal injury or damage to apparatus on, about or in connection
with any equipment covered by this section, and shall afford the Building
Official, every facility for investigating such accident. When an accident
involves the failure, breakage, damage or destruction of any part of the
apparatus or mechanism, it shall be unlawful to use such device until after
an examination by the Building Official is made and approval of the equipment
for continued use is granted. It shall be the duty of the Building Official
to make a prompt examination to the cause of the accident and to enter a full
and complete report thereof in the records of the Building Department. Such
records shall be open for public inspection at all reasonable hours.



   3008.6      Removal of damaged parts: It shall be unlawful; to
remove from the premises any part of damaged construction or operating
mechanisms of elevators, or other equipment subject to the provisions of this
section, until permission to do so has been granted by the Building Official.



   3009.0      (ADD NEW SECTION) CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   3009.1      The operation of the equipment governed by the
provisions of this chapter and hereinafter installed, relocated or altered
shall be unlawful by persons other than the installer until such equipment
has been inspected and tested as herein required and a final certificate of
compliance has been issued by the Building Official.



   3009.2      Posting Certificates of Compliance: The owner or
lessee shall post the current issued certificate of compliance in a
conspicuous place inside the elevator.



   3010.0      (ADD NEW SECTION) CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS AND PERMITS.



   3010.1      Application: The application for a permit shall be
accompanied by construction documents in sufficient detail and indicating the
location of the machinery room and equipment to be installed, relocate or
altered: and all supporting structural members, including foundations. The
construction documents shall indicate all materials to be used and all loads
to be supported or conveyed. Documents to be reviewed and approved before a
permit is issued.



   3010.2      Permits: Equipment or devices subject to the
provisions of this code shall not be constructed, installed, relocated or
altered unless a permit has been received from the Building Official before
the work is commenced. A copy of such permit shall be kept at the
construction site at all times while the work is in progress.



   3011.0      (ADD NEW SECTION) TESTS AND INSPECTIONS.



   3011.1      General: All equipment and devices covered by the
provisions of this code shall be subjected to acceptance and maintenance
tests and periodic inspections as required herein.



   3011.2      Acceptance tests: Acceptance test and inspections
shall be required on all new, relocated and altered equipment subject to the
provisions of this chapter. Tests and maintenance subject shall be of such
nature as to determine whether the entire installation is designed,
constructed and installed in compliance with this code, and shall include all
parts of the equipment and machinery. In addition, Full Load Tests to be done
on all equipment. All such tests shall be made in compliance with the
requirements of section 8.20 and in the presence of the Building Official or
by an approved agency for the Building Official and by the person installing
such equipment.



   3011.3      Periodic tests and periodic inspections: Periodic
tests shall be required on all new and existing power elevators, and periodic
inspections shall be made of all new and existing equipment subject to the
provisions of this chapter.



   3011.3.1   Periodic tests: Periodic tests shall be made by the
Building Official, or by an approved agency, and shall be made at the expense
and responsibility of the owner. Where such tests are not made by the
Building Official, the approved agency shall submit a detailed report of the
tests to the Building Official on approved forms not more than thirty (30)
days after the completion of the tests.



   3011.3.2   Periodic inspections: Periodic inspections shall be made
by the Building Official or by an approved agency. Where such inspections are
not made by the Building Official, the approved agency shall submit a
detailed report of the inspection to the Building Official on approved forms
not more than thirty (30) days after the completion of the inspection.



   3011.3.3   Frequency of tests and inspections: Tests and inspections
shall be conducted at intervals of not more than those set forth in ASME A
17.1 for elevators, escalators, dumbwaiters and moving walks.



   3012.0      (ADD NEW SECTION) Miscellaneous equipment.



   3012.2      Miscellaneous hoisting and elevating equipment: All
miscellaneous hoisting and elevating equipment shall be subjected to tests
and inspections as required by the Building Official to ensure safe operation.



   3012.2      Conveyors: Conveyors and related equipment shall be
inspected and test in accordance with ASME B20.1.



   3401.1      (REVISE SECTION TO READ) General: For repairs,
alterations and changes to existing buildings that are evaluated in
accordance with this Chapter, compliance with this Chapter may be accepted by
the Building Official when the propose work is consistent with safe building
practices and provides for a greater degree of public safety, health and
general welfare to the occupants of the building.



   3407.1      (ADD) The Village Board shall be able to designate a
building, block or area as historical in nature and not have to comply with
the requirements in whole or in part.



   Chapter 35   (DELETE).



   ICC EC   ICC Electric Code.



   IEBC      International Existing Building Code.



   IPSDC      International Private Sewage Disposal Code.



(Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08; Am. Ord. 1606-12, passed 1-17-12; Am. Ord.
1767-15, passed 10-20-15; Am. Ord. 1842-17, passed 4-4-17)



§ 150.12  REVISIONS TO THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   (A)   The following revisions and amendments are based on the 2006
Edition, and are intended for application to the most recent adopted edition.
If conflicts of application or interpretation exist between this section and
the most recently adopted code, the Code Official shall refer to the 2006
Edition for any revision or amendment in conflict.



   (B)   The following revisions or amendments supersede the actual
text of the code as published as it pertains to that section only.



   (C)   The following specific sections have been revised in part or
total to read as follows:



   101.1      (INSERT) The Village of Itasca, Illinois.



   103.6      Fees-see 150.80.



   111.0      (DELETE and INSERT) Appeals Board: Delete the entire
section and the following: See the amendments to the International Building
Code section 112.



   302.4      (INSERT) ten inches (10").



   304.14      (INSERT) April 1 to November 1.



   403.5      (ADD) Dryers to be directly vented to the outside of
the building.



   404.5      (REVISE SECTION TO READ) Dwelling units shall not be
occupied by more than permitted by the minimum area requirements of Table
404.5.



 

Table 404.5


Minimum area requirements


Space
 
Minimum area in square feet


1 - 2 occupants
 
3 - 5 occupants
 
6 or more occupants


Living room a/b
 
No requirements
 
120
 
150


Dining room a/b
 
No requirements
 
80
 
100


Bedrooms
 
Shall comply with section 404.4



 



   a.   See section 404.5.2 for combined living room/dining room spaces



   b.   See section 404.5.1 for limitations on determining the minimum
occupancy area for sleeping purposes.



   404.5.1      Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required
by Table 404.5 shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the
minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply
with section 404.4.



   404.5.2      Combined living room and dining room spaces shall
comply with the requirements of Table 404.5 if the total area is equal to
that required for separate rooms if the space is located so as to function as
a combination living room/dining room.



   602.3      (INSERT) October 1 to May 15.



   602.4      (INSERT) October 1 to May 15.



   Chapter 8   (DELETE).



   ICC EC   ICC Electric Code



   IEBC      International Existing Building Code



   IPSDC      International Private Sewage Disposal Code



   IZC      International Zoning Code



(Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08)



§ 150.13  [RESERVED]



§ 150.14  [RESERVED]



§ 150.15  [RESERVED]



§ 150.16  [RESERVED]



§ 150.17  [RESERVED]



§ 150.18  [RESERVED]



§ 150.19  [RESERVED]



§ 150.20  [RESERVED]



§ 150.21  REVISIONS TO THE INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.



   (A)   The following revisions and amendments are based on the 2006
Edition, and are intended for application to the most recent adopted edition.
If conflicts of application or interpretation exist between this section and
the most recently adopted code, the Code Official shall refer to the 2006
Edition for any revision or amendment in conflict.



   (B)   The following revisions or amendments supersede the actual
text of the code as published as it pertains to that section only.



   (C)   The following specific sections have been revised in part or
total to read as follows:



      R101.1      (INSERT) The Village of Itasca, Illinois.



      Rl12.1      (DELETE and INSERT) Appeals Board: Delete the
entire section and the following: See the amendments to the International
Building Code section 112.



      R108.2      Fees (INSERT) see 150.80.



      R109.1.1   (DELETE) and special requirements for wood
foundations, (ADD) piers for decks and other foundation work as required by
the department.



      R301.2(1)   (INSERT)



 



Ground Snow Load
 
25


Wind Speed
 
3 second 90 normal 75


Seismic Design Category
 
B


Weathering
 
Severe


Frost line depth
 
42 inches


Termite
 
Moderate to heavy


Decay
 
Slight to moderate


Winter Design Temperature
 
-5 degrees




 



 

Ice Shield Underlayment
 
Yes


Flood Hazard
 
See DuPage County Storm Water Ordinance


Air Freezing Index
 
2000


Mean Annual Temperature
 
50 degrees



 



      R309.3      (ADD) Provide a minimum four-inch (4") gas curb
against the dwelling unit side of all attached garages.



      R311.4.1   9 (DELETE) First sentence (ADD) Not less than two
(2) exits shall be provided from each dwelling unit. This shall include one
exterior side-hinged door measuring at least three feet (3'0") wide by six
feet eight inches (6'8") high, or an operable pair of doors with at least one
thirty two inches (32") wide active section. A second hinged door, French
door, patio door leading directly to the outside shall be provided. The
second door shall have a nominal minimum size of two feet eight inches
(2'8'") by eight feet six inches (8'6").



      R317.1      (DELETE) one (l)-hour (ADD) two (2)-hour.



      R317.2      (DELETE) meeting the requirements of R302 for
exterior walls (ADD) with a two (2)-hour fire rating.



      R317.2      Exception (ADD) Only metallic raceways are
permitted.



      R319.1.3   (REVISE) to include all locations that rest on
concrete.



      R401.3      (ADD) Drainage shall be directed away from
adjacent structures. When the sump pump line is not directly connected to the
storm drainage system, it shall not discharge any closer than five (5) feet
from the lot line.



      R402.1.2   (DELETE) Entire section (ADD) Wood footings and
foundations are not allowed.



      R403.1      (ADD) The use of wood footings is not allowed.



      R404.2      (DELETE) Entire section (ADD) The use of wood
foundations is not allowed.



      Chapters 25-32 (DELETE THE CHAPTERS IN THEIR ENTIRETY).



      Chapter 43   (DELETE).



      ICC EC   ICC Electric Code.



      IEBC       International Existing Building Code.



      IZC      International Zoning Code.



      Appendix    Adopt appendices B, C, F, G, J, N in their
entirety.



      Adopt Appendix P with the following amendments:



      AP101.1   This requirement only applies to detached single
family dwelling (townhouses).



      AP101.2   The following are additional installation
requirements:



            A.   There is no monitoring of the water flow
switch required.



            B.   Each unit shall have its own water supply for
fire protection.



            C.   Provide a strobe on the outside of each unit,
which is activated on sprinkler water flow. The location of the strobe is
approved by the Building Official.



            D.   Provide a signaling device for each unit
which is approved by the Building Official. There shall be a minimum of one
(1) in the basement or lower level and one (1) on an upper level.



(Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08; Am. Ord. 1671-13, passed 10-15-13)



§ 150.22  [RESERVED]



§ 150.23  [RESERVED]



§ 150.24  [RESERVED]



§ 150.25  REVISIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO THE 2004 ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE AND
THE 2006 INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE.



   (A)   The following revisions and amendments are based on the 2004
edition of the Illinois Plumbing Code and 2006 Edition of the International
Plumbing Code, and are intended for application to the most recent adopted
edition. If conflicts of application or interpretation exist between this
section and the most recently adopted code, the Code Official shall refer to
the aforementioned editions for any revision or amendment in conflict.



   (B)   The following revisions or amendments supersede the actual
text of the code as published as it pertains to that section only.



   (C)   The following specific sections of the Illinois Plumbing Code
have been revised in part or total to read as follows:



   890.410e   Revise to read: Drums traps are to be excluded.



   890.410   g) (3) Amend to read: when trap seals are used for
bathtubs, the minimum size of the "P" trap is two (2) inches and it shall be
installed directly under the tub.



   890.520   These requirements shall include all residential garages
with floor drains.



   890.550   Revise to read: Backwater valves are not allowed - use
overhead sewers.



   890.1110   (ADD) Plastic pipe is not allowed on water lines.



   890.1150   D) Water service to a building shall be installed five
(5) feet below grade in a separate trench from the sewer. Drains are to be
below the frost line. Over head sewers are to be installed when a basement is
described.



   890.1210 f) 1) (ADD) Air chambers shall be provided for all fixtures.



   890.1220a)   Safe plans shall be provided under all water heaters
located above occupiable areas. Water heaters shall not be installed with
flexible connectors.



   890.1230a)    Floor drains shall be provided within five (5) feet of
all relief valves.



   890.1320m)   (ADD) No back-to-back sanitary cross to shall be used
in a sanitary line. No back-to-back double 90-degree ells are to be used as a
drainage fitting. No running threads, bands or saddles shall be used in the
drainage system.



   890.1340 f)   (ADD) The minimum size for underground sanitary piping
shall be four (4) inches.



   890.1480   Revise "C" types of fixtures trap vents to read: Wet
vents are not allowed.



   890.1580 f)   The minimum size of underground vents shall be two (2)
inches.



   890 Appendix A - Table A shall be deleted and replaced with the
following:



 



 
 
Residential
 
Commercial


UNDERGROUND W&V
 
 
 
 


Cast iron
 
X
 
X


PVC
 
X
 
X


ABOVE GROUND W&V
 
 
 
 


Cast iron lead joints
 
X
 
X


Cast iron no hub
 
X
 
X


Galvanized Pipe
 
X
 
X


PVC Schedule 40
 
X
 
X


Copper type M
 
X
 
X


ABOVE GROUND STORM
 
X
 
X


Cast iron lead joints
 
X
 
X


Cast iron no hub
 
X
 
X


Galvanized Pipe
 
X
 
X


PVC
 
X
 
X


Copper Type M
 
X
 
X


UNDERGROUND WATER
 
 
 
X


Ductile iron class 52
 
X
 
X


Copper K
 
X
 
X


ABOVE GROUND WATER
 
 
 
 


Galvanized pipe - repair only
 
X
 
X


Copper K or L
 
X
 
X




 



   (D)   The following specific sections of the International Plumbing
Code have been revised in part or total to read as follows:



   101.1   (INSERT) The Village of Itasca, Illinois.



   106.6.2   Fees (INSERT) see 150.80.



   106.63   Fees (INSERT) see 150.80.



   108.4   Penalties (INSERT) see 150.99.



   108.5   Penalties (INSERT) see 150.99.



   305.6.1   (INSERT) Below frost.



   904.1   (INSERT) Twelve inches (12").



   Chapter 13 (DELETE)



   ICC EC   ICC Electric Code



   IEBC    International Existing Building Code



   IPSDC   International Private Sewage Disposal Code



   IZC   International Zoning Code



   Adopt Appendix B



   (E)   Pursuant to 17 Ill. Adm. Code 3730.307 (c) 4 and subject to
the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890) and the Lawn Irrigation
Contractor and Lawn Sprinkler System Registration Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code
892), all new plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after
the effective date of this section, shall bear the WaterSense label, as
designed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense Program, when
such labeled fixtures are available.



(Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08; Am. Ord. 1762-15, passed 8-18-15)



§ 150.26  [RESERVED]



§ 150.27  [RESERVED]



§ 150.28  [RESERVED]



§ 150.29  [RESERVED]



§ 150.30  [RESERVED]



§ 150.31  REVISIONS TO THE NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE.



   (A)   The following revisions and amendments are based on NFPA 70
National Electric Code 2008 edition. If conflicts of application or
interpretation exist between this section and the most recently adopted code,
the Code Official shall refer to the 2008 edition for any revision or
amendment in conflict.



   (B)   The following revisions or amendment supersede the actual text
of the code as published as it pertains to that section only.



   (C)   The following specific sections have been revised in part or
total to read as follows:



General amendments



   1.   All services for new construction (commercial and residential)
shall be underground.



   2.   All services shall have a disconnecting means within first five
(5) feet of entering the building. The ground shall run from the first point
of disconnect to the street side of the water meter.



   3.   All services shall have one disconnect-No sequential switching.



   4.   Any new one and two family dwellings exceeding 4,500 square
feet shall have a 400 amp service. Provide a complete load for any new one
and two family dwellings over 4,500 square feet.



Article    210.21(B)(3) (ADD) For non-residential branch circuits, only
20-amp receptacles shall be installed on 20 amp circuits.



Article    225.10 (Change as follows) The installation of outside wiring
on a building shall be permitted in rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal
conduit and electrical metallic conduit. Liquid tight flexible metal conduit
can be used only at the end of runs with a maximum length of six (6) feet.



Article    225.11 (DELETE IN ITS ENTIRETY).



Article    225.12 (DELETE IN ITS ENTIRETY).



Article    230  (ADD) F Multi-occupancy Buildings.



   Where multiple tenant spaces are reorganized to create a single
occupancy all separate services not meeting the special service requirements
of (A) above shall be required to create a single service.



Article    310.1 (B) Conductor material (DELETE) aluminum and copper-clad
aluminum



The following articles on specific wiring methods are not permitted unless
approved in writing by the Building Official.



Article 320   Armor Cable: Type AC.



Article 324   Fiat Conductor Cable: Type FCC.



Article 326   Integrated Gas Spacer Cable: Type 1GS.



Article 334   Non metallic sheathed Cable: Type NM, NMC, and NMS.



Article 336   Power and Control Tray Cable: Type TC.



Article 338   Service Entrance Cable: Type SE and USE.



Article 340   Under ground Feeder and Branch Circuit Cable: Type UF.



Article 362   Electric Nonmetallic Tubing: Type ENT.



Article 380   Multioutlet Assembly.



Article 382   Nonmetallic Extensions.



Article 396   Messenger Supported Wiring.



Article 550   Mobile Homes, Manufactured Homes and Mobile Home Parks.



(Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08)



§ 150.32  [RESERVED]



§ 150.33  [RESERVED]



§ 150.34  [RESERVED]



§ 150.35  REVISIONS TO THE 2006 INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.



   (A)   The following revisions and amendments are based on the 2006
Edition of the International Mechanical Code, and are intended for
application to the most recent adopted edition. If conflicts of application
or interpretation exist between this section and the most recently adopted
code, the Code Official shall refer to the aforementioned editions for any
revision or amendment in conflict.



   (B)   The following revisions or amendments supersede the actual
text of the code as published as it pertains to that section only.



   (C)   The following specific sections have been revised in part or
total to read as follows:



   101.1      (INSERT) The Village of Itasca, Illinois.



   106.3.1      (DELETE) Two copies (ADD) Five (5) copies.



         (ADD at the end of the paragraph) One (1) of the drawing
pages shall give details as vent schedule heat loss calculation units,
exhaust fans and other equipment, sizes, etc.



   106.6.2      Fees (INSERT) see 150.80.



   106.6.3      Fees (INSERT) see 150.80.



   108.4      Penalties (INSERT) see 150.99.



   108.5      Penalties (INSERT) see 150.99.



   109.0      (DELETE and INSERT) Appeals Board: Delete the entire
section and the following: See the amendments to the International Building
Code section 112.



   510.8.1      (ADD at the end of paragraph) Use approved duct tape
to cover any gap of one-sixteenth inch (1/16") to three-sixteenths inch
(3/16") in the fitting. If gap is one-quarter inch (1/4") or more, rework the
fittings maintaining one inch (1") or more of lap.



   ICC EC   ICC Electric Code



   IEBC      International Existing Building Code



   Adopt Appendix A



(Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08)



§ 150.36  REVISIONS TO THE 2006 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.



   (A)   The following revisions and amendments are based on the 2006
Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, and are intended for application
to the most recent adopted edition. If conflicts of application or
interpretation exist between this section and the most recently adopted code,
the Code Official shall refer to the aforementioned editions for any revision
or amendment in conflict.



   (B)   The following revisions or amendments supersede the actual
text of the code as published as it pertains to that section only.



   (C)   The following specific sections have been revised in part or
total to read as follows:



   101.1      (INSERT) the Village of Itasca, Illinois.



   106.3.1      (DELETE) Two copies (ADD) Five (5) copies.



(ADD at the end of the paragraph) One of the drawing pages shall give details
as vent schedule heat loss calculation units, exhaust fans and other
equipment, sizes, etc.



   106.6.2      Fees (INSERT) see 150.80.



   106.6.3      Fees (INSERT) see 150.80.



   108.4      Penalties (INSERT) see 150.99.



   108.5      Penalties (INSERT) see 150.99.



   109      (DELETE and INSERT) Appeals Board: Delete the entire
section and the following: See the amendments to the International Building
Code section 112.



   Chapter 8   (DELETE)



   ICC EC       ICC Electric Code



   IEBC         International Existing Building Code



   Adopt Appendices A, B, C



(Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08)



§ 150.37  REVISIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.



   (A)   The following revisions and amendments are based on the 2006
Edition of the International Fire Code, and are intended for application to
the most recent adopted edition. If conflicts of application or
interpretation exist between this section and the most recently adopted code,
the Code Official shall refer to the aforementioned editions for any revision
or amendment in conflict.



   (B)   The following revisions or amendments supersede the actual
text of the code as published as it pertains to that section only.



   (C)   The following specific sections have been revised in part or
total to read as follows:



   101.1      (INSERT) The Village of Itasca, Illinois.



   105.0      Permits required.



   106.9.3      Fees (INSERT) see 150.80.



   108      (DELETE and INSERT) Appeals Board: Delete the entire
section and the following: See the amendments to the International Building
Code section 112.



   Board of Appeals



   111.4      Penalties (INSERT) see 150.99.



   307.1      (ADD) The burning of yard or garden waste is
prohibited under any conditions.



   307.4.3      (ADD) These restrictions for open burning do not
apply to Fire Department training sessions.



   308.3      (DELETE ENTIRE SECTION).



   502.1      (ADD) Onsite fire apparatus access roads; That portion
of the Fire apparatus access road that extends across private property from
the rights-of-way to a facility, building or portion thereof.



   503      (CHANGE SECTION TITLE) ONSITE FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS
ROADS.



   503.1      (CHANGE AS FOLLOWS) Onsite fire apparatus access roads
shall be provided and maintained in accordance with sections 503.1.1 through
503.1.2. All other fire apparatus access roads shall be provided and
maintained per the Village of Itasca Development Standards and Specifications.



   503.2.5      (DELETE) 150 feet (ADD) three hundred feet (300').



   505.2      Street or Road Signs (DELETE SECTION).



   508.3      Fire Flow (CHANGE AS FOLLOWS) Minimum fire flow
requirements for buildings or portions of buildings and facilities are listed
in the Village of Itasca Development Standards and Specifications.



   505.5      Fire Hydrant Systems (CHANGE AS FOLLOWS) Publicly
owned and maintained fire hydrant systems shall comply with the requirements
of the Village of Itasca Development Standards and Specifications. Privately
owned and maintained fire hydrant systems shall comply with sections 508.5.1
through 508.5.6.



   508.5.2      (REVISE AS FOLLOWS) Publicly owned and operated fire
hydrant systems shall be subject to periodic tests as required by the Village
of Itasca and the Building Official. Maintenance and repair of publicly owned
and operated fire hydrant systems shall be conducted by and/or under the
direct supervision of the Village of Itasca and shall comply with the Village
of Itasca Development Standards and Specifications.



   704.1      (DELETE) TABLE 704.1.



   901.6      Supervisory service. All new and existing fire alarm
systems shall transmit trouble, supervisory, and fire signals through a
wireless transmitter which connects to an approved supervising station in
accordance with NFPA 72. The authority having jurisdiction under NFPA 72
shall approve the supervisory station connection.



   901.6.2      (CHANGE AS FOLLOWS) Records of all system
inspections, tests and maintenance required by the referenced standards shall
be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years and shall be
provided to the fire district, by the company performing the inspection(s),
through the third party inspection reporting system, Brycer LLC, at a fee of
$15.00 per inspection.



   903.2      (ADD) All new buildings require a fire sprinkler
system.



         Exception: Detached structures, which comply with all of
the following do not require automatic fire sprinklers:



         1.   Less than five hundred (500) square feet in area.



         2.   Single story.



         3.   Not used as a dwelling or sleeping area.



         4.   Not a High Hazard Group.



         5.   Not used for high hazard products or hazardous
materials.



         6.   No basements.



         7.   Minimum separation to other buildings twenty (20)
feet.



         Additions to any building or structure equal to or
exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the original
building construction as identified on the permit records and construction
drawings approved by the Village when the structure was first constructed
shall require the installation of an approved automatic sprinkler system
throughout the entire existing and proposed building or structure.



         Note: This applies to attached single family residences
(townhouses) but not detached single family homes.



   903.2.1.3   (DELETE) exception.



   903.2.1.4   (DELETE) exception.



   903.2.2      (DELETE) exception.



   903.2.10   Windowless Stories (DELETE section and INSERT) An
automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all windowless
stories or basements.



   903.2.14   (ADD SECTION) Transformer vaults. Within Commonwealth
Edison Transformer vaults and main switch gear rooms which are enclosed by
three (3)-hour fire resistance rated walls, floors and ceiling assemblies and
are also equipped with an approved automatic fire alarm system, the automatic
fire sprinkler system is not required in the vault or room. The doors shall
have Commonwealth Edison locks.



   905.2.1      (ADD) Open parking structures in which the highest
floor is located not more than one hundred fifty feet (150') above the lowest
level of fire department vehicle access shall be permitted to use a dry
standpipe system.



   905.3      (REVISE SECTION TO READ) All buildings over two (2)
stories above grade shall have a Class I standpipe system.



   905.4 #1   (REVISE THIS SECTION TO READ) Hose connections are
required at both sides of the doors at the stairway one (1) connection inside
the stairway, one (1) connection outside the stairway.



   905.7      (ADD) Hose valve/fire extinguisher cabinets shall be
mounted on the floor side of stairway doors.



   907.1.2      (ADD) When fire alarm systems are required,
detection is required throughout the entire building unless approved in
writing by the Building Official.



         When a fire alarm system is installed smoke detection shall
be installed in all mechanical and electric rooms.



   907.2      (ADD) A complete fire alarm system shall be installed
in all buildings or occupancies over two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet.



         Additions and remodeling to any building or structure equal
to or exceeding two thousand five (2,500) hundred square feet or fifty
percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the original building construction
as identified on the permit records and construction drawings approved by the
Village when the structure was first constructed shall require the
installation of an approved fire alarm system throughout the entire existing
and proposed building or structure.



         Manual pull stations shall be provided in all multi-level
parking structures. The manual pull stations shall be located at each level
inside of each enclosed stair tower. All pull stations shall be connected
into the main building alarm panel and separately zoned.



         The following table will apply to buildings, which have a
complete automatic fire sprinkler system installed.



 

Group
 
Manual pull stations
 
Complete smoke detection




A
 
Required
 
Not required


B
 
Required
 
Not required


E
 
Required
 


F
 
Required
 
Not required


H
 
Required
 
Not required


I
 
Required
 
Required


M
 
Required
 
Not required


R-1
 
Required
 
Required common areas


R-2
 
Required
 
Required common areas


R-3
 
Required
 
Not required


R-4
 
Required
 
Required common areas


S
 
Required
 
Not required


U
 
Not required
 
Not required




 



   907.5      (ADD) All conductors for the fire alarm system,
accessories and related equipment shall be in conduit. All conduit for fire
alarms shall be red.



   907.9      Zones (DELETE) twenty-two thousand five hundred
(22,500) square feet and three hundred (300) feet (INSERT) ten thousand
(10,000) square feet and one hundred fifty feet (150')



   909.21      (ADD section) All buildings over fifty-five (55) feet
or four (4) stories shall have the stairs pressurized per section 1020.1.7.
All opposing HVAC systems shall shut down upon activation of the system.



   912.1      (ADD) The size of all of all standpipe connections
shall be two and one-half inches (2-1/2") in diameter and National Standard
Thread.



   912.2      (ADD) Fire Department connections shall be located no
further than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the nearest hydrant as
measured over an accessible route.



   1008.1.8.3   (DELETE) # 2, 3, and 4



   1008.1.8.3   (ADD) unless approved by the Building Official.



   1011.5.3   (ADD) Photo luminescent exit signs are not allowed.



   1016.2      Roof vent increase (DELETE SECTION).



   1020.1.7   Smokeproof enclosures (REVISE SECTION TO READ) In
buildings, each of the exits that serves stories where the floor surface is
located more than fifty-five feet (55') in height or over four (4) stories
above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.



   1903.5.4   (ADD Section) The burning of any scraps, shavings or
cut-offs is not allowed.



   3301.1      (ADD) Refer to the Village of Itasca Zoning Ordinance
for more restrictive requirements.



   3204.3.1.1   The quantity limits are per the Village of Itasca
Zoning Ordinance.



   3404.2.9.5.1   See Ordinance Number 150.49 and the Village of Itasca
Zoning Ordinance.



   3406.2.4.4   The quantity limits are per the Village of Itasca
Zoning Ordinance.



   3804.2      The quantity limits are per the Village of Itasca
Zoning Ordinance.



   4004.1.7   (1) (REVISE LIMITS TO) Twenty (20) tons for
non-combustible containers, ten (10) tons for combustible containers and
twenty (20) tons per building. All distances to remain unchanged.



   4004.1.7(2)   (TABLE) Reduce quantities of product to five percent
(5%) of those listed, All distances to remain unchanged.



   4004.1.7(3)   (DELETE) Table Class 3 oxidizers are not allowed.



   4004.1.7(4)   (DELETE) Table Class 4 oxidizers are not allowed.



   Chapter 45   (DELETE).



   ICC EC       ICC Electric Code.



   Adopt appendices B, C, D.



   Appendix B   (CHANGE AS FOLLOWS).



   B 103.2   (DELETE) Fire-flow calculation area.



   B 104      (DELETE SECTION IN ITS ENTIRETY).



   B 105.1   (DELETE SECTION AND INSERT).



         Minimum fire flow requirements for buildings or portions of
buildings and facilities are listed in the Village of Itasca Development
Standards and Specifications.



   Appendix C   (DELETE SECTION AND INSERT).



         Fire hydrants shall be provided in accordance with the
Village of Itasca Development Standards and Specifications.



   Appendix D



   D101.1      (CHANGE AS FOLLOWS)



         Onsite fire apparatus access roads shall be provided and
maintained in accordance with this appendix and all other applicable
requirements of the International Fire Code. All other fire apparatus access
roads shall be provided and maintained per the Village of Itasca Development
Standards and Specifications.



   D103.4      Change to 300 feet.



   D106      Multiple- family residential developments (DELETE
SECTION IN ITS ENTIRETY).



   D107      One- or two-family residential developments (DELETE
SECTION IN ITS ENTIRETY)



(Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08; Am. Ord. 1601-11, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord.
1603-12, passed 1-17-12; Am. Ord. 1606-12, passed 1-17-12; Am. Ord. 1767-15,
passed 10-20-15; Am. Ord. 1789-16, passed 2-16-16; Am. Ord. 1842-17, passed
4-4-17)



§ 150.38  [RESERVED]



§ 150.39  REVISIONS TO THE INTERNATIONAL WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE.



   (A)   The following revisions and amendments are based on the 2006
Edition, and are intended for application to the most recent adopted edition.
If conflicts of application or interpretation exist between this section and
the most recently adopted code, the Code Official shall refer to the 2006
Edition for any revision or amendment in conflict.



   (B)   The following revisions or amendment supersede the actual text
of the code as published as it pertains to that section only.



   (C)   The following specific sections have been revised in part or
total to read as follows:



   101.1      (INSERT) The Village of Itasca, Illinois.



   Chapter 6   (DELETE).



   ICC EC   International Electric Code.



(Ord. 1464-08, passed 11-4-08)



SPECIAL PROVISIONS OR REQUIREMENTS



§ 150.40  [RESERVED]



§ 150.41  [RESERVED]



§ 150.42  EXTERIOR WALL MATERIALS FOR INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING
BUILDINGS.



   (A)   The exterior walls of all industrial and manufacturing
buildings and structures and any other building or structure in any "M"
zoning district of the village, shall be constructed of stone masonry, brick
masonry, poured-in-place concrete, precast concrete wall panels, glass and
metal structural frame work, or a combination of these materials.



   (B)   The exterior walls of all buildings and structures in any OR
or ROC zoning district of the village, shall be constructed of stone masonry,
brick masonry, poured-in-place concrete, precast concrete wall panels, glass
and metal structural framework, or a combination of these materials.



   (C)   All materials used shall comply with the building code
requirements for fire resistance.



   (D)   Use of any other exterior wall materials shall be subject to
the approval of the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 713-91, passed 5-14-91; Am. Ord. 1080-01, passed 3-20-01)  Penalty,
see § 150.99



§ 150.43  PERMITS FOR LANDMARKS OR STRUCTURES WITHIN HISTORIC DISTRICTS.



   (A)   (1)   Any application for a building permit for exterior
alteration, construction, demolition or removal, including plans and
specifications, for designated landmarks or for property or structures within
designated historic districts shall be sent by the Building Department to the
Historical Commission within seven days of the receipt of the application by
the Building Department.



      (2)   Any applicant may request a meeting with the Historical
Commission before mailing an application for a building permit.



   (B)   The Historical Commission shall respond to the Building
Department within 30 days of having received plans and or specifications for
the applicable building or structure.



   (C)   No permit shall be issued until a majority of the Historical
Commission members have reviewed the project and have responded to the
Building Department.



   (D)   However, the Chairman of the Historical Commission may waive
the review process for any work which will not adversely affect any
historically or architecturally significant features of the proposed project.



(Ord. 713-91, passed 5-14-91; Am. Ord. 1080-01, passed 3-20-01)  Penalty,
see § 150.99



§ 150.44  [RESERVED]



§ 150.45  [RESERVED]



§ 150.46  [RESERVED]



§ 150.47  [RESERVED]



§ 150.48  [RESERVED]



§ 150.49  [RESERVED]



§ 150.50  [RESERVED]



§ 150.51  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF MULTI-UNIT
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.



   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all multi-family
structures, including hotels, motels, nursing homes, sheltered care
facilities, apartments and condominiums, together with their appurtenances
and accessory structures except one- and two- family dwellings and one-family
town houses, which are not more than three stories in height, and which have
eight or less individual dwelling units per structure with a maximum of four
units off of, and using, a common entryway.



   (B)   Construction types shall be limited to types 1A, 1B, or 2A, as
per Table 601 in the International Building Code 2006.  The minimum fire
rating for any building element which is required to have a rating beyond
zero hours listed in Table 601 shall be two hours.  Any other element
required by the 2006 International Building Code to be rated shall also have
a rating of two hours.



(Ord. 713-91 passed 5-14-91; Am. Ord. 1080-01, passed 3-20-01; Am. Ord.
1204-04, passed 5-4-04; Am. Ord. 1361-07, passed 1-9-07; Am. Ord. 1464-08,
passed 11-4-08)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.52  PROTECTION OF VILLAGE PAVEMENTS.



   (A)   Damage to pavements generally.



      (1)   All persons responsible for damage to village pavements
shall be liable to the village for the cost of repair of such damaged
pavements.



      (2)   Damage to village pavements shall be determined by the
Village Engineer, who shall evaluate such damage by determining the normal
and customary life of a village pavement.



      (3)   Any and all damage which effects the integrity and
safety of village pavements shall be repaired immediately at the expense of
any person causing the damage.



      (4)   Any and all damage which effects the normal and
customary life of village pavement shall be assessed against those persons
responsible for such damage on a pro-rata basis (e.g., normal pavement life
of 20 years reduced to 15 years due to damage by unusual or excessive traffic
shall result in pro-rata liability in the amount of one-quarter the cost of
village pavement).



   (B)   Damage to pavements by developers, builders or contractors.



      (1)   All developers, builders, contractors and companies
responsible for the operation of trucks and heavy equipment as a result of
construction and development within the village, and who utilize village
pavements as ingress and egress to construction sites, shall be responsible
for all damage done to village pavements.



      (2)   A determination of damage done to village pavements
shall be made by the Village Engineer, as set forth in division (A)(3) and
(4);



      (3)   (a)   All developers, builders, contractors and
companies responsible for damage to village pavements shall be liable for the
full measure of damage caused to village pavements.



         (b)   Such damage amount is in no way limited by the
bond requirements of division (D).



   (C)   Exception.  This section shall not apply to streets within
any special service area, the purpose of which is street repair or
reconstruction.



   (D)   Cash bond requirements for developers, builders or contractors.



      (1)   Developers, builders or contractors shall post a cash
bond with the village in the amount of $500 per dwelling unit to ensure that
funds remain available for repairs to damaged village pavements.



      (2)   The Building Commissioner may waive the cash bond
requirement for projects involving a value less than $10,000, or if such
project will not require access by heavy trucks or the use of heavy equipment.



      (3)   If village pavements are utilized by construction
traffic of the developer, builder or contractor, a non-deductible $150 charge
per dwelling unit of the $500 cash bond shall be non-refundable.



      (4)   (a)   If, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, a
developer, builder or contractor causes damage to a village pavement (as set
forth in division (A)), the developer, builder or contractor shall be liable
for the amount of damage done to village pavements.



         (b)   The $500 per dwelling unit cash bond amount of the
developer shall be forfeited, in part or in whole, for any pavement damage
which occurs as a result of excessive traffic or heavy equipment traffic
which emanates from the construction of the proposed development or building.



(Ord. 713-91, passed 5-14-91; Am. Ord. 1080-01, passed 3-20-01)  Penalty,
see § 150.99



SCHEDULE OF FEES



§ 150.80  FEES FOR BUILDING PERMITS AND OTHER ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   No permit shall be issued nor shall any work requiring a
permit begin until the fees hereinafter have been issued to the village and
received by the Building Department.



   (B)   Nothing in this section or schedule of fees shall be construed
to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights
acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action a required
or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall any just
or legal right of remedy or any character be lost, impaired or affected by
this section.



   (C)   The fees to be paid for permits, and that the cash bonds or
surety bonds to be collected for projects under the jurisdiction of the
village shall be amended, and shall be as follows:



TABLE I
FEES FOR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCES, INCLUDING TOWNHOUSES



 

Permit type
 
Fee ($)
 
Specification




Permit Processing Fee
 
30
 
Permit processing base fee


Water connection
 
900
 
Each detached dwelling unit


1,000
 
Each detached dwelling unit


Sewer connection
 
1,400
 
Each detached dwelling unit


1,600
 
Each detached dwelling unit


Water meter
 
250
 
3/4 inch with remote - 135 GPM


300
 
1 inch with remote - 215 GPM


450
 
11/2 inch with remote


Unmetered water
 
60
 
For limited use (new buildings)


New construction of principal buildings or additions to existing buildings
 
500 Base fee + 0.90
 
Per gross square feet above grade, excluding area of wood decks, terraces,
open porches and the like. This includes fees for electric, plumbing, HVAC
work and the like.


Remodel/alter existing principal building or new attached garage
 
100 Base fee + 0.50
 
Per gross square feet above ground, excluding wood decks. This includes fees
for electric, plumbing, HVAC work and the like.


New construction of accessory buildings and detached garages
 
50 Base fee + 0.30
 
Per gross square feet above grade, excluding area of wood decks, terraces,
open porches and the like. This includes fees for electric, plumbing, HVAC
work and the like.


Remodeling of accessory buildings and detached garages/porches with roofs
 
30 Base fee + 0.30
 
Per gross square feet above grade, excluding area of wood decks, terraces,
open porches and the like. This includes fees for electric, plumbing, HVAC
work and the like.


Sidewalks/curbs
 
40
 
New installation, replacement or repair


Decks/porches
 
50
 
New construction or repair


Driveways
 
75
 
New construction


40
 
Replacement or repair


Curb cut fees
 
75
 
Per curb cut, driveway, sidewalk


Street cut fees
 
500
 
To open cut a street (plus road bond)


Walks and patios
 
50
 
New installation, replacement or repair


Swimming pools
 
150
 
Permanent in-ground


75
 
Above-ground


Furnace, central AC HVAC systems
 
25
 
Replace existing unit


50
 
New system


Miscellaneous plumbing and piping
 
50
 
For the first 4 fixtures, openings, cleanouts and the like


12
 
For each additional fixture, opening, cleanout and the like over 4


Lawn sprinkler
 
50
 
For each system or per lot


Electric service
 
30
 
Up to 200 amps


25
 
Temporary service


Electric miscellaneous
 
30
 
When not included in above cost


Alarm systems
 
40
 
For burglar or fire alarms


Fences
 
30
 
For the first 50 lineal feet or part thereof


5
 
For each additional 100 lineal feet or part thereof


Roofs, siding
 
30
 
When replacing existing or covering existing


Hydronic heating systems
 
50
 
Each system


Drainage revision
 
50
 
Minimum, plus consultant's fee at cost


Portable sheds
 
10
 
Up to 10' x 12' maximum size


Signs non-illuminated
 
40
 
Non-illuminated minimum


2
 
Per square foot of face


Signs Illuminated
 
60
 
Illuminated minimum


3
 
Per square foot of face


Signs Temporary
 
50
 
Per sign


Miscellaneous inspections
 
40
 
Per hour, per inspector


Late filing charge
 
75 or 2% cost of job
 
Minimum for work begun without a valid permit (whichever is greater)


Canceled projects
 
40
 
Per hour, per inspector


Reinspections
 
75
 
For each reinspection


Chimneys
 
50
 
For new or reconstruction if not part of the base permit fee


Fireplaces
 
75
 
Prefab or masonry


Engineering
 
At cost
 
Reimburse the village for costs incurred for engineering consultants. May be
billed after permit is issued. No final occupancy will be issued until
invoice is paid


Demolition
 
250
 
Partial building or structure


750
 
Entire building or structure


Electric
 
5,000
 
Code compliance bond to be maintained until job is completed and approved


Cash bonds
 
50
 
Minor work - to ensure inspection code compliance and for damage to property


100
 
Moderate work - to ensure inspection code compliance and for damage to
property


500
 
Intermediate work - to ensure inspection code compliance and for damage to
property


1,000
 
Dwelling units - to ensure inspection code compliance and for damage to
property


½ %
 
Of the cost of the job when required by the Building Commissioner


Road bonds
 
350
 
Per dwelling unit, for projects over $10,000, using village roads rated less
than 80,000 pounds with material loads over 15,000 pounds per truck, for the
protection of village pavement.


Road use fees
 
150
 
Per dwelling unit, for projects over $10,000, using village roads rated less
than 80,000 pounds with material loads over 15,000 pounds per truck, as a
predetermined fair share cost for road repairs necessitated by heavily loaded
trucks


Electronic pet containment
 
10
 
Per system installation


Portable storage container
 
10
 
Per container


Plan review
 
200
 
Review fee for all new construction


Residential generator
 
75
 
Per system


Final Certificate of Occupancy
 
50
 
Final (remodel or addition)


100
 
Final (new construction)


Conditional Certificate of Occupancy (not required for work limited by
weather)
 
75
 
Conditional (remodel or addition)


250
 
Conditional (new construction)




 



TABLE II
FEES FOR MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, OFFICE, INSTITUTIONAL AND ALL
OTHER CONSTRUCTION NOT LISTED IN TABLES I OR III



 

Permit type
 
Fee($)
 
Specification


Water connection - multiple dwelling
 
1,000
 
Each dwelling unit


Sewer connection - multiple dwelling
 
1,600
 
Each dwelling unit


Water connection - commercial, industrial, institutional, hotels, offices and
the like
 
1,500 + 0.15
 
For each new building plus per gross square feet over 5,000 square feet for
new buildings or additional area to existing buildings


Sewer connection - commercial, industrial, institutional, hotels, offices and
the like
 
2,500 + 0.25
 
For each new building plus per gross square feet over 5,000 square feet for
new buildings or additional area to existing buildings



 



 

Permit type
 
Fee($)
 
Specification




Miscellaneous connection fees
 
Fair charge
 
For those situations not covered in any of the 4 previous classifications or
where unusual water or sewer problems are encountered, the Board of Trustees
shall establish a fair and reasonable charge, consistent with the nature of
the situation and problem, and charges hereinabove made


Base permit fees (new buildings and structures)
 
150
 
Minimum


0.50
 
Per square foot (buildings)


0.40
 
Per square foot (structures)


Base fees for alterations and repairs
 
75
 
Minimum


15
 
Per $1,000 cost of job


Shoring or moving building
 
100
 
Minimum


0.10
 
Per square foot


Wrecking building
 
100
 
Minimum (per floor)


0.07
 
Per square foot


1,500
 
Minimum (entire building)


Elevators, each
 
200
 
5 floors or less


20
 
Each additional floor above 5


80
 
Each elevator inspection


200
 
Temporary construction towers


Ventilation systems
 
60
 
Minimum for first 3,000 CFM


15
 
For each additional 1,000 CFM


Warm air furnaces
 
50
 
Each unit


AC units
 
25
 
0 to 3 tons each unit


35
 
3 to 30 tons each unit


45
 
30 to 100 tons each unit


60
 
100 to 1,000 tons each unit




 



 

Permit type
 
Fee($)
 
Specification




Plan review, equipment
 
40
 
Process equipment up to 960,000 BTU/Hr.


70
 
960,000 - 2,880,000 BTU/Hr.


90
 
Over 2,880,000 BTU/Hr.


Boilers
 
50
 
Each unit


Fences over five feet
 
60
 
For the first 100 lineal feet


10
 
For each additional 100 lineal feet or part thereof


Fences under five feet
 
40
 
For the first 100 lineal feet


10
 
For each additional 100 lineal feet or part thereof


Final Certificate of Occupancy
 
100
 
Final (remodel/addition)


200
 
Final (new construction)


Conditional Certificate of Occupancy (not required for work limited by
weather)
 
400
 
Conditional (remodel/addition)


500
 
Conditional (new construction)


200
 
Conditional (Zoning Certificate only)


Tank installation
 
150
 
121 - 1,000 gallons each tank


6
 
Each additional 1,000 gallons per tank


Tank removal
 
70
 
Each tank


Temporary platforms
 
75
 
For public assembly


Roofing
 
100
 
Minimum


0.02
 
Per square foot


Signs non-illuminated
 
40
 
Non-illuminated minimum


2
 
Per square foot of face


Signs illuminated
 
60
 
Illuminated minimum


3
 
Per square foot of face


Signs temporary
 
50
 
Per sign




 



 

Permit type
 
Fee($)
 
Specification




Plumbing and piping
 
75
 
Minimum for the first 5 new fixtures, openings, cleanouts and the like


10
 
For each additional new fixture, opening, cleanout and the like in excess of 5


60
 
Minimum for first 5 replaced


10
 
For each additional replaced fixture, opening, cleanout and the like in
excess of 5


Water meters
 
150
 
3/4 inch with remote - straight


200
 
1 inch with remote - straight


400
 
1 1/2 inch with remote - straight


750
 
2 inch with remote - straight


1,600
 
2 inch with remote - compound


2,000
 
3 inch with remote - compound


3,300
 
4 inch with remote - compound


6,000
 
6 inch with remote - compound


Fire review
 
100
 
Base fee + Fire District costs


Sprinkler field inspections
 
100
 
Base fee + Fire District costs


Fire pumps
 
150
 
Each pump


Hydrostatic
 
75
 
Each test


Fire Alarm Plan review
 
100
 
Per hour


Base fee + Fire District costs


Restaurant kitchen hoods, ducts and Extinguishing Systems Plan review
 
80
 
Per hour




 



 

Permit type
 
Fee($)
 
Specification




Electrical
 
50
 
Minimum fee


30
 
Plan review per hour


8
 
Per 20 amp or less circuit, up to 50 circuits


5
 
Per 20 amp or less circuit, over 50 circuits


16
 
Per 21 - 50 amp circuit


1
 
For each additional outlet or device on an existing circuit


15
 
One motor or device


7.50
 
Each additional motor or device


Electrical services
 
40
 
0 - 100 amps


50
 
101 - 200 amps


55
 
201 - 400 amps


60
 
401 - 600 amps


75
 
601 - 1,000 amps


Note: Fees for electrical services in excess of 1,000 amps shall be computed
on the basis of the rating of the service disconnects installed, prorated
according to the fee schedule and shall include feeders, risers and all
wiring equipment up to the branch circuit distribution panels or motor power
panels or control centers.


Vault inspections
 
50
 
Each vault (except utility vaults)


Lamp posts
 
25
 
Each pole


Fire alarms
 
60
 
Minimum


15
 
Per 1,000 cost of job


Burglar alarms
 
60
 
Per system or tenant space


Communications
 
50
 
Per floor minimum


15
 
Per 1,000 cost of job


Video/antennas
 
50
 
Per system


Swimming pools
 
150
 
Each pool




 



 

Permit type
 
Fee($)
 
Specification




Driveways
 
40
 
Each driveway


75
 
Each curb cut


Parking lot restripe or repave
 
0.50
 
Per space


New parking lot
 
2
 
Per space


Roadways, private
 
2
 
Per lineal foot


Sidewalks, curbs
 
50
 
For first 100 lineal feet


10
 
For each additional 100 lineal feet or part thereof


Loading docks
 
40
 
Each dock


Compactors
 
50
 
Each compactor


Hydrant flushing
 
150
 
Per 1,000 feet of main or part thereof


Fire pump tests
 
150
 
Per test


New water main tests
 
150
 
Per test


Water main chlorination
 
150
 
Per chlorination


Unmetered water
 
50
 
For limited use (new building)


Canceled projects
 
50
 
Per cancelled permit + cost per hour for plan review completed


Engineering
 
Costs incurred
 
Per consultant invoices. May be billed after permit is issued. No final
occupancy will be issued until invoice is paid.


Civil improvements
 
200
 
For Village Employee review


New tenant inspections
 
100
 
For occupancy up to 10,000 square feet


50
 
For each 10,000 square feet thereafter


Reinspections
 
75
 
Per inspection


Other fees
 
As required
 
Per Subdivision Regulations and/or Development Standards


Antennas, flagpoles
 
50
 
Each


Canopies
 
60
 
Each canopy




 



 

Permit type
 
Fee($)
 
Specification




Chimneys
 
50
 
Isolated chimney over 20 feet above any roof


Not listed above
 
1 ½%
 
Of the actual cost for work which requires a permit


Late filing charge
 
75 or 2% of job cost
 
For work begun without a permit (whichever is greater)


Land Development Permit fee
 
1,500 or 7 ½%
 
Of the cost of land improvements less mass grading and buildings minimum for
Land Development Permit fee (2 ½% plan review, 5% construction inspections)


Curb cut fees
 
75
 
Per curb cut, driveway, sidewalk


Street cut fees
 
500
 
To open cut a street (plus road bond)


TV inspections of sewer mains - bond fee
 
1.50
 
Per lineal foot. To be refunded upon compliance with Development Standards,
or shall be used by the village to complete said requirements.


Soil erosion control bond
 
1,500
 
Per acre or part thereof for projects involving site grading. This may be
included as part of the code performance bond.


Electrical bond
 
5,000
 
Code compliance bond to be maintained until job is completed and approved


Cash bonds
 
50
 
Minor work to ensure inspections, code compliance and for damage to property


250
 
Moderate work to ensure inspections, code compliance and for damage to
property


500
 
Intermediate work to ensure inspections, code compliance and for damage to
property


750
 
Substantial work to ensure inspections, code compliance and for damage to
property, for projects up to $150,000 value


½%
 
One-half percent of the cost of the job when required by the Building
Commissioner




 



 

Permit type
 
Fee($)
 
Specification


Road bonds
 
350
 
Per unit or building for projects over $10,000 using village roads rated less
than 80,000 pounds capacity with material loads over 15,000 per truck for the
damage of the roads


Road use fees
 
150
 
Per unit or building for projects over $10,000 using village roads rated less
than 80,000 pounds capacity with material loads over 15,000 per truck as a
predetermined cost for road repairs necessitated by heavily loaded trucks.



 



TABLE III
FEES FOR NOT-FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS



 

Permit type
 
Fee ($)
 
Specification


Not-for-profit organizations
 
Fees waived
 
Except as listed below, for permits issued to "not-for-profit organizations,"
including the Village of Itasca, Park Districts, other governmental
organizations, schools, churches and other not-for-profit groups approved by
the President of the Board of Trustees (excludes any and all outside
consultant costs incurred by the village)


Engineering
 
Costs incurred
 
Per consultant invoices. May be billed after permit is issued. No final
occupancy will be issued until invoice is paid.


Soil Erosion Control Board
 
1,500
 
Per acre of part thereof for projects involving site grading. This may be
included as part of the code performance bond.


Electrical bond
 
5,000
 
Code compliance bond to be maintained until job is completed and approved.



 



 

Permit type
 
Fee ($)
 
Specification




Cash bonds
 
50
 
Minor work to ensure inspections, code compliance and for damage to property


250
 
Moderate work to ensure inspections, code compliance and for damage to
property


500
 
Intermediate work to ensure inspections, code compliance and for damage to
property


750
 
Substantial work to ensure inspections, code compliance and for damage to
property, for projects up to $150,000 value


½%
 
One-half percent of the cost of the job when required by the Building
Commissioner


Road bonds
 
350
 
Per unit or building for projects over $10,000 using village roads rated less
than 80,000 pounds capacity with material loads over 15,000 per truck for the
damage of the roads


Road use fees
 
150
 
Per unit or building for projects over $10,000 using village roads rated less
than 80,000 pounds capacity with material loads over 15,000 per truck as a
predetermined cost for road repairs necessitated by heavily loaded trucks.


Late filing charge
 
75
 
For work begun without a permit


Water meters
 
- -
 
See page 40G for fees


Water usage
 
- -
 
See Ch. 52 for fees


Land Development Permit Fees
 
- -
 
See page 40J for fees




 



(Ord. 713-91, passed 5-14-91; Am. Ord. 754-93, passed 1-26-93; Am. Ord.
851-95, passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 1080-01, passed 3-20-01; Am. Ord. 1346-06,
passed 12-19-06; Am. Ord. 1438-08, passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 1462-08, passed
11-4-08; Am. Ord. 1818-16, passed 10-4-16)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.81  FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT FEES.



   (A)   The following fees shall be paid for permits issued by the
village requiring inspection by a fire protection district within the village.



 


Plan Review Fees






A.

 

Volume Sq. Feet



0 - 5,000



5,001 - 20,000



20,001 - 50,000



50,001 - 80,000



80,001 - 100,000



100,001 - 150,000



150,001 - 200,000



Over 200,000**

 

Fee*



$55



$70



$80



$90



$110



$135



$175



$175




*   Fire alarm and sprinkler reviews are not included.



**   Plus $35 for each additional 10,000 sq. ft. or fraction over 200,000
sq. ft.




B.

 

Fire Alarm System



Systems under 7,500 sq. feet



Systems over 7,500 sq. feet

 

Fee



$55



$110




(Additional time after 2 hours will be at a rate of $55 per hour.)




C.

 

Hood & Duct Systems



Wet chemical



Dry chemical

 

Fee



$55



$55




(Fee based on a per hour charge or a fraction after



   the first hour.)

 

$55 per hour




D.

 

Other Reviews

 

Fee




(Fee based on a per hour charge or a fraction after



   the first hour.)

 

$55 per hour




E.

 

Sprinkler Systems



New installation



1 - 20 heads



21 - 100 heads



1 - 100 add’l heads over 100 heads

 

Fee



$40



$50



$45





 



 


Plan Review Fees






F.

 

Alterations



1 - 20 heads



200 - 100 heads



1 - 100 add’l heads over 100 heads

 

Fee



$40



$50



$45




G.

 

Underground Storage Tanks



Plan review

 

Fee



$55




H.

 

Above Ground Storage Tanks



Plan review

 

Fee



$55




I.

 

Fire Pump



No charge for fire pump review that is part of a new



   fire sprinkler submission.



Addition of fire pump to existing sprinkler system

 




$110




Inspection Fees   Note: (includes one reinspect)




A.

 

Volume Sq. Feet



0 - 3,000



3,001 - 10,000



10,001 - 25,000



25,001 - 50,000



50,001 - 75,000



75,001 - 100,000



100,001 - 150,000



150,001 - 200,000



Over 200,000**

 

Fee*



$60



$80



$85



$100



$115



$145



$195



$240



$240




*      Fire alarm and sprinkler reviews are not included.



**   Plus $50 for each additional 10,000 sq. ft. or fraction over 200,000
sq. ft.




Additional reinspects will be at a rate of $60 per hour; minimum rate



   of $60.




B.

 

Fire Alarm Systems



Acceptance Test



Systems over 7,500 sq. ft.

 

Fee



$55



$110




(Retesting or additional time after 2 hours will be at a rate of $55 per
hour.)





 



 


Inspection Fees






C.

 

Fire Pump Testing (witness)



Testing

 

Fee



$55




(Retesting will be at a rate of $55 per hour.)




D.

 

Hood & Duct Systems



Wet chemical



Dry chemical

 

Fee



$55



$55




(Fees based on a per hour charge of a fraction after the first hour.)

 

$55 per hour




E.

 

Other Inspections

 

Fee




(Fee based on a per hour charge of a fraction after the first hour.)

 

$55 per hour




F.

 

Sprinkler Systems



Open Ceiling Inspection



   0 - 20 heads



Pressure Test/Open Ceiling



   20 - 100 heads



   



   1 - 100 additional heads over 100



   (based on each group of 1 - 100 over the first 100)

 

Fee



$45 per inspection



$65 per inspection



$40




(Retesting or reinspections at same rate as initial charge.)




G.

 

Under Ground Storage Tanks



Installation (Testing)



Removal (Witness)

 

Fee



$60



$60




(Fee is per tank)




H.

 

Above Ground Storage Tank



Testing

 

Fee



$60




(Fee is per tank)




I.

 

Underground Flush of Watermain

 

Fee



$55





 



(Ord. 1593-11, passed 11-15-11)



§ 150.82  [RESERVED]



§ 150.83  [RESERVED]



§ 150.84  [RESERVED]



§ 150.85  [RESERVED]



§ 150.86  FEES FOR THE CLEANING, RESTORATION OR REPAIR OF VILLAGE STREETS
AND PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   Nothing in this section or schedule of fees shall be construed
to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights
acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action required or
existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall any just or
legal right of remedy or any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
section.



   (B)   The following rates will be charged based on equipment and
manpower required.



   (C)   A minimum charge of four hours times equipment and manpower
will be made for any call out requiring overtime.



   (D)   Time and one-half will be charged on Saturdays, or before 7:00
a.m. and after 3:30 p.m. on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays or
Fridays.



   (E)   Double time will be changed on Sundays and legal holidays of
the village.



   (F)   The following rates shall apply:



 



Unit Supplies
 
Cost/Hour


Street Sweeper + Operator
 
$75


Bobcat + Operator
 
$65


Front End Loader + Operator
 
$70


Backhoe + Operator
 
$85


Pay Scraper + Operator
 
$75


Pick Up + Driver
 
$50


Small Dump Truck + Driver
 
$65


Large Dump Truck + Driver
 
$75


Rental Equipment
 
1.5 X Cost/Hour


Laborer + Hand Tools
 
$25


Supervisor
 
$35


Superintendent of Department
 
$50


Subcontractors or Consultants
 
1.5 X Cost/Hour




 



(Ord. 713-91, passed 5-14-91; Am. Ord. 1080-01, passed 3-20-01)



§ 150.87  GENERAL LIABILITY AND PROPERTY DAMAGE INSURANCE.



   All general contractors doing work within the village shall maintain
public liability and property damage insurance according to the following
minimum values:



 

Total Contract Amount of Work
 
Personal Liability Insurance
 
Property Damage Insurance


$0 to $10,000
 
$500,000
 
$100,000


$10,000 to $100,000
 
$1,000,000
 
$300,000


$100,000 to $1,000,000
 
$3,000,000
 
$1,000,000


Over $1,000,000
 
$5,000,000
 
110% of Contract



 



(Ord. 713-91, passed 5-14-91; Am. Ord. 1080-01, passed 3-20-01)  Penalty,
see § 150.99



BUILDING PERMITS



§ 150.90  BUILDING PERMIT TIME LIMITS.



   (A)   A building permit, once issued, shall be valid for a period of
one year for all residential construction except multi-family construction.
The Community Development Director or his/her designee may grant extensions
for additional periods not to exceed six months each, provided a fee of 25%
of the original cost of the permit shall be paid at the time each extension
is granted. Where, under authority of a permit or extended permit, work has
been started, and has been abandoned for a continuous period of 12 months,
all rights under such permit shall thereupon terminate by limitations, and
the permit fee shall be forfeited.



   (B)   For all commercial, industrial and multi-family construction
of less than 100,000 square feet, a building permit once issued shall be
valid for 12 months. For construction projects greater than 100,000 square
feet but less than 200,000 square feet, a permit once issued shall be valid
for 18 months. For construction projects greater than 200,000 square feet, a
permit shall be valid for 24 months. The Community Development Director or
his/her designee may grant extensions for additional periods not to exceed
six months each, provided that 10% of the original building permit fee has
been paid at the time each extension is granted. Any additional plan review
fee or associated fee shall be charged according to the building permit fee
schedule and will be in addition to the 10% extension fee charge.



   (C)   Any permitted work that is not completed by the permit
expiration date(s), including extensions, shall be maintained in a safe
condition. Any unsafe conditions that may exist, as determined by the
Community Development Director or his/her designee shall, after notice
provided to the property owner or permit holder, be immediately made into a
reasonably safe condition, including the possible removal of any dangerous
structure or portion thereof, as determined at the discretion of the
Community Development Director or his/her designee. Should the owner or
permit holder fail to remedy the unsafe condition, a contractor selected by
the Community Development Director or his/her designee shall make the
structure, the site or portion thereof safe, at the owner's expense. All
costs associated with making the structure, the site or portion thereof safe,
including but not limited to legal fees, staff hours, and any contractual
work, shall be the responsibility of the owner. If all costs associated with
making the structure, the site or portion thereof safe are not paid within 30
days of receipt of invoice from the village, a lien shall be placed upon the
property.



(Ord. 1711-14, passed 11-4-14)



VIOLATIONS



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any requirements or
provisions contained in this chapter or the codes adopted by reference shall
be prosecuted in the name of the village and, on being found guilty thereof
by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be fined a minimum amount of $50
up to a maximum of $750 per offense, with each day that such violation
continues being a separate offense.



(Ord. 713-91, passed 5-14-91; Am. Ord. 1080-01, passed 3-20-01; Am. Ord.
1464-08, passed 11-4-08)



CHAPTER 151:  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



Section



   151.01   Adoption by reference



§ 151.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The Comprehensive Plan of Public Improvements as prepared and
recommended by the Plan Commission of the village, copies of which are on
file in the office of the Village Clerk, is adopted and incorporated as part
of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



   (B)   The Amendatory Comprehensive Plan is adopted and incorporated
herein as if fully set out in this code and copies of which can be found in
the office of the Village Clerk in pamphlet form.



(Ord. 123-58, passed 9-23-58; Am. Ord. 475-77, passed 10-18-77; Am. Ord.
492-79, passed 1-16-79; Am. Ord. 771-93, passed 3-9-93; Am. Ord. 843-95,
passed 2-28-95; Am. Ord. 987-98, passed 3-3-98; Am. Ord. 1751-15, passed
7-7-15)



CHAPTER 152:  FEE SCHEDULE FOR LAND USE ACTIVITIES



Section



   152.01   Schedule of fees



§ 152.01  SCHEDULE OF FEES.



   (A)   The fees and charges of the village are established according
to the following schedule for all zoning requests and amendments, variations,
appeals, special uses, planned developments, annexation applications,
annexation fees and subdivisions.



 



ANNEXATIONS
 


Application
 
Fee


Residential (single lot)
 
$ 50


Residential (multiple lots)
 
150 + $25 per acre


Nonresidential
 
250 + $25 per acre


Annexation
 


(if application approved)
 


Residential (single lot)*
 
$100 per acre or part


Residential (multiple lots)
 
350 per acre or part


Nonresidential
 
350 per acre or part


*Fee waived if residence already receiving village sewer or water services,
for residential single lot only.


SUBDIVISIONS
 


Five acres or less
 
$500


Over five acres
 
100 per acre


ZONING
 


Amendment
 
Fee


Residential (single lot)
 
$ 50


Residential (multiple lots)
 
150


Nonresidential
 
250


Appeals
 


Residential (single lot)
 
$ 50


Residential (multiple lots)
 
150


Nonresidential
 
250


Planned Developments
 


25 acres or less
 
250


Between 26 and 50 acres
 
400


Over 51 acres
 
600


Special Uses
 


Residential
 
200


Nonresidential
 
300


Variation
 


Residential (single lot)
 
50


Residential (multiple lots)
 
150


Nonresidential
 
250




 



   (B)   To the above fees, add expenses for engineering, planning,
legal, recording and other applicable fees or services.  The above fees are
also cumulative in cases of multiple requests (e.g., the request for
subdivision and special use).



(Ord. 649-88, passed 2-16-88)



CHAPTER 153:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



   153.01   Findings



   153.02   Adoption of county ordinance by reference; compliance



   153.03   Effective date



   153.04   Fees for stormwater permit application review



§ 153.01  FINDINGS.



   (A)   Pursuant to state statute the DuPage County Board on September
24, 1991, adopted Ordinance No. SMO-0001-91, the Countywide Stormwater and
Floodplain Ordinance ("County Ordinance"); and



   (B)   The DuPage County Board on June 22, 1999, adopted revised
sections 15-111 and 115-240 of the County Ordinance effective September 1,
1999; and



   (C)   The County Ordinance was intended to provide certain minimum
standards with regard to the regulation of storm water and flood plains
within the county; and



   (D)   The Corporate Authorities of the village received a partial
waiver to enforce the County Ordinance from the county on April 21, 1992; and



   (E)   When a municipality seeks a partial or complete waiver, it is
required to take certain actions and evidence those actions through the
passage of an ordinance; and



   (F)   A municipality receiving a partial or complete waiver of the
County Ordinance is required to adopt certain standards contained within the
County Ordinance as the minimum standards effective within its territorial
jurisdiction, although it may impose higher standards; and



   (G)   The village currently enforces its own development standards
and specifications, which may be amended from time to time.  The standards
and specifications shall be consistent with the County Stormwater Ordinance,
but also may impose higher standards than those mandated by the county; and



   (H)   The Corporate Authorities may eventually pass a revised
ordinance which unifies the provisions of the County Ordinance and its
technical attachments and the provisions of its own ordinances into a single
document, but until the acts of the county are completed, it desires to
fulfill the requirements of the County Ordinance in the manner provided
hereafter.



(Ord. 743-92, passed 2-18-92; Am. Ord. 1063-00, passed 9-5-00)



§ 153.02  ADOPTION OF COUNTY ORDINANCE BY REFERENCE; COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   In order to assure that the provisions of the existing
ordinances of the village and those which may be adopted in the future are
consistent with and at least as stringent as the DuPage County Stormwater
Management Plan and the County Ordinance, the Corporate Authorities do hereby
adopt the County Ordinance with amendments which are attached hereto and made
a part of this chapter as if set out fully herein.  The County Ordinance is
adopted by reference, with the amendments adopted as a specific and integral
part of this chapter.  The provisions adopted by this section shall be in
full force and effect and shall supersede any other ordinances of the
municipality with which they are inconsistent or which are less stringent
than the terms of this chapter.



   (B)   Section 6.05 of the Village Development Standards and
Specifications shall be amended concurrently with this chapter, and, the
amended Section 6.05 shall serve as Appendix A, as attached to Ordinance
1208-04, passed 11-2-04.



   (C)   Any new annexation or pre-annexation agreement entered into by
this municipality after such time as this chapter is in full force and effect
shall require that every developer comply with the stormwater standards of
this chapter or as this chapter may be amended in the future to make its
terms consistent with the County Ordinance which shall apply to any plat of
subdivision within such newly annexed territory.



   (D)   The Corporate Authorities agree that the village will be bound
by the rules and procedures of the County Ordinance, including without
limitation, the Committee procedures for reasserting county jurisdiction over
stormwater management within the jurisdiction of this municipality.



(Ord. 743-92, passed 2-18-92; Am. Ord. 821-94, passed 8-23-94; Am. Ord.
981-98, passed 3-17-98; Am. Ord. 1063-00, passed 9-5-00; Am. Ord. 1208-04,
passed 11-2-04; Am. Ord. 1328-06, passed 8-1-06; Am. Ord. 1459-08, passed
10-7-08; Am. Ord. 1630-12, passed 7-24-12)



§ 153.03  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be in full force and effect ten days after its
passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form.



(Ord. 743-92, passed 2-18-92; Am. Ord. 1063-00, passed 9-5-00)



§ 153.04  FEES FOR STORMWATER PERMIT APPLICATION REVIEW.



   (A)   No stormwater permit shall be issued, nor shall any work
requiring a permit begin, until the fees hereinafter have been issued to the
village and received by the Building Department.



   (B)   The fees to be collected for stormwater permits for
developments within the jurisdiction of the village shall be as follows:



      (1)   Fees for single-family residences; outside SMA, less
than three acres.



 

         Review
 
Fee




         Regular review
 
$1,000


            First review
 


            First letter
 


            Follow-up review and approval
 


            Site visit
 


         Additional review and follow-up
 
300 each


         Violation
 
100/hour




 



      (2)   Small site development; no detention required.



         Single/two-family residential subdivision; less than three
acres.



         Non-residential subdivision; less than one acre.



         Multiple family residential subdivision; less than one acre.



 

         Review
 
Fee




         Regular review
 
$1,400


            First review
 


            First letter
 


            Follow-up review and approval
 


            Site visit
 


         Additional review and follow-up
 
400 each


         Violation
 
100/hour




 



      (3)   Large site development; detention required.



         Single/two-family residential subdivision; greater than or
equal to three acres.



         Non-residential subdivision; greater than or equal to one
acre.



         Multiple family residential subdivision; greater than or
equal to one acre.



 

         Review
 
Fee


         Per hour billing rate (billed directly to developer)
 
$74 - $140/hour



 



(Ord. 1248-05, passed 4-19-05)



CHAPTER 154:  HISTORIC PRESERVATION



Section



General Provisions



   154.01   Purpose



   154.02   Definitions



   154.03   Landmark and historic district designation procedures



   154.04   Construction, alteration, demolition or removal;
certificate of appropriateness



   154.05   Certificate of economic hardship



   154.06   Appeals



Historical Commission



   154.20   Establishment



   154.21   Purpose



   154.22   Membership; terms



   154.23   Officers



   154.24   Meetings



   154.25   Vacancies



   154.26   Powers and duties



   154.27   Annual budget



   154.28   Compensation



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the educational, cultural,
economic and general welfare of the community by:



   (A)   Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the special
distinctive historic, aesthetic, architectural and/or landscaping
characteristics of the village which represent elements of the village's
cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history.



   (B)   Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments
of the past as represented in the village's landmarks and historic districts.



   (C)   Stabilizing and improving the property value of the village's
landmarks and historic districts, and continued utilization of such
properties.



   (D)   Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the village to
its homebuyers, homeowners, residents, tourists, visitors and shoppers, and
thereby supporting and promoting business, commerce, industry and providing
economic benefit to the village.



   (E)   Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration and
rehabilitation.



   (F)   Ensuring that all of the economic benefits resulting from
preservation, including tax incentives, new jobs and renewed buildings are
available to our citizens.



(Ord. 642-87, passed 11-17-87)



§ 154.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALTERATION.   Any act or process requiring a building permit that
changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of a structure,
including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction or
removal of any structure.



   AREA.   A specific geographic division of the village.



   BOARD.   The Village Board of Trustees.



   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.   A certificate issued by the
Historical Commission indicating its approval of the appropriateness of the
plans for alteration, construction, removal or demolition of a landmark or of
a structure within a Historic District as defined by this chapter.



   COMMISSION.   The Village Historical Commission.



   COMMISSIONERS.   Members of the Village Historical Commission.



   CONSTRUCTION.   The act of adding to, or altering a structure or new
construction that requires a building permit.



   DEMOLITION.   Any act or process which destroys in part or in whole a
landmark or a structure within a designated Historic District.



   DESIGN CRITERIA.   A standard that will preserve the historic and
architectural character of the structure or area.



   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE.   The architectural character and
general composition of the exterior of a structure, including but not limited
to the kind, color and texture of the building material and the type, design
and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, ornamental details,
signs and appurtenant elements.



   HISTORIC DISTRICT.   An area designated as a "Historic District" by
ordinance of the Village Board of Trustees and which may contain within
definable geographic boundaries one or more landmarks and which may have
within its boundaries other properties or structures which, while not of such
historic and/or architectural significance to be designated as landmarks,
nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the landmark
or landmarks located within the District.



   LANDMARK.   A property or structure designated as a "Landmark" by
ordinance of the Village Board of Trustees, according to criteria and
pursuant to procedures prescribed herein, and which is therefore worthy of
rehabilitation, restoration and preservation because of its historic and/or
architectural significance to the village.



   OWNER OF RECORD.   The person or corporation or other legal entity
whose name appears on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds as the
title holder.



   PROPERTY.   A distinct parcel of real property which is assigned a
separate tax parcel number by the County Supervisor of Assessments.



   RELOCATION.   Any removal of a structure on a site to another site or
any relocation of a structure on its site.



   REPAIR.   Any change that does not require a building permit, that is
not construction, removal or alteration.



   RESTORATION.   The process of returning a property to a state of
utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient
contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property
which are significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values.



   SIGNIFICANT.   Any property, structure or area deserving to be
considered as an influence or effect to the cultural, social, economic,
political or architectural history of the nation, state or the village.



   STRUCTURE.   Anything constructed or erected.  An edifice or building
of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built-up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner.



(Ord. 642-87, passed 11-17-87)



§ 154.03  LANDMARK AND HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Any Landmark or Historic District nominations shall be made to
the Historical Commission on a form prepared by the Commission.



   (B)   The Commission shall, upon receipt of a properly completed
nomination, make a preliminary determination as to whether the nominated
property, structure or area meets one or more of the following criteria:



      (1)   Its character, interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the community, county,
state or country.



      (2)   Its location as a site of a significant local, county,
state or national events that may be likely to yield information important in
history.



      (3)   Its identification with a person or persons who
significantly contributed to the development of the community, county, state
or country.



      (4)   Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural and/or landscape style valuable for the study of a period,
type, method of construction or use of indigenous materials.



      (5)   Its identification as the work of a master builder,
designer, architect or landscape architect whose individual work has
influenced an era.



      (6)   Its overall embodiment of elements of design, detailing,
materials or craftsmanship which renders it architecturally significant.



      (7)   Its overall embodiment of design elements that make it
structurally or architecturally innovative.



      (8)   Its unique location or singular physical characteristics
that makes it an established or familiar visual feature in the village.



      (9)   Its character as a particularly fine or unique example
of a utilitarian structure or group of such structures, including, but not
limited to farmhouses, retail stores or other commercial structures, with a
high level of integrity or architectural significance.



      (10)   Historic Districts must have clear and definable
boundaries.



      (11)   Any structure, property or area that meets one or more
of the above criteria shall also have sufficient integrity of location,
design, materials and workmanship to make it worthy of preservation or
restoration.



   (C)   Within 30 days following a preliminary determination that a
proposed Landmark or Historic District meets one or more of the criteria in
division (B) of this section, the Commission shall notify the owner of record
in writing personally or by U.S. Mail.



   (D)   The Commission will recommend to the Village Board of Trustees
those proposed Landmarks or Historic Districts that should be designated.



      (1)   For individual landmarks, the owner of record shall be
notified by letter.



      (2)   For designation of a Historic District, a notice shall
be published.



      (3)   A recommendation of the designation shall be given to
the Village Board.



      (4)   A decision by the Commission not to recommend a
designation to the Village Board shall be the final administrative decision
of the Historical Commission.  Reapplication may be made to the Commission.



(Ord. 642-87, passed 11-17-87)



§ 154.04  CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, DEMOLITION OR REMOVAL; CERTIFICATE OF
APPROPRIATENESS.



   (A)   Any application for a building permit for alteration,
construction, demolition or removal, including plans and specifications, for
designated landmarks or for property or structures within designated Historic
Districts shall be sent by the Building Department to the Historical
Commission within seven days of the receipt of the application by the
Building Department.  Any applicant may request a meeting with the
Commission before applications for the building permit.



   (B)   Review criteria.  In making a determination whether to issue
or deny a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission shall consider,
among other things, the effect of the proposed construction, alteration,
removal or demolition upon historic, aesthetic or architectural value,
characteristics and significance of the landmark or of the Historic
District.  The criteria to be used by the Commission in making its
determination shall include, but is not limited to:



      (1)   The maintenance of the significant original qualities or
character of the structure or property, including, if significant, its
landscape.  The removal or alteration of any historic or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.



      (2)   The compatibility of the architectural style and design
detailing the proposed construction, alteration, addition or repair with the
original architecture of the landmark or styles within the Historic District.



      (3)   The compatibility of the general design, arrangement,
scale, texture or materials of the construction or alteration, with the
historic, aesthetic or architectural values, characteristics and significance
of the Historic District and/or landmark.



      (4)   The relationship of the location of the construction,
alteration or removal to the streets, public or semi-public ways and any
other structures or property within a Historic District.



      (5)   It is recommended that construction, alteration and
demolition shall be done in accordance with the following:



         (a)   All buildings, structures and sites shall be
recognized as products of their own time; however, structural alterations
that have historical basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance
shall be encouraged.



         (b)   Exterior physical changes which may have taken
place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a
building, structure or site and its environment.  These changes may have
acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall be
recognized and respected.



         (c)   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of
skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure or site shall
be treated with sensitivity.



         (d)   Deteriorated architectural features shall be
repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible.  In the event replacement
is necessary, the new material need not be identical to but should match the
material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture and other
visual qualities.



         (e)   The surface cleaning of structures shall be
undertaken with the gentlest means possible.  Sandblasting and other
cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials should not
be undertaken.



         (f)   Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect
and preserve archaeological resources affected by, or adjacent to, any
project.



         (g)   Contemporary design for alterations and additions
to existing properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and
additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural
material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material
and character of the property, neighborhood or environment.



         (h)   Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to
structures shall be done in such manner that if such additions or alterations
were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the
structure would not be impaired.



   (C)   Review process.



      (1)   If the Commission finds that the work proposed in the
application will not adversely affect any historically or architecturally
significant features of the landmark or structure or property within a
Historic District and is appropriate or consistent with the spirit and
purposes of this section, it shall, at the next regular Commission meeting,
issue a certificate of appropriateness and forward copies to the owner of
record and the Building Department.  An owner may request a special meeting
if the next regular Commission meeting is scheduled 15 days or more after the
receipt of the building permit application.



      (2)   If the Commission finds that the proposed work will
adversely affect or destroy any significant historic, aesthetic or
architectural feature or value of the landmark or structure or property
within a Historic District or is inappropriate or inconsistent with the
spirit and purposes of this section, it shall disapprove the application and
shall so advise the applicant for permit and the Building Department in
writing within 30 days after receiving the copy of the application.



         (a)   The Commission shall briefly state its reasons
therefor in writing and it may make recommendations to the applicant with
respect to the appropriateness of design, arrangement, texture, scale,
material, color, location or other elements of appearance of the building or
structure involved.



         (b)   In cases of disapproval accompanied by
recommendation, the applicant may again be heard before the Commission if
within 60 days of the date of receipt of notice of disapproval of the
application he amends the application to conform with the recommendations or
makes application for a certificate of economic hardship as provided for in
§ 154.05.  The applicant shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the
Commission after receipt of the amended application, and the Commission shall
approve or disapprove the amended application.



(Ord. 642-87, passed 11-17-87)



§ 154.05  CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP.



   (A)   A certificate of economic hardship shall be issued by the
Historical Commission upon a finding by it that all reasonable use of, or
return from, a designated landmark or property within a Historic District
would be denied a property owner as a result of the disapproval of a
certificate of appropriateness.



   (B)   An applicant for a certificate of economic hardship may submit
any or all of the following information in order to assist the Commission in
making its determination on the application:



      (1)   The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase
and the party from whom purchased.



      (2)   The assessed value of the land and improvements thereon
according to the two most recent assessments.



      (3)   Real estate taxes for the previous two years.



      (4)   Remaining balance on mortgage, if any, and annual debt
service, if any, for the previous two years.



      (5)   All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by
the owner or applicant in connection with this purchase, financing or
ownership of the property.



      (6)   Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price
asked and offers received, if any.



      (7)   Any consideration by the owner as to profitable adaptive
uses for the property.



      (8)   If the property is income-producing, the annual gross
income from the property for the previous two years, itemized operating and
maintenance expenses for the previous two years, and annual cash flow before
and after debt service, if any, during the same period.



      (9)   Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether
sole proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited
partnership, joint venture or other.



      (10)   Any other information, including the portion of the
returns respecting the property income tax of the owner, applicant or
principal investors in the property, reasonably necessary for a determination
as to whether the property can be reasonably used or yield a reasonable
return to present or future owners.



   (C)   Upon a finding by the Commission that without approval of the
proposed work all reasonable use of, or return from, a designated landmark or
property within a Historic District will be denied a property owner, then the
application shall be delayed for a period not to exceed 60 days.  During
this period of delay, the Commission shall investigate plans and make
recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees with concurrence of the Plan
Commission, to allow for a reasonable use of, or return from the property, or
to otherwise preserve the subject property.  Such plans and recommendations
may include, but are not limited to, a relaxation of the provisions of this
chapter, building code modifications and/or changes in zoning regulations,
provided that a public hearing will be held before the Plan Commission, as
may be necessary, with the recommendation of the Plan Commission.



   (D)   If by the end of this 60-day period, the Historical Commission
has found that, without approval of the proposed work, the property cannot be
put to a reasonable use or the owner cannot obtain a reasonable economic
return therefrom, then the Commission shall issue a certificate of economic
hardship approving the proposed work.  If the Commission finds otherwise, it
shall deny the application for a certificate of economic hardship, and notify
the applicant by mail of the final denial.



(Ord. 642-87, passed 11-17-87)



§ 154.06  APPEALS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a final denial of a certificate of
appropriateness or a certificate of economic hardship for either a landmark,
property or structure within a Historic District, the applicant may, within
15 days, appeal the Historical Commission's decision to the Village Board of
Trustees.  The Village Board may affirm or modify the decision, after due
consideration of the facts contained in the record submitted to the Board by
the Commission.  The Commission may receive comments on the contents of the
record, but no new matters may be considered by the Commission.  Upon a
decision by the Village Board that a certificate of appropriateness or a
certificate of economic hardship shall be issued, the Village Clerk shall
notify the Commission, the applicant and the Building Department within seven
days.



   (B)   If the Village Board concurs with a decision of the Commission
not to issue a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic
hardship, the Village Clerk shall notify the Commission, the applicant and
the Building Department within seven days.



(Ord. 642-87, passed 11-17-87)



HISTORICAL COMMISSION



§ 154.20  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The President and Board of Trustees of the Village has created the
Village Historical Commission established under the provisions of the statute
granting such authority, Preservation of Historical and Other Special Areas,
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-48.2-1 through 11-48.2-7.  This subchapter
establishes the purposes and powers of such legislation to be administered by
the Historical Commission on behalf of the village, Commission membership and
terms of office, meetings and budget.



(Ord. 642-87, passed 11-17-87)



§ 154.21  PURPOSE.



   The Historical Commission is created for the purpose of:



   (A)   Identifying such property, structures or areas within the
village that are historically significant in that they exemplify and/or
reflect the cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history of
the nation, state or the village.



   (B)   Advising the Village Board of Trustees on the designation of
such property, structures or areas as either landmarks or Historic Districts.



   (C)   Protecting the distinctive visual characteristics of the
landmarks or Historic Districts by reviewing and giving advice on changes to
their exterior architectural appearance.



   (D)   Performing such other functions as may be useful or necessary
to safeguard and enhance the community heritage as embodied in properties,
structures and areas.



(Ord. 642-87, passed 11-17-87)



§ 154.22  MEMBERSHIP; TERMS.



   The Historical Commission shall consist of seven members all appointed
by the Village President, by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees. 
Each appointment shall be for three-year terms, except the initial
appointments shall be as follows:  Three members shall be appointed for
three-year terms; two members shall be appointed for two-year terms; and two
members shall be appointed for one-year terms. If a vacancy on the Historical
Commission occurs, a new member shall be appointed to fill the vacancy for
the remainder of the vacated member's term.  No compensation shall be paid
to a member.



(Ord. 601-1985, passed 11-5-85; Am. Ord. 1516-10, passed 1-19-10)



§ 154.23  OFFICERS.



   (A)   Officers shall consist of a Chairperson appointed by the
Village President.  Other officers are Secretary and Treasurer elected by
the Historical Commission.



   (B)   Chairperson.  The Chairperson shall:



      (1)   Preside over meetings.  In the absence of the
Chairperson, a Chairperson Pro Tem shall be elected by those present.



      (2)   Notify the Village President of vacancies.



   (C)   Secretary.  The Secretary shall:



      (1)   Take minutes of the Commission meeting.  If absent, a
Secretary Pro Tem shall be elected by those present.



      (2)   Distribute to the Commissioners copies of the minutes.



      (3)   When minutes are approved, the original shall be filed
and copies distributed to the Village President, Village Clerk and Village
Attorney.



      (4)   Type all correspondence and file a copy of said
correspondence.



      (5)   Maintain files for the Commission.



   (D)   Treasurer.  The Treasurer shall:



      (1)   Keep the financial records of the Commission.



      (2)   Compile the yearly budget.  After approval by the
Commission, the budget shall be submitted to the Village Board of Trustees
for approval.



(Ord. 642-87, passed 11-17-87)



§ 154.24  MEETINGS.



   (A)   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the Commissioners.



   (B)   All decisions or actions of the Commission shall be made by a
majority vote of those present and voting at any meeting where a quorum
exists, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.



   (C)   Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times or at any
time upon the call of the Chairperson.



   (D)   No Commissioner shall vote on any matter which may materially
or apparently affect the property, income or business interest of the
Commissioner.



   (E)   No action shall be taken by the Commission which could in any
manner deprive or restrict the owner of a property in its use, modification,
maintenance, disposition or demolition until such owner shall first have had
the opportunity to be heard at a public meeting of the Commission, as
provided by law.



(Ord. 642-87, passed 11-17-87)



   (F)   All provisions of the Illinois Open Meeting Act shall be
observed.  The Commission shall keep minutes of its meetings which minutes
shall be kept permanently by the Village Clerk.



   (G)   The Board of Trustees shall provide space for the holding of
the meetings of the Commission.



(Ord. 601-1985, passed 11-5-85)



§ 154.25  VACANCIES.



   The office of any Commissioner who fails to attend three consecutive
meetings without a valid reason, or who fails to attend two-thirds of all
meetings scheduled or called during any one-year period may be declared
vacant by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Historical
Commission.  Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the same
manner as for original appointment to the Commission.



(Ord. 642-87, passed 11-17-87)



§ 154.26  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Historical Commission shall have the following powers:



   (A)   To adopt its own procedural regulations.



   (B)   To conduct an ongoing survey to identify the Village's
historically and architecturally significant properties, structures and
areas, including landscapes.



   (C)   To investigate and recommend to the Village Board of Trustees
that certain village properties or structures having special historic,
community or architectural value be designated as landmarks.



   (D)   To investigate, hold public hearings and recommend to the
Village Board certain village areas as having special historic, community,
architectural or archaeological value as Historic Districts.



   (E)   To keep a register of all property and structures which have
been designated under this chapter, including all information required for
each designation.



   (F)   To determine an appropriate system of markers and make
recommendations for the design and implementation of specific markings of the
streets and routes leading from one landmark or Historic District to another.



   (G)   To advise and assist owners of landmarks and property or
structures within Historic Districts on physical and financial aspects of
preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse, and on procedures for
inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places.



   (H)   To nominate landmarks and Historic Districts to the National
Register of Historic Places.



   (I)   To inform and educate the citizens of the village concerning
the historic and architectural heritage of the village by publishing
appropriate maps, newsletters, brochures and pamphlets, and by holding
programs and seminars.



   (J)   To review building permit applications for construction,
alteration, removal or demolition of designated landmarks or structures
within Historic Districts and to notify the Village Board of the Commission's
decision to issue or deny certificates of appropriateness for such actions. 
Applicants shall be required to submit two sets of plans, drawings,
elevations, specifications and other information as may be necessary to make
decisions concurrently with the application to the Building Department.



   (K)   To develop specific design criteria for the restoration,
construction or removal of landmarks, or property and structures within
Historic Districts.



   (L)   To review proposed zoning amendments, applications for special
uses or applications for zoning variances that affect designated landmarks
and Historic Districts.  The Village Clerk shall send copies of applications
for special use or zoning variances to the Commission not less than 15 days
prior to the date of the hearing by the Plan Commission, Zoning Board of
Appeals or the Village Board.



   (M)   To administer on behalf of the village, any property, or full
or partial interest in real property, including a conservation right as that
term is used in ILCS Ch. 765, Act 340, § 1, which the village may possess or
accept as a gift or otherwise, upon request or authorization by the Village
Board.



   (N)   To accept and administer on behalf of the village, upon
designation by the Village Board, such gifts or grants of money as may be
designated by the grantor or donor for the uses and purposes of this
chapter.  Such money may be expended for publishing maps and brochures, or
for hiring staff persons or consultants or performing other appropriate
functions for the purpose of carrying out the duties and powers of the
Commission and the purposes of this chapter.



   (O)   To call upon village staff members as well as to engage other
experts and professionals for technical advice as may be required from time
to time, and as may be provided for in the budget of the Commission.



   (P)   To testify before all boards, committees, agencies and
commissions including the Village Plan Commission, Building Committee and the
Zoning Board of Appeals on any matter affecting historically and
architecturally significant property, structures and areas.



   (Q)   To confer recognition upon the owners of designated landmarks
or property or structures within Historic Districts by means of certificates,
plaques or markers.



   (R)   To develop a preservation component to be identified in the
Comprehensive Master Plan of the village, and to recommend it to the Plan
Commission and the Village Board for inclusion in the Comprehensive Master
Plan.



   (S)   To periodically review the zoning ordinance and to recommend
to the Plan Commission and the Village Board any amendments appropriate for
the protection and continued use of landmarks or property and structures
within designated Historic Districts.



   (T)   To assist owners of significant properties within certified
Historic Districts to receive state certification.



   (U)   To recommend certification of designated Historic Districts to
the Division of Historic Sites, Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.



   (V)   To provide guidelines approved by the Village Board to the
Building Department for methods and procedures, to notify the Historical
Commission of proposed construction, alteration, removal or demolition of
designated landmarks or structures within Historic Districts.



   (W)   To undertake any other action or activity necessary or
appropriate for the implementation of its powers and duties, or to the
implementation of the purposes of this chapter and as permitted by statute.



(Ord. 642-87, passed 11-17-87)



§ 154.27  ANNUAL BUDGET.



   Each year the Historical Commission shall prepare an annual fiscal year
budget which shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees by May 1 of a
year.  All receipts of funds to or for the credit of the Historical
Commission shall be deposited into an account selected by the Board of
Trustees.  All disbursements of funds of the Historical Commission shall be
from said account but with prior approval of the Board of Trustees, which
Board shall designate the persons authorized to sign checks against or
otherwise disburse funds from said account.



(Ord 601-1985, passed 11-5-85)



§ 154.28  COMPENSATION.



   Each member of the Historical Commission shall receive compensation for
their service on the Commission in the amount of $25 per meeting attended by
the member.



(Ord. 1275-05, passed 11-1-05)



CHAPTER 155:  SIGNS AND AWNINGS



Section



Off-Premises Outdoor Signs



   155.01   Definitions



   155.02   Application for license; license fee



   155.03   Change of ownership



   155.04   Affixing license to off-premises outdoor signs



   155.05   Dynamic display off-premises outdoor signs prohibited



 



   155.99   Penalty



OFF-PREMISES OUTDOOR SIGNS



§ 155.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DYNAMIC DISPLAY.   Any characteristic of a sign that appears to have
movement or that appears to change, caused by any method other than
physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the
apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure itself, or
any other component of the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a
technology or method allowing the sign face to change the image without
having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its
components.  This also includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing,
blinking, or animated display and any display that incorporates rotating
panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, "digital ink" or any
other method or technology that allows the sign face to present a series of
images or displays.



   OFF-PREMISES OUTDOOR SIGN.  An outdoor sign, display, device, notice,
figure, painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard or other thing
which relates to products or services not sold or offered on the land or in
the structure upon which the outdoor sign is attached.



(Ord. 537-82, passed 10-5-82; Am. Ord. 1481-09, passed 11-18-08; Am. Ord.
1818-16, passed 10-4-16)



§ 155.02  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   Prior to the construction and installation of any off-
premises outdoor sign, and on or before January 1 of each year thereafter
while the off-premises outdoor sign remains on the land or structure, the
owner or agent of the owner of the off-premises outdoor sign shall make
application for a license to the Village Clerk, by submitting reasonable
information as requested and payment of the license fee for each off-premises
outdoor sign.  A copy of the state permit shall be supplied, if the sign is
authorized under ILCS Ch. 225, Act 440, §§ 1 et seq., as amended.



   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a license containing all
required information and appropriately executed, and upon payment of the fee,
the Village Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant, provided that such
sign is permitted by village ordinance or by ILCS Ch. 225, Act 440, §§ 1 et
seq., as amended.



   (C)   To defray the cost of regulating and inspection, there is
hereby established an annual license fee of $500 for each off- premises
outdoor sign, as defined in § 155.01.  The license year shall be from
January 1 through December 31.  The license fee for the first year shall be
prorated from the date of the application or installation of the sign, to the
end of the license year, whichever is earlier.



(Ord. 537-82, passed 10-5-82; Am. Ord. 1818-16, passed 10-4-16)



§ 155.03  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP.



   Upon change of sign ownership, the new owner of the sign or agent of
the owner shall promptly notify the Village Clerk, and supply the necessary
information (at no cost to the applicant) within 60 days of change of
ownership.  Any license not so renewed shall become void.



(Ord. 537-82, passed 10-5-82; Am. Ord. 1818-16, passed 10-4-16)



§ 155.04  AFFIXING LICENSE TO OFF-PREMISES OUTDOOR SIGNS.



   The license as issued by the Village Clerk shall be securely affixed to
the front face of the sign or sign structure in a conspicuous position by the
owner within 14 days after receipt of the license or within 20 days after the
completion of the sign erection, whichever is later.



(Ord. 537-82, passed 10-5-82; Am. Ord. 1818-16, passed 10-4-16)



§ 155.05  DYNAMIC DISPLAY OFF-PREMISES OUTDOOR SIGNS PROHIBITED.



   No dynamic display off-premises outdoor sign is permitted in any
district.  No existing off-premises outdoor sign shall be permitted to have
dynamic display capabilities added to it.



(Ord. 1481-09, passed 11-18-08; Am. Ord. 1818-16, passed 10-4-16)



§ 155.99  PENALTY.



   Any person or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter adopted or fail to comply therewith shall severally for each and
every such violation and noncompliance respectively be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $500. 
A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed upon each day during which
the violation occurs or continues.  The imposition of one penalty for any
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue.



(Ord. 537-82, passed 10-5-82; Am. Ord. 1818-16, passed 10-4-16)



CHAPTER 156:  SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL



Section



   156.01   Purpose



   156.02   Definitions



   156.03   Permit requirements



   156.04   Land modification standards



   156.05   Supplemental to flood control standards



§ 156.01  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to control land modifications and
excavation activities to prevent:



   (A)   Soil erosion, sedimentation, and earth, soil or rock removal
that will result in damage to or loss of topsoil.



   (B)   Sedimentation that will affect the quality of runoff or the
capacity of storm sewers, drainage channels, streams and structures.



(Ord. 510-80, passed 12-16-80)



§ 156.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GRADING PLAN.   Topographical plan that shows the existing land
conditions including elevations, drainage, structures and natural objects,
and proposed elevations, drainage, structures and natural objects.



   LAND MODIFICATION.   Any modification to the existing land surface,
including fills of more than 2500 cubic feet (70.79 cubic meters),
excavations of more than 2500 cubic feet (70.79 cubic meters), drainage
changes that will affect drainage onto or off of adjacent property, or
surface disturbances of more than 2500 square feet (232.69 square meters).



(Ord. 510-80, passed 12-16-80)



§ 156.03  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Before any land modification is made, a permit for the
proposed work shall be obtained from the Building Commissioner.



   (B)   The application for a permit shall be submitted on forms
provided by the Building Commissioner, and at a minimum shall include the
following information:



      (1)   All information required on the application form,
including the location of the proposed work, a grading plan showing existing
and proposed conditions, and the purpose for which the work is proposed.



      (2)   For land modifications, the application shall include
the area of land that will be stripped of vegetation, the location of any
proposed soil stockpiles, the limits of any excavation, the measures taken to
keep soil erosion and sedimentation to a minimum, the effects on drainage,
and a schedule of land modification activities including revegetation.



(Ord. 510-80, passed 12-16-80)



§ 156.04  LAND MODIFICATION STANDARDS.



   (A)   No permit for a land modification, either separately or as a
part of a building permit, shall be issued unless a sediment and erosion
control plan is submitted that provides for the following:



      (1)   The smallest practical area of land is exposed at any
given time in the development.



      (2)   The area exposed shall be kept to as short a duration of
time as is practical.



      (3)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins, or
soil traps shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff
waters from land undergoing development.



      (4)   Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the
increased runoff caused by changed soil surface conditions during and after
development.



      (5)   Permanent, final plant covering of structures shall be
installed as soon as possible.



      (6)   The erosion control plan shall relate to the topography
and soil at the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created.



   (B)   The intent of this section is to obtain compliance with the
Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
Northeastern Illinois.



(Ord. 510-80, passed 12-16-80)



§ 156.05  SUPPLEMENTAL TO FLOOD CONTROL STANDARDS.



   This chapter shall implement and is in addition to all other ordinances
regulating flood prevention and flood damage.



(Ord. 510-80, passed 12-16-80)



CHAPTER 157:  SUBDIVISION CODE



Section



   157.01   Incorporation by reference



§ 157.01  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   Subdivision Ordinance 616-86, passed 8-12-86, is hereby incorporated by
reference, as said Subdivision Ordinance has been and is amended from time to
time, as if fully set forth herein.  Copies shall be maintained on file in
the office of the Village Clerk for public inspection during normal business
hours.



(Am. Ord. 894-96, passed 3-5-96; Am. Ord. 1034-99, passed 10-5-99; Am. Ord.
1333-06, passed 9-5-06)



CHAPTER 158:  SWIMMING POOLS



Section



General Provisions



   158.01   Definition



   158.02   Compliance required



   158.03   Location of pool



   158.04   Permit required



   158.05   Drawings and plans



   158.06   Permit fees



Equipment and Use



   158.15   Recirculating system



   158.16   Filters



   158.17   Materials



   158.18   Structural design



   158.19   Walk areas



   158.20   Fences



   158.21   Steps or ladders



   158.22   Skimmers



   158.23   Water supply



   158.24   Heaters



   158.25   Inlets



   158.26   Outlets



   158.27   Water disinfection



   158.28   Electrical requirements



   158.29   Safety precautions



   158.30   Operation and maintenance



   158.31   Inspection



 



   158.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 158.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL.   A receptacle for water or an
artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two feet,
intended for the purpose of immersion, or partial immersion therein, of human
beings, and including all appurtenant equipment constructed, installed and
maintained in or above the ground outside of a building used as a
single-family dwelling unit; provided, further, that such PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL
SWIMMING POOL is maintained by an individual primarily for the sole use of
the individual's household and guests, and not for the purpose of profit or
in any connection with any business operated for profit.  No out-of-doors
swimming pool intended for the use of members and their guests of a nonprofit
club or organization, or limited to house residents of a multiple dwelling
unit, a block, subdivision, neighborhood, community or specified area of
residence shall be permitted in a residence district.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)



§ 158.02  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   Every private residential swimming pool constructed, installed and
maintained hereafter shall comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.03  LOCATION OF POOL.



   Private residential swimming pools shall be a permitted accessory use
in any residence district providing it conforms with this chapter and other
applicable ordinances of the village including the zoning code.  Pumps,
filters, and pool water disinfection equipment installations shall be located
at a distance not less than eight feet from any side property line.  Pools
and appurtenant equipment shall not be permitted in the side yard between
dwellings.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and
appurtenances within the village unless permits therefor shall have first
been obtained from the Building Commissioner.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.05  DRAWINGS AND PLANS.



   (A)   All drawings and plans for the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and
appurtenances for which a permit is required shall first be presented to the
Building Commissioner for examination and approval as to proper location,
construction and use.



   (B)   All plans and drawings shall be drawn to a scale of not less
than one-eighth of an inch to the foot, on paper or cloth, in ink, or by some
process that will not fade or obliterate.  All distances and dimensions
shall be accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing
the lot lines, and including information pertaining to the pool, walk and
fence construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal systems,
and all appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool.



   (C)   All private residential swimming pools, appurtenances, water
supply and drainage systems shall be constructed in conformity with the
approved plans.  If any deviations from such plans are desired, a
supplementary plan covering that portion of the work involved shall be filed
for approval and shall conform to the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.06  PERMIT FEES.



   The fee for a permit for the erection or construction of a swimming
pool shall be $10 for each 1000 cubic feet or fraction thereof to be
contained within the proposed pool as determined by the plans and
specifications submitted with the application for the permit.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)



EQUIPMENT AND USE



§ 158.15  RECIRCULATING SYSTEM.



   All private residential swimming pools shall be equipped with a water
recirculation and filtration system.  The equipment shall be capable of
effecting one turnover of the pool volume in ten hours or less, at a rate of
filtration not exceeding three gallons per square foot of filter area per
minute.  The recirculation system shall consist of pumping equipment, hair
and lint catcher, filters, necessary pipe connections to the pool inlets and
outlets, and facilities and equipment for disinfecting the pool water.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)



§ 158.16  FILTERS.



   (A)   Filters shall be capable of maintaining the clarity of the
water to permit the ready identification, through an eight-foot depth of
water, of a disc two inches in diameter, which is divided into four quadrants
in alternate colors of red and white.



   (B)   Filter capacity shall be such that it need not be cleaned more
frequently than once every four days under proper conditions of water, pool
and filter operation.



   (C)   All pressure filters shall be equipped with influent and
effluent pressure gauges to determine the pressure differential and frequency
of cleaning.



   (D)   All other filters shall be equipped with at least one
pressure, vacuum or compound gauge, as applicable, which shall be positioned
in such a way as to determine the differential across the filter and the need
of cleaning.



   (E)   All pressure filter systems shall be equipped with an air
release at the high point in the system.  Each sand filter shall be provided
with a visual means of determining when the filter has been restored to
original cleanliness. 



   (F)   Operating instructions shall be posted on every filter
system.  All valves shall be properly designated, indicating their purpose.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)



§ 158.17  MATERIALS.



   Private residential swimming pool walls and floor shall be constructed
of any impervious material which will provide a tight tank with white or
light colored, easily cleaned surfaces.  The floor, or bottom surface, of
the pool shall have a nonslip finish.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)



§ 158.18  STRUCTURAL DESIGN.



   Pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within and
to resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty.  The side and
end walls shall be vertical, and shall present a smooth finish.  The slope
of the bottom of any part of the pool in which the water is less than five
feet in depth shall not be more than one foot in each eight feet.  The
maximum slope where the water is five feet or more in depth shall not exceed
one foot in two feet.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)



§ 158.19  WALK AREAS.



   Unobstructed walk areas not less than three feet wide shall be provided
to extend entirely around the pool.  The walk areas shall be constructed of
impervious material, easily cleaned, and of nonslip construction.  The slope
of the walks shall have a definite pitch away from the pool edge.  A
foot-rinse unit should be available for cleaning of feet before entrance onto
the pool walks.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)



§ 158.20  FENCES.



   (A)   All private residential swimming pools shall be completely
enclosed by a fence erected along the periphery of the pool walks.  All
fence openings or points of entry into the pool area enclosure shall be
equipped with gates.  The fence and gates shall be at least 42 inches high,
and the gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices
placed at the top of the gate so as to be inaccessible to small children.



   (B)   During construction and prior to completion of the fence as
described in this section, no water will be allowed in said pool unless the
pool is guarded 24 hours a day by a capable watchman.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.21  STEPS OR LADDERS.



   One or more means of egress in the form of steps, ladders, or
step-holes shall be provided for all private residential swimming pools, and
located at the deepest end of the pool.  Treads of steps, ladders, or
step-holes shall be constructed of a nonslip material, shall be at least
three inches in width and shall have a handrail on both sides.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)



§ 158.22  SKIMMERS.



   (A)   In every private residential swimming pool, at least one
skimming device shall be provided for each 800 square feet of surface area or
fraction thereof.  Skimmers shall be located at least 30 feet apart. 
Handholes shall be provided and consist of a bull-nosed coping not over two
and one-half inches thick for the outer two inches or an equivalent approved
handhold.  The handhold must be no more than nine inches above the normal
water line.  Skimming devices shall be built into the pool wall and shall
adequately remove floating oils and waste.



   (B)   Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow-through rate of at
least 30 gallons per minute and a total capacity of all skimmers on any pool
shall be at least 50% of the required filter flow of the recirculation system.



   (C)   They shall be automatically adjustable to variations in water
level over a range of at least three inches.



   (D)   An easily removable and cleanable basket or screen through
which all overflow water must pass shall be provided to trap large solids.



   (E)   The skimmer shall be provided with a device to prevent airlock
in the suction line.  If an equalizer pipe is used, it shall provide an
adequate amount of makeup water for pump suction should the water of the pool
drop below the weir level.  This pipe shall be at least two inches in
diameter and shall be located at least one foot below the lowest overflow
level of the skimmer.



   (F)   An equalizer line shall be provided with a valve that will
remain tightly closed under normal operating conditions, but will
automatically open at a differential of not more than four inches between the
pool level and the level of the overflow tank.



   (G)   The overflow weir shall be of sufficient length to maintain a
rate of flow of at least 20 gallons per minute per lineal foot of weir lip.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)



§ 158.23  WATER SUPPLY.



   No source of water other than that secured from the village waterworks
distribution system shall be used in private residential swimming pools;
except water obtained from wells approved by the Building Commissioner and
other governmental bodies having jurisdiction may be used.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.24  HEATERS.



   Gas-fired swimming pool heaters and swimming pool boilers must comply
with all applicable American Standard Approval requirements including A.G.A.
and A.S.M.E. standards.  Oil-burning equipment must be approved by U.L. or
other nationally recognized testing agency.  All such equipment shall carry
the corresponding seal of approval by the appropriate agencies.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.25  INLETS.



   (A)   Private residential swimming pool water recirculation system
inlets shall be located so as to produce so far as possible uniform
circulation of water throughout the pool without the existence of dead spots
and to carry pool bottom deposits to the outlets, and shall discharge at a
minimum depth of ten inches below the pool overflow level.  A minimum of one
recirculation system inlet shall be provided for every 615 square feet of
surface area of the pool.



   (B)   Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for adding
make-up water as needed.  There shall be no physical connection between the
water supply line and the pool system.  If the make-up water is added
directly to the pool, the outlet shall be at least six inches above the upper
rim of the pool.  If the make-up line discharges to a surge or balancing
tank, the point of discharge shall be at least six inches above the rim of
the tank.  If a hose connection from a sill cock or other plumbing fixture
is to be used for supplying make-up water, then an approved vacuum breaker
shall be installed between the sill cock or control valve at the fixture and
the hose connection.  The vacuum breaker shall be installed at a height not
less than seven feet-six inches above the floor, platform or ground upon
which a person would stand when operating the sill cock or control valve.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)



§ 158.26  OUTLETS.



   (A)   In private residential swimming pools, 30 feet in width or
less, water circulation system outlets shall be located so as to provide at
least one outlet at the deepest point in the pool.  If the pool width is
more than 30 feet, multiple outlets shall be provided and spaced not more
than 30 feet apart, nor closer than four feet to any wall.  All pool drain
outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an area of openings not less
than four times the cross-sectional area of the outlet pipe.  The gratings
shall be of such design so they cannot be readily removable by bathers and
will not injure bathers' fingers.  One outlet shall be provided for each 800
square feet of surface area.



   (B)   Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely
emptying the pool and the discharge of the pool water to the sewer shall be
at a rate not exceeding 250 gallons per minute.  No direct connection shall
be made to the sewer.



   (C)   Drain outlet fittings from the pool shall not be directly
connected to a sewer line.  Drainage shall be by gravity or by pumping or
siphoning onto the ground or into the top of a basin or sump located ahead of
the storm sewer.  The discharge of pool water into the sanitary sewer is
prohibited.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.27  WATER DISINFECTION.



   Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool water by
the use of chlorine compounds, and shall have sufficient capacity to maintain
a minimum free chlorine residual of 0.5 parts per million.  The disinfectant
shall be introduced into the recirculation system ahead of the filters. 
Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be used for disinfecting pool water. 
A test kit with permanent color standards shall be provided at all pools and
be used at frequent intervals to check the adequacy of chlorine treatment.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)



§ 158.28  ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All electrical installations provided for, installed and used
in conjunction with private residential swimming pools shall be in
conformance with the National Electrical Code.



   (B)   No current-carrying electrical conductors shall cross private
residential swimming pools, either overhead or underground or within 15 feet
of such pools.



   (C)   All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to
private residential swimming pools, which might become electrically alive as
a result of contact with broken overhead conductors, or from any other cause,
shall be effectively grounded.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.29  SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.



   (A)   A skilled swimmer shall be present at all times that private
residential swimming pools are in use.



   (B)   Every private residential swimming pool shall be equipped with
one or more throwing ring buoys not more than 15 inches in diameter and
having 60 feet of 3/16 inch Manila line attached, and one or more light but
strong poles with blunted ends and not less than 12 feet in length, for
making reach assists or rescues.



   (C)   No diving board or platform more than three feet above the
water level shall be installed for use in connection with any private
residential swimming pools.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.30  OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   No private residential swimming pool shall be used between
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   (B)   All private residential swimming pools shall be maintained in
a clean and sanitary condition, and all equipment shall be maintained in a
satisfactory operating condition during periods the pool is in use.



   (C)   No private residential swimming pool shall be used, kept,
maintained or operated in the village if such use, keeping, maintaining or
operating shall be the occasion of any nuisance or shall be dangerous to life
or detrimental to health.  No nude bathing will be allowed at any time.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.31  INSPECTION.



   The Village Health Officer, or the Health Officer's representative,
shall inspect all private residential swimming pools to determine whether the
provisions of this chapter regarding health, sanitation, and safety are being
complied with.  If the Health Officer finds that the operation of such pool
does not meet the requirements of this chapter, the Health Officer shall
direct that the pool be closed until the requirements are met.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)



§ 158.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter, shall upon conviction be fined not less than
$1 nor more than $500 for each offense.  Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.  The Building
Commissioner is hereby designated and authorized to enforce this chapter.



   (B)   In the event any private residential swimming pool shall be
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, maintained or used
in violation of this chapter, the Building Commissioner, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the
unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use; to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in
or about the premises; or to restrain, correct, or abate the violation.



(Ord. 179-62, passed 7-17-62)



CHAPTER 159:  ZONING CODE



Section



   159.01   Incorporation by reference



§ 159.01  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   Zoning Ordinance 688-90, passed 2-6-90, is hereby incorporated by
reference, as said Zoning Ordinance has been and is amended from time to
time, as if fully set forth herein.  Copies shall be maintained on file in
the office of the Village Clerk for public inspection during normal business
hours.



(Am. Ord. 800-94, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 1011-98, passed 11-3-98; Am. Ord.
1020-99, passed 3-16-99; Am. Ord. 1021-99, passed 3-16-99; Am. Ord. 1026-99,
passed 6-15-99; Am. Ord. 1075-01, passed 2-6-01; Am. Ord. 1088-01, passed
5-1-01; Am. Ord. 1122-02, passed 1-15-02; Am. Ord. 1131-02, passed 4-16-02;
Am. Ord. 1186-03, passed 11-4-03; Am. Ord. 1188-03, passed 12-2-03; Am. Ord.
1227-04, passed 10-19-04; Am. Ord. 1234-05, passed 2-1-05; Am. Ord. 1253-05,
passed 5-3-05; Am. Ord. 1255-05, passed 5-3-05; Am. Ord. 1287-06, passed
1-17-06; Am. Ord. 1290-06, passed 2-7-06; Am. Ord. 1314-06, passed 5-2-06;
Am. Ord.1315-06, passed 5-2-06; Am. Ord. 1316-06, passed 5-2-06; Am. Ord.
1335-06, passed 9-19-06; Am. Ord. 1343-06, passed 12-5-06; Am. Ord. 1355-06,
passed 12-5-06; Am. Ord. 1356-06, passed 12-19-06; Am. Ord. 1382-07, passed
6-5-07; Am. Ord. 1386-07, passed 6-5-07; Am. Ord. 1433-08, passed 4-1-08; Am.
Ord. 1446-08, passed  - -08; Am. Ord. 1481-09, passed 11-18-08; Am. Ord.
1469-09, passed 3-3-09; Am. Ord. 1520-10, passed 3-16-10; Am. Ord. 1527-10,
passed 5-18-10; Am. Ord. 1533-10, passed 7-20-10; Am. Ord. 1541-10, passed
8-17-10; Am. Ord. 1548-10, passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 1549-10, passed
10-19-10; Am. Ord. 1605-12, passed 1-17-12; Am. Ord. 1629-12, passed 7-3-12;
Am. Ord. 1679-13, passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 1818-16, passed 10-4-16)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table




         I.   ACCEPTANCES AND DEDICATIONS





         II.   ANNEXATIONS AND DISCONNECTIONS





         III.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS





         IV.   EASEMENTS





         V.   FRANCHISES





         VI.   HISTORIC DISTRICTS





         VII.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS





         VIII.   STREET NAME CHANGES





         IX.   VACATIONS





         X.   ZONING MAP CHANGES





         XI.   BONDS




TABLE I:  ACCEPTANCES AND DEDICATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




348-71
 
3-2-71
 
Acceptance of dedication of Catalpa Street


465-77
 
6-7-77
 
Acceptance of dedication of portion of relocated Nordic Road


511-1981
 
1-6-81
 
Acceptance of dedication of Park Boulevard


516-1981
 
7-21-81
 
Acceptance of dedication of Pierce Road


734-91
 
10-22-91
 
Acceptance of dedication of certain property owned by the Forest Preserve
District.


967-97
 
9-16-97
 
Accepting dedication of land for roadway purposes, Catalpa Avenue.


1331-06
 
9-5-06
 
Accepting dedication of land, Spring Brook Creek - Marianna Subdivision.


1375-07
 
4-3-07
 
Accepting a dedication in the Sanyo/Unisource Office Planned Development (850
- 900 Arlington Heights Road).


1531-10
 
6-29-10
 
Accepting the preliminary plan for the Coghill/Thorndale Planned Development,
approving the preliminary plan of subdivision and approving the site plan for
certain real property located at and adjacent to 1475-1485 Thorndale Avenue.


1639-12
 
11-20-12
 
Accepting a plat of dedication for Harmony Court.


 
 




 



TABLE II:  ANNEXATIONS AND DISCONNECTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




173-62
 
3-13-62
 
Annexing four parcels of land, including part of Route 53.


164-61
 
11-28-61
 
Annexing certain territory together with an accurate map of the annexed
territory, which is attached to Ord. 164-61.


181-62
 
8-21-62
 
Annexing certain territory described as that part of section 7, township 40
north, range 11 east, beginning at the southwest corner of said section 7.


200-63
 
8-20-63
 
Annexing certain territory, together with those portions of Thorndale Avenue
and Illinois State Route 53 lying within the boundaries of said annexed
territory.


202-63
 
8-20-63
 
Annexing lot 4 in Mahler's Addition.


214-64
 
5-19-64
 
Annexing lot 1 in Addison Township Supervisors' Assessment Plat 10; annexing
lot B in George Kraft's Resubdivision.


222-64
 
10-6-64
 
Annexing certain territory described as that part of the southeast quarter of
section 6, township 40 north, range 11 east of the Third Principal Meridian.


227-65
 
2-23-65
 
Annexing part of lot 26 in Addison Township Supervisors' Assessment Plat 14.


236-65
 
9-7-65
 
Annexing lot 26 (except the south 160 feet thereof), in Addison Township
Supervisors Assessment Plat 14.


258-66
 
9-20-66
 
Annexing certain property owned by William and Mary Gossage.


 
 
Parcel 1.  That part of the northwest quarter of section 7, township 40
north, range 11 east of the Third Principal Meridian.


 
 
Parcel 2.  Commencing at the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of
fractional section 7, township 40 north, range 11 east of the Third Principal
Meridian.


 
 
Parcel 3.  Commencing at the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of
fractional section 7, township 40 north, range 11 east of the Third Principal
Meridian.


 
 
Parcel 4.  Commencing at the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of
fractional section 7, township 40 north, range 11 east of the Third Principal
Meridian.


268-67
 
9-19-67
 
Annexing certain territory described as lot 2 in block 1 in McIntosh Brothers
Incorporated Fairway Park.


275-68
 
7-2-68
 
Annexing certain territory now inhabited and owned by Joseph and Marie Gorka.


277-68
 
7-3-68
 
Annexing property held in trust by Elmhurst National Bank for Kenneth and
Shirley Morgan.


279-68
 
7-30-68
 
Annexing certain territory inhabited and owned by Joseph and Stella Siksnus.


284-68
 
10-15-68
 
Annexing west portion of right-of-way of Prospect Road.


285-68
 
10-15-68
 
Annexing east portion of right-of-way of Prospect Road.


302-69
 
12-16-69
 
Annexing lot 1 in Luehring's Lawrence Avenue Gardens.


303-69
 
12-16-69
 
Annexing certain property owned by Central National Bank of Chicago.


310-70
 
1-6-70
 
Annexing certain property owned by Elmhurst National Bank.


311-70
 
1-6-70
 
Annexing certain property owned by Robert and Hazel Slater.


313-70
 
1-20-70
 
Annexing certain territory including all parts of the rights-of-way of roads
and highways abutting same, described on Exhibit A attached to Ord. 313-70.


314-70
 
5-5-70
 
Annexing certain property owned by Elmhurst National Bank.


316-70
 
6-2-70
 
Annexing certain property owned by Chicago Title and Trust Company.


322-70
 
7-7-70
 
Annexing part of southeast quarter of northwest quarter of section 1,
township 40 north, range 10 east; also lots 8 and 9 in Branigar's Medinah
Terrace; also parts of Crest, Meacham and Circle Roads.


325-70
 
7-21-70
 
Annexing certain territory described as that portion of the west half of the
southeast quarter of section 5, township 40 north, range 11 east of the Third
Principal Meridian; also lots 1, 2, and 3 of Koller's Subdivision.


326-70
 
8-18-70
 
Annexing certain property owned by Commonwealth Edison Company.


328-70
 
8-18-70
 
Annexing certain territory described as lots 12, 13, and 14 of Addison
Township Supervisor's Assessment Plat Number 14.


329-70
 
8-18-70
 
Annexing certain territory described as part of a large tract of land in that
part of fractional section 6, township 40 north, range 11 east of the Third
Principal Meridian.


333-70
 
10-6-70
 
Annexing certain property owned by Homer and Lorraine Langguth et al.


334-70
 
10-20-70
 
Annexing certain property owned by Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc.


339-70
 
11-17-70
 
Annexing two parcels of land held in trust by Wheaton National Bank.


340-70
 
11-17-70
 
Annexing certain territory described as the east four acres of the west 12
acres of the south one-half of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter
of section 5-10-11, lying east of the Third Principal Meridian.


344-71
 
1-5-71
 
Annexing certain property owned by Henry and Thelma Keyworth.


346-71
 
2-16-71
 
Annexing 15.60 acres and 35 acres of land, more or less, owned by Henry and
Anne Lauterbach and Olive and Forest Warren.


350-71
 
3-16-71
 
Annexing certain territory described as the east 40 feet of the Percy Wilson
Irving Park Country Club Subdivision.


351-71
 
3-16-71
 
Annexing certain territory described as lot 15 in block 1 in Percy Wilson
Irving Park Country Club Subdivision.


352-71
 
4-6-71
 
Annexing approximately 60 acres surrounding village, except that part falling
within Thorndale Avenue and F.A.I. Route 90.


356-71
 
5-18-71
 
Annexing certain property held in trust by Chicago Title and Trust Company
and by Oak Park National Bank.


360-71
 
6-1-71
 
Annexing certain property owned by Raymond and Loretta Forke.


363-71
 
7-20-71
 
Annexing certain property owned by Melvin and Viola Smith.


365-71
 
7-20-71
 
Annexing certain territory described as lot 1 (except the south 200 feet, as
measured on the east and west lines thereof) of Thornton's Assessment Plat.


376-72
 
3-21-72
 
Annexing certain property owned by Ralston Purina Company.


384-72
 
5-16-72
 
Annexing certain territory described as lot 3 in Tonne Farm Assessment Plat.


388-72
 
5-16-72
 
Annexing certain property owned by Elmer and Dorothy Tonne.


394-72
 
8-15-72
 
Annexing certain territory including the rights-of-way of Devon Avenue and
Thorndale Avenue.


397-72
 
8-15-72
 
Annexing certain property owned by the Cheker Oil Company.


400-72
 
9-5-72
 
Annexing certain territory described as lots 1 and 2 in Harold Pfluger's
Assessment Plat.


405-72
 
12-5-72
 
Annexing certain territory described as lot 7 in Tonne Farm Assessment Plat.


407-73
 
1-2-73
 
Annexing certain property owned by W.E. Gould and Company and by Midwest Bank
and Trust Company (as Trustee).


410-73
 
2-6-73
 
Annexing certain property owned by Edgar and Elsie Bunge and by KPK
Corporation.


415-73
 
4-17-73
 
Annexing certain property owned by DuPage County.


416-73
 
5-15-73
 
Annexing certain property owned by Itasca Park District.


421-73
 
6-5-73
 
Annexing certain property owned by Carson International Inc.


428-73
 
11-6-73
 
Annexing certain property owned by Commonwealth Edison Company.


430-73
 
11-20-73
 
Annexing part of lot 1 in block 1 of Itasca Ranchettes.


436-74
 
5-7-74
 
Repeals Ord. 353-71; also annexes approximately 60 acres surrounding village
(except that portion falling within F.A.I. Route 90).


460-77
 
2-15-77
 
Annexing certain property owned by Francis and Joyce Novack.


489-78
 
12-5-78
 
Annexing certain property owned by Jean Klingler and by U.S. Shelter, Inc.


497-79
 
6-19-79
 
Annexing certain territory owned by Trammell Crow Company.


500-79
 
11-27-79
 
Disconnecting certain territory from the Kane-DuPage Soil and Water
Conservation District.


527-82
 
3-16-82
 
Annexing certain property owned by the Lutheran Church of St. Luke.


546-83
 
3-15-83
 
Annexing certain property owned by St. Matthew's Evangelical Lutheran Church.


559-84
 
3-27-84
 
Annexing certain territory described as that part of section 17, township 40
north, range 11 east and beginning at a point on the north line of said
section.


561-84
 
5-1-84
 
Annexing certain property owned by Maurice and Adeline Gaston.


565-84
 
6-26-84
 
Annexing certain territory described as the south 195.56 feet (except the
south 33 feet thereof) of the west half of the southwest quarter of the
southwest quarter of section 5, township 40 north, range 11 east of the Third
Principal Meridian.


586-85
 
6-11-85
 
Annexing certain property owned by Glen Neis and other property owned by the
Bank of Wheaton (Trustee).


589-85
 
7-2-85
 
Annexing certain property owned by Richard and Catherine Buff.


610-86
 
6-17-86
 
Annexing certain property owned by La Salle National Bank (Trustee).


621-87
 
1-13-87
 
Annexing the AMLI property.


643-87
 
12-15-87
 
Annexing certain territory described as lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, in Bloomington
Township Supervisor's Assessment Plat No. 1 (also known as Medinah Farm
Estates).


653-88
 
5-24-88
 
Annexing two parcels of land owned by Itasca Park District.


654-88
 
6-7-88
 
Annexing certain property owned by Michael and Julie Mariottini.


671-89
 
5-6-89
 
Annexing certain territory owned by the Regional Board of School Trustees.


691-90
 
4-24-90
 
Annexing certain territory owned by Byoung I. Suh and Minsook Suh.


702-90
 
9-18-90
 
Annexing certain territory being lots 6 and 7 in Bloomingdale Township
Supervisors Assessment Plat No. 1.


708-91
 
2-19-91
 
Annexing certain territory owned by Joseph L. Imesch.


725-91
 
9-3-91
 
Annexing certain territory owned by the Church Extension Board of the
Presbytery of Chicago.


769-93
 
4-6-93
 
Annexing certain territory owned by Emro Marketing Company and Suburban
National Bank of Palatine.


779-93
 
4-20-93
 
Annexing certain territory owned by That's Entertainment, Inc. and Harris
Bank/St. Charles.


782-93
 
4-20-93
 
Annexing certain territory owned by the Elk Grove Park District and Carl J.
and Maxine Kruger, Mary Babbitt, and John Schenk.


785-93
 
4-20-93
 
Annexing certain territory owned by Evelyn Krieger, Lois Sislow, Monte Ford,
the Itasca Bank & Trust Co., and Kimball Hill.


805-94
 
5-10-94
 
Annexing 19 W. 140 Granville.


811-94
 
7-5-94
 
Annexing Lot 1 in Block 2 in Itasca Ranchettes, being a subdivision in the
East Half of Section 12, Township 40 North, Range 10, East of the Third
Principal Meridian, located at the southwest corner of Lloyd Avenue and
Irving Park Road.


815-94
 
7-26-94
 
Annexing the south 1/2 of the northeast 1/4 of the southwest 1/4 (except the
east four acres and the west twelve acres thereof) in section 5, township 40
north, range 11, east of the third principal meridian, except that part
dedicated for public highway.


816-94
 
8-23-94
 
Annexing Lot 7 together with that part of Thorndale Ave. lying south of and
adjacent to said lot 7 in Branigan's Medinah Terrace Unit No. 3, a
subdivision in the southwest quarter of Section 1, Township 40 North, Range
10, East of the Third Principal Meridian, and being a part of Block 8, in
Branigan's Medinah Terrace Unit No. 2, East of the Third Principal Meridian,
according to the plat thereof.


824-94
 
9-27-94
 
Annexing village-owned property, called Sipp Strip, containing 1.745 acres,
including all parts of the right-of-way of Interstate 290 lying west of said
property and abutting the same.


848-95
 
8-8-95
 
Annexing 470 South Oak Street.


851-95
 
11-14-95
 
Annexing three parts measured on the south line of that part of the north
half of the southeast quarter of section 1, township 40 north, range 10, east
of the third principal meridian.


869-96
 
1-16-96
 
Annexing the Busse property, described as Lot 10 in Addison Township
Supervisor's Assessment Plat No. 10.


871-96
 
1-16-96
 
Annexing the Pope property, described as Lot 6 (except the west 17 feet
thereof) in Addison Township Supervisor's Assessment Plat #10.


873-96
 
1-16-96
 
Annexing the Ricciardi property, described as Lot 8 in Addison Township
Supervisor's Assessment Plat number 10.


875-96
 
1-16-96
 
Annexing the Schmalbeck property, described as Lot 9 in Addison Township
Supervisor's Assessment Plat no. 10.


877-96
 
1-16-96
 
Annexing the Maple property, described as Lot 7 in Addison Township
Supervisor's Assessment Plat no. 10.


881-96
 
2-6-96
 
Annexing the Georgiafentis property (5N770 Lombard Road).


882-96
 
2-6-96
 
Annexing the Georgiafentis property (5N750 Lombard Road).


884-96
 
1-16-96
 
Annexing the O'Connor property, described as that part of the northeast
quarter of section 18, township 40 north, range 11, east of the third
principal meridian and beginning at the northeast corner.


911-96
 
5-14-96
 
Annexing the Arbor property, described as the north 318.74 feet of Lot 4 of
Tonne Farm Assessment Plat of part of section 17, township 40 north, range 11
east.


913-96
 
5-14-96
 
Adopting an annexation agreement between Itasca Bank & Trust Company and the
village.


920-96
 
6-25-96
 
Annexing Citadel Homes.


934-1996
 
10-1-96
 
Annexing two tracts of territory:


 
 
(1)   The east 69.49 feet (measured on the north line thereof) of Tract 11
of the north half of the southwest quarter of section 1, township 40 north,
range 10.


 
 
(2)   Tract 10 of Assessment Plat 1, being an assessment plat of the
southeast quarter of section 1, township 40 north, range 10.


939-96
 
11-19-96
 
Annexing the northwest corner of Rohlwing and Nordic Roads.


940-96
 
11-19-96
 
Annexing 20 W 052 Bryn Mawr.


941-96
 
11-19-96
 
Annexing 520 N. Mill Road.


942-96
 
11-19-96
 
Annexing 19 W 475 George Street.


946-97
 
1-21-97
 
Annexing 7 N 731 North Arlington Heights Road.


947-97
 
3-11-97
 
Annexing certain Willow Street properties.


969-97
 
9-16-97
 
Annexing the Hamilton Partners/Bloomingdale Bank property, described as the
south ½ of Lot 5, the south ½ of the north ½ of said Lot 5, and the north
½ of Lot 6.


971-97
 
9-16-97
 
Annexing 625 Devon Avenue.


994-98
 
5-12-98
 
Annexing the southeast corner of Parkside Business Park.


1008-98
 
11-3-98
 
Annexing Dierking Property at the southwest corner of Parkside Business Park.


1046-00
 
1-18-00
 
Annexing Scalzitti Property/Clover Ridge.


1048-00
 
3-7-00
 
Annexing Hari Heights/Percy Wilson Resubdivision.


1084-01
 
4-17-01
 
Annexing 7 North 665 Arlington Heights Road.


1093-01
 
6-19-01
 
Annexing 7 North 651 Arlington Heights Road.


1094-01
 
6-19-01
 
Annexing 7 North 717 Arlington Heights Road.


1104-01
 
9-18-01
 
Annexing 1.3 acres located at the northeast corner of Granville Avenue and
Parkside Avenue (Itasca Oaks).


1115-01
 
12-18-01
 
Annexing 19 W 626 Pierce Road.


1116-01
 
12-18-01
 
Annexing 19 W 720 Pierce Road.


1117-01
 
12-18-01
 
Annexing 19 W 427 Thorndale and 19 W 411 Thorndale.


1153-02
 
12-17-02
 
Annexing Maples of Itasca.


1163-03
 
7-1-03
 
Annexing 19 W 114 Granville Avenue.


1176-03
 
8-19-03
 
Annexing 5 N Rohlwing Road/Route 53.


1177-03
 
8-19-03
 
Annexing 5 N 430 Rohlwing Road/Route 53.


1196-04
 
3-2-04
 
Annexing 480 South Oak Street.


1223-04
 
10-5-04
 
Annexing 20 W 551 Nordic Road.


1224-04
 
10-10-04
 
Annexing 20 W 551 Nordic Road.


1242-05
 
4-19-05
 
Annexing 7 N 573 Rohlwing Road.


1271-05
 
9-20-05
 
Annexing 19 W 036 Granville Avenue.


1284-05
 
11-15-05
 
Annexing Lots 5 through 10 in Block 2 in Percy Wilson's County Club
Subdivision.


1324-06
 
7-11-06
 
Annexing certain property commonly known as the "Prospect Avenue Wastewater
Treatment Plant Parcel."


1423-07
 
12-18-07
 
Annexing Pinnacle Property, parcels 02-12-204-011 and 02-12-204-012.


1444-08
 
5-20-08
 
Annexing Parkview Property.


1494-09
 
7-28-09
 
Annexing property located at Prospect Avenue & Railway Intersection.


1545-10
 
9-7-10
 
Annexing Maslon Property, located at 19W130 Granville Avenue.


1611-12
 
2-21-12
 
Annexing Berlen property, located at 19W090 Granville Avenue.


 
 




 



TABLE III:  CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




331-70
 
9-1-70
 
Providing for the creation and participation by the village in a local mass
transit district.


506-80
 
9-2-80
 
Adopting the Intergovernmental Police Service Assistance Agreement.


535-82
 
9-28-82
 
Authorizing village membership in the Northern DuPage Cable Television Agency
(NORDCAT).


588-85
 
6-25-85
 
Accepting and authorizing the execution of a grant agreement between the
village and the Environmental Protection Agency.


629-87
 
6-23-87
 
Authorizing continuing membership in an existing intergovernmental agency
known as the Northern DuPage Cable Television Agency (NORDCAT) for an
additional term of five years.


690-90
 
4-24-90
 
Authorizing annexation agreement of certain territory owned by Byoung I. Suh
and Minsook Suh.


714-91
 
5-21-91
 
Authorizing the village to enter into an agreement with the village's hotels
on the use of 3% of the revenues generated from the village's hotel tax.


736-91
 
10-22-91
 
Authorizing the execution of settlement agreement between the village and
Walter and Wendy Ripley.


772-93
 
 
Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental water and sanitary sewer
service agreement with the Wood Dale Park District.


773-93
 
3-16-93
 
Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental easement agreement with the
Wood Dale Park District.


814-94
 
7-26-94
 
Making an annexation agreement between the village and the petitioners of
this property:  The south 1/2 of the northeast 1/4 of the southwest 1/4
(except the east four acres and the west twelve acres thereof) in section 5,
township 40 north, range 11, east of the third principal meridian, except
that part dedicated for public highway.


817-94
 
8-23-94
 
Entering into an Annexation Agreement with Marino Hilltop Subdivision over
the following annexation:  Lot 7 together with that part of Thorndale Ave.
lying south of and adjacent to said lot 7 in Branigan's Medinah Terrace Unit
No. 3, a subdivision in the southwest quarter of Section 1, Township 40
North, Range 10, East of the Third Principal Meridian, and being a part of
Block 8, in Branigan's Medinah Terrace Unit No. 2, East of the Third
Principal Meridian, according to the plat thereof.


853-95
 
11-14-95
 
Adopting an annexation agreement and directing the execution thereof (Gullo-
Rohlwing and Old Thorndale Roads).


853-95
 
12-12-95
 
Adopting an annexation agreement and directing the execution thereof
(Pormals).


854-95
 
12-12-95
 
Adopting an annexation agreement and directing the execution thereof (Hallin).


855-95
 
12-12-95
 
Adopting an annexation agreement and directing the execution thereof
(Geschrey).


870-96
 
1-16-96
 
Adopting an annexation agreement and directing the execution thereof (Busse).


872-96
 
1-16-96
 
Adopting an annexation agreement and directing the execution thereof (Pope).


874-96
 
1-16-96
 
Adopting an annexation agreement and directing the execution thereof
(Ricciardi).


876-96
 
1-16-96
 
Adopting an annexation agreement and directing the execution thereof
(Schmalbeck).


878-96
 
1-16-96
 
Adopting an annexation agreement and directing the execution thereof (Maple).


880-96
 
2-6-96
 
Adopting an annexation agreement and directing the execution thereof
(Georgiafentis, 5N770 Lombard Rd.).


883-96
 
2-6-96
 
Adopting an annexation agreement and directing the execution thereof
(Georgiafentis, 5N750 Lombard Rd.).


885-96
 
1-16-96
 
Adopting an annexation agreement and directing the execution thereof
(O'Connor).


886-96
 
1-16-96
 
Adopting an annexation agreement and directing the execution thereof
(Raimondi).


916-96
 
6-4-96
 
Approving and directing the execution of a recapture agreement between Sanyo
North America Corporation and the village.


921-96
 
6-25-96
 
Authorizing adoption and execution of an annexation agreement (Citadel Homes).


928-96
 
8-13-96
 
Approving lease agreement (Paging Network of Illinois, Inc.).


930-96
 
9-3-96
 
Approving and directing the execution of a recapture agreement between Mitco,
Inc. and the village.


944-97
 
1-21-97
 
Approving and directing the execution of the annexation agreement between
Emro Marketing Co. and the village.


960-97
 
7-15-97
 
Approving and directing the execution of an agreement between the village and
Jay Eageny.


968-97
 
9-16-97
 
Adopting an annexation agreement between the village and Hamilton Partners
Office Division #1, Inc. and Hamilton Ranches.


989-98
 
4-7-98
 
Approving and directing the execution of a recapture agreement between the
village and the Tantillo Corporation.


1024-99
 
6-15-99
 
Canceling the obligation of the cable television franchise to construct an
institutional network.


1039-99
 
11-2-99
 
Authorizing execution of a water and sewer agreement for the Chancellory
Office Park ROC District.


1049-00
 
3-7-00
 
Approving and directing the execution of the annexation agreement of the Hari
Heights/Percy Wilson Resubdivision.


1106-01
 
9-18-01
 
Approving and directing the execution of an annexation agreement with G.
Carey Construction Co. for Itasca Oaks.


1162-03
 
7-1-03
 
Approving and directing the execution of an annexation agreement with Jack
and Lauriel Boryszewski for 19 W 114 Granville Avenue.


1311-06
 
5-2-06
 
Authorizing the disposal of certain surplus Police Department equipment.


1317-06
 
6-20-07
 
Authorizing the disposal of certain surplus Public Works vehicles and
miscellaneous equipment.


1323-06
 
7-11-06
 
Authorizing the annexation of certain property commonly known as the
"Prospect Avenue Wastewater Treatment Plant Parcel."


1332-06
 
8-15-06
 
Authorizing the disposal of certain surplus Public Works vehicle and Police
Department equipment.


1336-06
 
9-19-06
 
Authorizing the disposal of certain surplus Police Department equipment.


1344-06
 
11-21-06
 
Authorizing the disposal of certain surplus Public Works equipment.


1358-06
 
12-19-06
 
Authorizing the disposal of certain surplus Public Works vehicle and Police
Department equipment.


1362-07
 
1-9-07
 
Authorizing the conveyance of certain real property to Itsaca School District
#10.


1369-07
 
3-20-07
 
Authorizing the disposal of obsolete inventory - Old Village Hall.


1387-07
 
6-19-07
 
Authorizing the disposal of certain surplus Public Works equipment (tractor).


1397-07
 
9-4-07
 
Authorizing the disposal of certain surplus Public Works vehicles and
miscellaneous equipment.


1476-09
 
1-27-09
 
Authorizing execution of a revised water supply agreement and grant of
sanitary and water line easement with the Itasca Country Club for the
Prospect Avenue wastewater treatment facility.


1482-09
 
3-10-09
 
Terminating the 1990 water supply agreement between the village and Itasca
Country Club, Inc.


1474-09
 
1-20-09
 
Authorizing execution of a water supply agreement with the Itasca Country
Club for the Prospect Avenue Wastewater Treatment Facility.


1484-09
 
5-19-09
 
Authorizing execution of a revised water supply agreement with the Itasca
Country Club for the Prospect Avenue Wastewater Treatment Facility.


1485-09
 
5-19-09
 
Revising the termination of the 1990 Water Supply Agreement between the
village and Itasca Country Club, Inc.


1525-10
 
5-11-10
 
Approving amended and restated installment purchase agreements.


1538-10
 
8-17-10
 
Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement with the Itasca
Park District to provide for the conveyance and exchange of certain real
estate commonly known as the Schiller Detention Basin and Pump House Parcels.


1616-12
 
4-3-12
 
Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement with neighboring
municipalities for the Northern Illinois Police Alarm System (NIPAS).


 
 




 



TABLE IV:  EASEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




418-73
 
6-5-73
 
Granting easements from the village to Cove Development Co. in and upon the
public park dedicated by Colonial Gardens Unit No. 1.


750-92
 
11-24-92
 
Authorizing Commonwealth Edison Company to use the public ways and other
public property in conjunction with its construction, operation and
maintenance of an electric system in and through the village.


807-94
 
12-27-94
 
Granting an easement for 200 N. Maple for perpetual non-exclusive ingress and
egress, over, across, along and upon certain premises.


990-98
 
4-7-98
 
Approving and authorizing execution of public utility easement agreements for
Devon Avenue water main.


1066-00
 
9-5-00
 
Abrogating a water main easement and approving a plat of abrogation of the
Clover Ridge Subdivision.


1295-06
 
2-7-06
 
Approving plat of easement for property located at the southwest corner of
Arlington Heights Road and New Pierce Road.


1474-09
 
1-20-09
 
Authorizing grant of sanitary easement with the Itasca Country Club for the
Prospect Avenue Wastewater Treatment Facility.


1475-09
 
1-20-09
 
Authorizing the acquisition of a transmission line right-of-way easement with
Commonwealth Edison Company for the Prospect Avenue Wastewater Treatment
Facility.


1484-09
 
5-19-09
 
Authorizing grant of forcemain and treated effluent waterline easement with
the Itasca Country Club for the Prospect Avenue Wastewater Treatment Facility.


1486-09
 
5-12-09
 
Authorizing the acquisition of an outfall sewer easement from the Forest
Preserve District of DuPage County for the Prospect Avenue Wastewater
Treatment Facility.


1499-09
 
8-18-09
 
Authorizing the execution of an easement agreement for the acquisition of
certain non-exclusive permanent and temporary easements for the Prospect
Avenue Wastewater Treatment Facility.


1661-13
 
6-18-13
 
Accepting the dedication of a utility easement at Arlington Thorndale
Resubdivision.


1662-13
 
6-18-13
 
Vacating a utility easement at Arlington Thorndale Resubdivision.


 
 




 



TABLE V:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




487-78
 
10-3-78
 
Granting to Illinois Bell Telephone Company a franchise to construct,
maintain and operate fixtures and equipment for conduct of a general
telephone business.


500 A-79
 
3-20-79
 
Granting 50-year franchise to Northern Illinois Gas Company to construct,
operate and maintain gas distributing system in village.


534-82
 
9-28-82
 
Granting a non-exclusive franchise to Metro Vision of DuPage County No. 2,
Inc. for the operation of a community antenna television system.


575-84
 
- -84
 
Amending Ord. 487-78, described above.


806-94
 
5-10-94
 
Continuing franchise of the Illinois Bell Telephone Company for another 10
years.


844-95
 
3-21-95
 
Approving transfer of the Itasca Cable Television Franchise held by
Metrovision of Du Page County No. 2, Inc. to Time Warner
Entertainment/Advance Newhouse Partnership.


988-98
 
3-17-98
 
Granting an extension of the current non- exclusive cable television
franchise held by Time Warner Entertainment - Advance/Newhouse Partnership
until September 1, 1998.


1002-98
 
8-18-98
 
Granting an extension of the current non-exclusive cable television franchise
held by the Time Warner Entertainment-Advance/Newhouse Partnership for 180
days beginning September 1, 1998.


1016-99
 
2-16-99
 
Granting an extension of the current non-exclusive cable television franchise
held by Time Warner Entertainment-Advance/Newhouse Partnership to June 1,
1999.


1070-00
 
10-3-00
 
Approving a renewal of the existing cable television franchise agreement with
Heritage Cablevision of Maine II, Inc.


 
 




 



TABLE VI:  HISTORIC DISTRICTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description


648-88
 
- - 88
 
Designating all that territory lying within the boundaries commencing at the
center lines of Division Street and Maple Street as Historic District, 1987.


720-91
 
7-16-91
 
Enlarging the boundaries of the Historic Preservation District to include the
territory declared as Historic District, 1991.


964-98
 
1-20-98
 
Allowing for special parking provisions in the Itasca Historic Preservation
District.


 
 



 



TABLE VII:  REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




216
 
- -
 
Lease of Lot 3 of Original Town of Itasca, and the Elm Street right-of-way,
all south of Spring Brook, and north of C M St. P & P RR right-of-way for a
term from June 1, 1964 to December 31, 1965 and annually thereafter until
cancelled.


259-67
 
1-3-67
 
Authorizing transfer of lands to the Itasca Park District.


270-68
 
1-16-68
 
Authorizing transfer of lands to the Itasca Park District.


292-69
 
6-17-69
 
Authorizing sale of village property to the State of Illinois for the use of
the Department of Public Works and Buildings, and entering into agreement
concerning land for temporary easement, and entering into a right-of-entry
agreement.


338-70
 
11-17-70
 
Authorizing transfer of lands to the Itasca Park District.


390-72
 
6-20-72
 
Authorizing transfer and conveyance of real estate to Itasca Fire Protection
District No. 1.


479-78
 
3-21-78
 
Requesting transfer of lands from the Itasca Park District to the Village of
Itasca.


503-80
 
5-6-80
 
Confirming land acquisition purchase of more than five acres of vacant land
commonly called "The Triangle," located between Irving Park Road,
Bloomingdale Road, and Walnut Avenue, except for the Shell Oil premises at
the northwesterly end.


508-80
 
9-23-80
 
Authorizing transfer of lands to the Itasca Park District.


576-85
 
2-5-85
 
Conveying village real estate to the State of Illinois.


793-93
 
8-10-93
 
Authorizing transfer of village property being frontage to Prospect Road at
the location of the village public works facility to the County of DuPage.


807-94
 
12-27-94
 
Exchanging real estate (200 N. Maple) with a private party and granting an
easement.  Details can be found in the exhibits A and B located in the
Village Clerk's Office along with this ordinance.


1013-98
 
12-15-98
 
Approving plat of subdivision and engineering plan for Itasca Heights first
resubdivision.


1187-03
 
11-18-03
 
Authorizing acquisition of certain property commonly known as a portion of
the Prospect Avenue Waste Water Treatment Plant Parcel.


1189-03
 
12-2-03
 
Approving plat of resubdivision for 118 East Washington Street.


1211-04
 
7-6-04
 
Authorizing acquisition of certain property commonly know as the Prospect
Avenue Parcel.


1318-06
 
6-13-06
 
Requesting conveyance of certain property from Itasca School District #10 to
the Village of Itasca (Franzen School - Bryn Mawr Avenue).


1414-07
 
12-18-07
 
Authorizing the acquisition of certain property commonly known as the Itasca
Riverwalk Project/Hejny parcel by the village.


1416-07
 
12-18-07
 
Authorizing the acquisition of certain property commonly known as the Itasca
Riverwalk Project/Butler parcel by the village.


1554-10
 
11-17-10
 
Approving the final planned development plan for the Thorndale/Coghill
Planned Development and approving final plat of subdivision for certain real
property located at and adjacent to 1475-1485 Thorndale Avenue.


1559-11
 
1-18-11
 
Approving preliminary and final plat of subdivision for 464 South Maple
Street.


1581-11
 
6-21-11
 
Approving a plat of subdivision for 205 West North Street (Wuckert
Subdivision).


1600-11
 
12-13-11
 
Amending the Chancellory at Hamilton Lakes Concept Plan for Pierce Tower
(a.k.a. One Pierce Place).


1696-14
 
5-20-14
 
Authorizing execution of a memorandum of lease and a first amendment to lease
agreement between the village and American Tower Asset Sub, LLC.


1720-14
 
12-16-14
 
Approving a plat of subdivision for 752 Rohlwing Road (Aspito).


1744-15
 
5-5-15
 
Amending the Chancellory at Hamilton Lakes Concept Plan and a special use
permit, and approving a plat of subdivision and a Class I Site Plan for the
vacant lot just east of 2 Pierce Road (Piedmont).


1747-15
 
6-16-15
 
Approving a subdivision of the vacant real estate immediately south of 1145
N. Arlington Heights Road (The Residences at Hamilton Lakes).


1748-15
 
6-16-15
 
Approving a special use permit for planned development with departures and
granting Class I Site Plan approval for the real estate situated south of
1145 N. Arlington Heights Road.


1774-1
 
11-17-15
 
Amending the Chancellory at Hamilton Lakes Concept Plan and a Class I Site
Plan for the property at the southeast corner of Park Boulevard and Pierce
Road (American Academy of Pediatrics).


1775-15
 
12-1-15
 
Authorizing a lease of a portion of 1 Pierce Place.


1780-15
 
12-1-15
 
Approving a plat of consolidation for the Itasca Park District for property
at 350 E. Irving Park Road and Washington Park.


1791-16
 
2-16-16
 
Granting a special use permit and approving a Class I site plan for 1375 N.
Arlington Heights Road (Elk Grove Park District).


1795-16
 
3-1-16
 
Granting approval for a Class I site plan, a special use permit and variance
for 524 North Rush Street (St. Peter the Apostle Catholic Parish).


1796-16
 
3-1-16
 
Approving and accepting a plat of dedication for a portion of North Rush
Street.


1803-16
 
6-7-16
 
Granting approval for a Class I site plan, a special use permit and Variances
for 100 South Walnut Street (Itasca Tap House).


1819-16
 
10-18-16
 
Approving a Class I site plan for 400 Park Boulevard (Westin Hotel).


1820-16
 
10-18-16
 
Approving a Class I site plan for 1325 Ardmore Avenue (APG Holdings).


1821-16
 
10-18-16
 
Approving a Class I site plan for 425 Spring Lake Drive (Gift of Hope).


1822-16
 
10-18-16
 
Approving a Class I site plan for 1050 Spring Lake Drive (Titan Electric/
Elmhurst 83, LLC).


1823-16
 
10-18-16
 
Approving a plat of subdivision for 425 and 1050 Spring Lake Drive (Gift of
Hope & Elmhurst 83, LLC).


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VIII:  STREET NAME CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




 
 
8-15-56
 
The following street names are hereby changed as follows:


 
 
 
 
(1)   Lombard Avenue North of Bloomingdale Road is changed to "Forest
Avenue."


 
 
 
 
(2)   Elsea Street is changed to "Catalpa Street."


 
 
 
 
(3)   Seminary Avenue between Irving Park Boulevard and Center Street is
changed to "Catalpa Street."


548-1983
 
5-17-83
 
Changing the name of Frontage Road to Park Boulevard West.


1097-01
 
8-7-01
 
Changing the name of Old Pierce Road between Arlington Heights Road and New
Pierce Road to Ketter Drive.


1490-09
 
7-7-09
 
Changing the name of Line Street to Gigi Gruber Lane.


1735-15
 
4-7-15
 
Changing the name of Park Boulevard West to Clover Ridge Lane.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IX:  VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




125-58
 
11-4-58
 
Vacating part of Oak Street in the village.


417-73
 
6-5-73
 
Vacating certain existing easements and abrogating certain building lines in
Colonial Gardens Unit No. 1.


439-74
 
8-6-74
 
Vacating parts of Linden, Rush, Orchard and Cherry Streets.


458-76
 
10-19-76
 
Vacating a part of the right-of-way over a portion of George Street.


517-81
 
7-21-81
 
Vacating all six parcels of old Pierce Road, as described in the Plat of
Vacation from the right-of-way of Pierce Road, and the village shall cease
its jurisdiction over said six parcels and terminate any maintenance thereon.


704-90
 
12-18-90
 
Vacating Second Street for its entire length of 300 feet.


819-94
 
9-6-94
 
Vacating and abandoning Rush Street between Washington Street and Irving Park
Road.


949-97
 
4-22-97
 
Vacating a part of Willow Street extending south of Irving Park Road.


1051-00
 
3-7-00
 
Vacating certain streets and alleys for Percy Wilson Resubdivision.


1064-00
 
9-5-00
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of unimproved Cherry Street north of North
Street.


1067-00
 
9-5-00
 
Vacating and abandoning parts of Pierce Road and accepting a plat of
dedication and vacation and plat of grant easements in the Chancellory Office
Park.


1102-01
 
9-18-01
 
Vacating and abandoning a portion of unimproved Bryn Mawr Avenue west of the
existing and improved Bryn Mawr Avenue.


1121-02
 
1-15-02
 
Affirming the vacation of certain streets and alleys for Percy Wilson
Resubdivision (Hari Heights).


1243-05
 
4-5-05
 
Vacating a portion of unimproved Cherry Street in the Sanyo/Unisource Office
Planned Development (850 - 900 Arlington Heights Road).


1345-06
 
11-21-06
 
Vacating a portion of unimproved Old Pierce Road at 19W626 Pierce Road.


1354-06
 
12-5-06
 
Vacating a portion of the dedicated but unimproved Elm Street right-of-way
from the Soo Line Railroad to Orchard Street.


1375-07
 
4-3-07
 
Vacating a portion of unimproved Cherry Street in the Sanyo/Unisource Office
Planned Development (850 - 900 Arlington Heights Road).


1379-07
 
4-17-07
 
Vacating a portion of unimproved Tall Oaks Lane in the Hidden Oaks Planned
Development (410 and 420 Thorndale Avenue).


1439-08
 
5-6-08
 
Authorizing plat of vacation to vacate a portion of Tall Oaks Lane and
utility easements located within the Hidden Oaks I Subdivision.


1645-13
 
1-15-13
 
Approving plat of vacation for a portion of the cul-de-sac on Harmony Court.


 
 




 



TABLE X:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




655-88
 
6-7-88
 
Rezoning lot 5 and the west 17 feet of lot 6 in Addison Township Supervisors'
Assessment Plat 10 from R-1 to R-2.


662-88
 
9-27-88
 
Rezoning lot 10 and 11 in Addison Township Supervisor's Assessment Plat 15
from R-1 to O-R.


678-89
 
9-5-89
 
Rezoning certain territory located on the west half of lot 2 of the northwest
quarter of Section 1, Township 40 North, Range 10 from R-1 to M.


681-89
 
9-5-89
 
Rezoning lot 11, except the east 69.49 feet, in Bloomingdale Township
Supervisor's Assessment Plat 1 from R-1 to M.


684-89
 
9-5-89
 
Two parcels of land in Clarkson's Woodlands Assessment Plat, commonly known
as Medinah Woods Club from R-1 to PUD.


689-90
 
3-6-90
 
Rezoning Lot 1 and Outlot A in Block 8 in Itasca Estates Subdivision to B-2
Planned Development and Special Use.


703-90
 
9-18-90
 
Rezoning certain property owned by Industrial Development International, Inc.
from R-1 to an M-Limited Manufacturing District.


709-91
 
2-19-91
 
Zoning newly annexed territory owned by Joseph L. Imesch for classification
from R-1 to R-1 Special Use.


724-91
 
9-3-91
 
Zoning newly annexed territory owned by the Church Extension Board of the
Presbytery of Chicago for classification from R-1 to R-1, Special Use.


770-93
 
4-6-93
 
Zoning newly annexed territory owned by Emro Marketing Company and Suburban
National Bank of Palatine for classification as B-3 Special Use.


780-93
 
4-20-93
 
Zoning newly annexed territory owned by That's Entertainment, Inc. and Harris
Bank/St. Charles for classification as B-3 Service Business District as a
Special Use for Planned Development.


783-93
 
4-20-93
 
Zoning newly annexed territory owned by Elk Grove Park District and Carl J.
and Maxine Kruger, Mary Babbitt, and John Schenk for classification as R-1
Single Family Special Use.


786-93
 
4-20-93
 
Zoning newly annexed territory owned by Evelyn Krieger, Lois Sislow, Monte
Ford, Itasca Bank & Trust Co. for classification as R-3 General Residence
District with a Special Use for a Planned Development.


813-94
 
7-26-94
 
Zoning the property annexed in Ord. 815- 94 as R-3 with a special use
variations.


818-94
 
8-23-94
 
Rezoning from R-1 to R-3 the property annexed in Ord. 816-94.


825-94
 
10-11-94
 
Granting Harold Pfluger rezoning from B- 2 to B-3 on his property at 1215
West Irving Road.


826-94
 
11-15-94
 
New constructions is allowed at the Spring Lake Business Park for a 70,000
square foot building and landscaping.


827-94
 
11-15-94
 
Allowing variations to front yard and public street access requirements to
allow construction of a single family residence on Lot 9, just west of 438
Hickory Drive.


828-94
 
11-15-94
 
Rezoning from R-1 to ROC with variations to permit a free standing child care
center for the Evangelical Fellowship Chapel.


829-94
 
11-15-94
 
Granting variations to Lot 18, 330 North Hickory Drive.


830-94
 
11-15-94
 
Amending the zoning from B-2 to B-2 special use to permit the operation of an
office building with a residential use on the second floor of 107 Orchard and
owned by Stanislaw Slotwinski.


831-94
 
11-15-94
 
Allowing for a variance to section 10.07D.2 of the zoning ordinance for 225
Windsor Road Property for 190 stall satellite parking lot.


832-94
 
11-15-94
 
Approving creation of a tax division for the Steepleview Apartment Planned
Development Complex Assessment Plat and Declaration of Protective Covenants
and amending the zoning ordinance in accordance with change.


833-94
 
11-15-94
 
Amending the zoning classification for the Spring Lake Executive Campus Phase
II Planned Development and Modification to Spring Lake Executive Campus
Planned Development Site Plan and Landscape Plan Dated December 15, 1988.


834-94
 
11-15-94
 
Approving a temporary special use permit allowing a portable concrete batch
plant to be operated on two acres located at Medinah/Meacham Roads and Crest
Avenue.


835-94
 
11-15-94
 
220 North Catalpa is rezoned from B-3 to B-3 Special Use to allow the
remodeling of the existing building.


841-95
 
2-21-95
 
Rezoning from M to B-2 and granting two variation property described as being
located at the northeast corner of Prospect Avenue and Irving Park Road.


852-95
 
11-14-95
 
Rezoning from I-1 to M for Gullo's property.


862-96
 
1-2-96
 
Rezoning of seven acres from R-1 to R-1 Special Use for property located on
the east side of Rohlwing Road south of Amli's Spring Lake Business Park,
1,000 feet north of Nordic Road.


863-96
 
1-2-96
 
Approving additional ground mounted sign at 333 Pierce Road Building/ROC
District.


864-96
 
1-2-96
 
Approving an amendment to the Medinah Woods Club planned development special
use ordinance (684-89) to allow a resubdivision (Savoy).


865-96
 
1-2-96
 
Amending Ordinance 689-90 modifying the planned development and special use
for 16.2 acres located at the southwest corner of Arlington Heights Road and
Thorndale Avenue for Sanyo North America Corporation.


866-96
 
1-2-96
 
Approving rezoning southwest corner of Irving Park Road and Rohlwing Road
from B-3 to B-3 Special Use for the operation of an automobile service and
repair station (Bucaro).


867-96
 
1-2-96
 
Granting Premier Risk Services, Inc. rezoning from B-2 to B-2 Special Use at
127 North Walnut Street.


887-96
 
1-16-96
 
Rezoning 227 North Walnut Street from B-1 to B-2 Special Use.


888-96
 
1-16-96
 
Amending the B-3 Special Use planned development ordinance no. 777-93 for
Extended Stay America Hotel.


889-96
 
2-6-96
 
Amending the ROC Zoning District to ROC Special Use to allow installation of
antennas on the roof of One Pierce Place by PCS Primeco.


895-96
 
3-12-96
 
The south ten acres of the Parkside Business Park located on the west side of
Arlington Heights Road, from O-R to B-3 along with a special use for a
planned development.


912-96
 
5-14-96
 
To allow for a senior citizen living facility, rezoning the north 318.74 feet
of Lot 4 of Tonne Farm Assessment Plat of part of section 17, township 40
north, Range 11 east, from R-2 to R-3.


919-96
 
6-25-96
 
Rezoning and granting variations for Citadel Homes.


932-96
 
10-1-96
 
Granting a height variance for a PCS facility on Commonwealth Edison property.


936-96
 
10-8-96
 
Rezoning six acres of property owned by Centerpoint Properties Corporation
from I-1 to M-Manufacturing District.


937-96
 
10-8-96
 
Granting a height variance for an antenna facility on Commonwealth Edison
property (Ameritech).


938-96
 
10-22-96
 
Granting a deck variance for 531 West North Street (Pradun).


945-97
 
1-21-97
 
Rezoning property located at 7 N 731 North Arlington Heights Road from R-2
District to B-2 Community Business District.


955-97
 
5-27-97
 
Rezoning 200 North Maple Street from B- 2 Community Business District to B-2
Community Business District Special Use.


962-97
 
8-19-97
 
Rezoning and granting setback variance for property located at 309 West
Irving Park Road from Itasca B-3 to B-3 Special Use Planned Development.


965-97
 
8-19-97
 
Rezoning property commonly known as the west 283.40 feet of the property
located at 1475 East Thorndale Avenue from Itasca B-3 Special Use to Itasca M
Manufacturing District.


970-97
 
9-16-97
 
Rezoning property commonly known as the northerly portion of the triangle
formed by the construction of the new Prospect Avenue cut-off east of the
existing Arlington Heights Road to B-3 Service Business District, and
granting variations for a parking lot setback.


972-97
 
9-16-97
 
Rezoning 625 Devon Avenue from DuPage County R-1 to Itasca R-1.


976-97
 
11-4-97
 
Approving variances and landscape plan for Bank of Itasca.


978-97
 
12-2-97
 
Granting variations for property located at 725 and 749 North Baker Drive.


980-98
 
1-20-98
 
Granting a height variance for and AT&T PCS monopole tower on Commonwealth
Edison property.


983-98
 
2-3-98
 
Granting a rear yard setback variation for Willy Wonka Candy Factory located
at 1445 Norwood and 1440 Glenlake.


995-98
 
5-19-98
 
Rezoning newly annexed property known as the Parkside Business Park, located
on the west side of Arlington Heights Road from DuPage County R-1 to Itasca
B-3.


1000-98
 
5-19-98
 
Amending a plan development and granting a height variance for Itasca Office
L.L.C.


998-98
 
6-2-98
 
Granting a variance from off-street parking requirements for 109-111 West
Orchard Street.


1001-98
 
7-21-98
 
Approving variances, site plan, and landscape plan for the Itasca Park
District parking lot expansion at Washington Park/Recreation Center.


1007-98
 
10-6-98
 
Approving a building height variance for Itasca Bank and Trust Company.


1009-98
 
11-3-98
 
Rezoning the newly annexed Dierking property at the southwest corner of
Parkside Business Park, and amending the final development plan.


1010-98
 
11-3-98
 
Approving amendment to the ROC District Concept Plan (Pierce Road
relocation/Boise Cascade Office Products Headquarters).


1032-99
 
7-6-99
 
Approving sign variances for the Petitioner, Giovanni and Maria Family
Limited Partnership at 245 and 265 Spring Lake Drive.


1036-99
 
10-5-99
 
Approving sign variances for the Franzen Intermediate School.


1037-99
 
10-5-99
 
Approving sign variances for Raymond Benson Primary School.


1044-99
 
12-7-99
 
Approving rezoning and a preliminary plan for a planned residential
development entitled, Clover Ridge of Itasca.


1045-00
 
1-4-00
 
Approving a sign height variance for 1100 Arlington Heights Road for U.S.F.
Worldwide, a tenant of property located at 1100 Arlington Heights Road.


1047-00
 
3-7-00
 
Approving rezoning to R-2, Single Family Residence District, and final plat
of resubdivision for Percy Wilson Subdivision.


1050-00
 
3-7-00
 
Approving a side yard variance for Vern and Donna Field, the owners of
property located at 345 Bloomingdale Road.


1052-00
 
3-21-00
 
Approving a rear yard setback variance for Harold and Patricia Feick, the
owners of property located at 513 Hickory Drive.


1057-00
 
6-20-00
 
Approving variances for James and Linda Wuerffel, the owners of property
located at 722 Linden Circle West.


1059-00
 
6-20-00
 
Approving side yard setback variances for Thomas and Gigi Grosso, the owners
of property located at 314 North Maple.


1068-00
 
9-5-00
 
Approving an amendment to the Regional Office Center District (ROC) Concept
Plan and a site plan for a one-story office building for Hamilton Partners
and DHC Realty LLC, for property in the Chancellory Office Park.


1073-00
 
11-21-00
 
Approving an amendment to the Regional Office Center District (ROC) Concept
Plan and approving a site plan for a six-story office building for Hamilton
Partners, the majority owner of property in The Chancellory at Hamilton Lakes.


1074-00
 
12-19-00
 
Approving an amendment to the planned development for Nordic Hills, and
approving a site plan and certain exceptions to the zoning ordinance.


1078-01
 
2-20-01
 
Rezoning vacant land east of Arlington Heights Road and bisected by Prospect
Avenue.


1079-01
 
2-20-01
 
Granting a sign variation to United Computer Supplies, Inc., to permit a
second ground sign at 865 West Irving Park Road.


1086-01
 
4-17-01
 
Rezoning newly annexed property, granting a special use permit to operate a
child care center, a variation, and a final site plan review to InSite
Itasca, LLC, the owner of property located at 7 North 665 Arlington Heights
Road.


1087-01
 
4-17-01
 
Granting a variation to Larry Swets for 306 North Maple Street.


1091-01
 
6-19-01
 
Granting a variation to James and Cynthia Helm for 430 North Willow Street.


1092-01
 
6-19-01
 
Granting a variation to F. Edward Peacock for 770 Greenview Road.


1098-01
 
8-7-01
 
Approving a special use permit, final site plans and variations to Rocco
Segretti for 7 N 731 Arlington Heights Road (Superior Car Wash).


1105-01
 
9-18-01
 
Approving a setback variance to Nextel Communications for a
telecommunications tower at 1247 Norwood Avenue.


1108-01
 
10-16-01
 
Approving a variation and site plan for 102 East Irving Park Road (Walnut
Partners, LLC).


1109-01
 
10-16-01
 
Granting a variation to Bill and Effie Sepka for 331 North Rush Street.


1110-01
 
10-16-01
 
Granting a special use permit to allow a water reservoir and pumping station
and permitting a chain link fence at 650 Rohlwing Road.


1120-02
 
1-15-02
 
Rezoning certain territory located at the southeast corner of Thorndale
Avenue and Prospect Avenue.


1127-02
 
3-19-02
 
Granting a variation for 505 North Rush Street.


1132-02
 
4-16-02
 
Granting a special use permit to Itasca Lot 2 LLC to allow an office use in
excess of 1,200 square feet at 865-895 Maplewood (Irving Park Plaza).


1136-02
 
5-21-02
 
Granting a variation to Steve and Melissa Sciurba for 786 Willow Court.


1146-02
 
9-3-02
 
Amending the zoning ordinance to permit 7-Eleven, Inc., a special use in the
M Limited Manufacturing District for an automobile service station with
convenience retail sales.


1147-02
 
9-3-02
 
Granting a special use permit to allow 7-Eleven/Citgo to construct an
automobile service station with convenience retail signs, sign variations,
and final site plan review.


1152-02
 
11-5-02
 
Granting a corner side yard variance to Paul Carello for 445 South Home
Street.


1159-03
 
4-15-03
 
Granting an amendment to a special use permit and a variance to Power Broker
Marine to permit the sale and storage of snowmobiles and personal watercraft
in the B-3 Service Business District for certain property situated at 309
West Irving Park Road.


1164-03
 
7-1-03
 
Providing for the zoning classification of certain property owned by Jack and
Lauriel Boryszewski and located at 19 W 114 Granville Avenue.


1168-03
 
7-15-03
 
Amending the zoning ordinance to permit M-K Signs, Inc., on behalf of
Hamilton Partners, to construct directional signs in excess of 12 square feet
in area and bearing advertising or corporate identification.


1169-03
 
7-15-03
 
Amending the zoning ordinance to allow Randy and Cynthia Rapshus to increase
the permitting buildable width on a corner lot at 531 West Center Street.


1173-03
 
7-15-03
 
Granting a variation to Paul and Patti Fridlund, the owners of property
located at 531 West Center Street.


1178-03
 
8-19-03
 
Rezoning certain property (southwest corner of Nordic Road and Rohlwing Road).


1180-03
 
9-2-03
 
Approving an amendment to the planned development for 865 West Irving Park
Road.


1185-03
 
11-4-03
 
Granting a variation to Thomas and Deborah Hatzold, the owners of property
located at 310 North Elm Street.


1194-04
 
1-20-04
 
Approving an amendment to the Regional Office Center District (ROC) concept
plan and approving a site plan for a banking center branch financial
institution (Hamilton Partners/Fifth Third Bank).


1197-04
 
3-2-04
 
Providing for the zoning classification of certain property (480 South Oak
Street).


1202-04
 
4-20-04
 
Granting a variation to Brian and Meghann Peiffle, the owners of property
located at 326 North Willow Street.


1209-04
 
6-15-04
 
Granting variations to Daniel and Linda Ward, owners of the property located
at 125 South Maple Street.


1213-04
 
8-10-04
 
Approving a special use permit for property located at 1200 Bryn Mawr Avenue.


1217-04
 
8-10-04
 
Approving an amendment to the existing planned development and special use
permit for property located at 1475 East Thorndale Avenue.


1218-04
 
8-17-04
 
Granting a variation to Thomas and Gina Sheck, owners of the property located
at 429 North Walnut Street.


1225-04
 
10-5-04
 
Providing for the zoning classification of certain property (20 W 551 Nordic
Road).


1235-05
 
1-25-05
 
Granting a variance for 330 North Walnut Street (Patrick and Jenny Burke).


1237-05
 
2-15-05
 
Approving a plat of subdivision for 210 West Irving Park Road (Itasca
Riverwalk I Subdivision).


1239-05
 
3-15-05
 
Approving a wall sign measuring in excess of 48 square feet at 1 Pierce Place
(First Midwest Bank).


1240-05
 
3-15-05
 
Approving a third wall sign measuring in excess of 48 square feet at 1250
Arlington Heights Road (Cole Taylor Bank).


1241-05
 
3-29-05
 
Adopting the Village of Itasca 2005 Official Zoning Map.


1244-05
 
4-5-05
 
Approving an amendment to the existing planned development and approving a
plat of resubdivision in the Sanyo/Unisource Office Planned Development (850
- 900 Arlington Heights Road).


1245-05
 
4-5-05
 
Granting a variance for construction of parking lot within floodplain for
1475 East Thorndale Avenue - Finch & Barry.


1246-05
 
4-5-05
 
Approving special use permit for planned development for property located at
former 7N481 and 7N511 Arlington Heights Road (Prospect Courtyards).


1247-05
 
4-19-05
 
Approving a plat of subdivision for 426 and 436 Walnut Street (Walnut Estates
Subdivision).


1250-05
 
4-19-05
 
Granting a variation for 201 South Maple Street (Bernard and Cathy Zukaukas).


1251-05
 
4-19-05
 
Approving a plat of subdivision for 766 and 770 Willow Street (766/700 Willow
Subdivision).


1261-05
 
6-21-05
 
Approving a special use permit for a planned development for property located
at the southeast corner of Thorndale Avenue and Prospect Avenue (North Point
Shopping Center - Mokena Partners, Inc.).


1262-05
 
6-21-05
 
Granting a variance for 406 South Home Avenue (Mark and Laura Cychosz).


1264-05
 
6-21-05
 
Granting variations for 299 North Walnut Street (Marie Schlund).


1267-05
 
8-16-05
 
Granting a variation for 330 South Maple Street (Diane Hegstrom).


1268-05
 
8-16-05
 
Granting a variation for 230 West Center Street (Christie Wyrick).


1269-05
 
9-6-05
 
Approving a special use permit for a planned development for certain property
located at the southwest corner of Arlington Heights Road and New Pierce Road
(Buona Beef, Inc./Besa Mi Taco).


1270-05
 
9-20-05
 
Granting a variation for 1297 Prestwick Lane (Glen and Joan Tucker).


1272-05
 
9-20-05
 
Approving the rezoning and grant of a special use permit for a residential
planned development for certain property located at 410 and 420 Thorndale
Avenue (Landmark Custom Homes and Gillespie Properties).


1273-05
 
11-1-05
 
Approving a special use permit to allow for the outside storage and display
of merchandise for certain property located at 1150 West Irving Park Road
(ExxonMobile Oil Company).


1280-05
 
11-15-05
 
Granting a variation for 270 Windsor Road (Bright Horizons).


1281-05
 
11-15-05
 
Approving a special use permit to allow for the operation of a baseball and
softball training academy with batting cages at the property located at 221 -
225 Catalpa Avenue (All-Stars Sports Academy).


1282-05
 
11-15-05
 
Granting a variation for 550 West Valley Road (Kenneth Beine).


1283-05
 
11-15-05
 
Granting a variation for 807 Willow Court (Michael and Mary Harrison).


1288-06
 
1-17-06
 
Approving a plat of consolidation for 1638 Percy Lane (Lots 5 - 10 in Percy
Wilson's Subdivision - John and Elaine Riser).


1289-06
 
1-17-06
 
Granting a variation for 431 North Elm Street (David and Karen Janssen).


1291-06
 
3-7-06
 
Approving an amendment to the existing planned development for certain real
property located at 1475 East Thorndale Avenue (Finch & Barry Realty, LLC).


1300-06
 
3-7-06
 
Granting a variation for 239 South Maple Street (Jeff and Melinda Borck).


1302-06
 
3-21-06
 
Granting a variation for 542 South Cherry Street (Giovanni and Anna Maria
Restaino).


1303-06
 
3-21-06
 
Granting a variation for 221 Forest Avenue (Michael and Kimberley Wisner).


1310-06
 
4-18-06
 
Approving a special use permit to allow for the operation of a contractors
and construction office at the property located at 413 West Irving Park Road
(Tony Adamo/Adamo Builders).


1313-06
 
5-2-06
 
Granting a variance for 242 South Maple (William and Diane Pappas)


1319-06
 
6-20-06
 
Granting a variance for 435 North Hickory Drive (Charlie and Susan Celenza)


1322-06
 
9-19-06
 
Approving rezoning and granting variances for certain property located at
19W626 Pierce Road (Landmark Custom Homes)


1325-06
 
7-18-06
 
Approving a special use permit to allow for outside storage of equipment and
materials at 1500 Industrial Drive.


1326-06
 
7-18-06
 
Approving a plat of subdivision for 616 and 622 North Elm Street
(Wilson-Vorgas Subdivision).


1329-06
 
1-24-07
 
Establishing Spring Lake Special Service Area.


1334-06
 
9-5-06
 
Approving a plat of subdivision for 437 West Bloomingdale Road (Marianna
Subdivision).


1337-06
 
10-3-06
 
Approving amendment to existing Planned Development for certain property
located at 1475 East Thorndale Avenue.


1338-06
 
10-3-06
 
Granting a variance to allow construction of an addition to the existing
parking lot located at 1475 East Thorndale Avenue.


1340-06
 
10-17-06
 
Granting a variance for ground and wall signage for 1475 East Thorndale
Avenue.


1341-06
 
10-17-06
 
Approving a plat of subdivision for 1600 Glenlake Avenue.


1342-06
 
10-31-06
 
Amending Ord. 1334-06, approving a plat of subdivision for 437 West
Bloomingdale Road (Marianna Subdivision).


1347-06
 
11-21-06
 
Approving an amendment to existing Tall Oaks Manor Planned Development for
certain real property located at 410 and 420 Thorndale Avenue.


1348-06
 
11-21-06
 
Approving a special use permit to allow for T-Mobile Central, LLC wireless
communication facility at 210 South Walnut Street.


1349-06
 
1-9-07
 
Approving a special use permit for the Chew Chew Doggie Daycare facility
located at 210 West Irving Park Road.


1350-06
 
12-5-06
 
Approving a special use permit to allow the continuance of the use of a
four-unit multi-family residential apartment building located at 311 Elm
Street (Rudy and Maria Presta).


1351-06
 
12-5-06
 
Granting variances for 109-111 Orchard Street (Michael and Vittoria Carey).


1352-06
 
12-5-06
 
Granting a variance for excess signage at 2 Pierce Place (Arthur J. Gallagher
& Co./Hamilton Partners).


1353-06
 
12-5-06
 
Approving a plat of resubdivision for 411 Pierce Road.


1357-06
 
12-19-06
 
Approving an amendment to the existing Planned Development for property
located at 1101-1137 Prospect Avenue.


1363-07
 
1-16-07
 
Approving a plat of subdivision for 760 and 762 Willow Street (Joe’s
Subdivision).


1364-07
 
1-16-07
 
Granting a variance for signage for 1475 East Thorndale.


1368-07
 
3-6-07
 
Granting a variance for 312 North Linden Street.


1371-07
 
3-20-07
 
Granting a special use permit and Class I Site Plan review for a freight
terminal at 1600 Glenlake Avenue (SunTrans International).


1372-07
 
3-20-07
 
Approving amendment to existing Planned Development for certain property
located at 1475 East Thorndale Avenue.


1373-07
 
3-20-07
 
Approving a special use permit to allow for outside storage of equipment and
materials at 1555 Industrial Drive (Lino and Poli Plumbing, Inc.).


1374-07
 
4-3-07
 
Approving a plat of resubdivision for 850-900 Arlington Heights Road
(Sanyo/Unisource Office Planned Development).


1377-07
 
4-17-07
 
Approving an amendment to the existing Planned Development for property
located at 913 and 935 West Irving Park Road (Itasca Park Place/Four Columns,
LTD.).


1380-07
 
4-17-07
 
Approving a plat of resubdivision for 410 and 420 Thorndale Avenue.


1384-07
 
5-1-07
 
Approving a plat of subdivision for 523 South Arlington Heights Road.


1390-07
 
7-17-07
 
Granting variances for 427 North Rush Street (Timothy and Dahlia Denman).


1391-07
 
7-17-07
 
Granting a parking lot variance for 751 Rohlwing Road (Crawford Supply
Company).


1392-07
 
7-17-07
 
Granting a variance for a wall sign for 1475 East Thorndale Avenue.


1395-07
 
7-24-07
 
Granting a special use permit for 865 West Irving Park Road (Mr. David’s
Carpet Service LTD.).


1398-07
 
9-18-07
 
Granting a parking/loading area variance for 1400 Ardmore Avenue.


1399-07
 
9-18-07
 
Granting a special use permit for 320 West Irving Park Road (Scott and
Victoria Nottke).


1402-07
 
10-2-07
 
Amending the Spring Lake planned development to allow subdivision of lots.


1404-07
 
10-16-07
 
Granting a variance for an electronic sign at 550 West Irving Park Road.


1405-07
 
10-16-07
 
Approving a sign measuring in excess of 88 square feet at 1395 Arlington
Heights Road (Speedway Gas Station).


1421-07
 
12-18-07
 
Providing for the rezoning of certain property and petition for special use
permit 7N 573 Rohlwing Road/Wondrasek Property.


1422-07
 
12-18-07
 
Providing for the rezoning of certain property and petition for special use
permit (Pinnacle Property).


1427-08
 
1-29-08
 
Granting a variance for signs that are in excess of 120 square feet at 1150
Arlington Heights Road (Hyatt Place).


1432-08
 
4-1-08
 
Granting a variation for a ground sign measuring in excess of the maximum
total gross surface area at 751 North Rohlwing Road.


1434-08
 
4-1-08
 
Granting a closed-cup flash point variation for 800 West Thorndale (Kester,
Inc.).


1435-08
 
4-15-08
 
Granting a variation for construction of two ground signs measuring in excess
of the maximum total gross surface area within the required front yard
setback at 1395 Arlington Heights Road (Speedway Gas Station).


1436-08
 
4-8-08
 
Granting a special use permit for 111 Line Street (Mark Hadfield).


1440-08
 
12-16-08
 
Granting a special use permit for 1149 W. Irving Park Road (BP Products North
America, Inc.).


1442-08
 
5-20-08
 
Rezoning of certain property and petition for a variance (Parkview Townhomes
Property).


1448-08
 
7-15-08
 
Granting a variance for two wall signs that measure in excess of the gross
surface area allowed and project higher than 30 feet at 900 North Arlington
Heights Road (Formerly Sanyo Building).


1451-08
 
9-2-08
 
Granting a variance for an additional 48 square feet of signage at 111 Line
Street (Old Village Hall).


1452-08
 
9-2-08
 
Granting a closed-cup flash point variation for 800 West Thorndale (Kester,
Inc.)


1454-08
 
9-2-08
 
Granting a special use permit for 1250 N. Arlington Heights Road (American
Tower Services).


1455-08
 
9-16-08
 
Amending Ord. 1349-06 to amend a special use permit for 210 W. Irving Park
Road (Chew Chew Doggie Daycare).


1456-08
 
9-9-08
 
Proposing the establishment of the 2008 Central Manufacturing District
Special Service Area in the village.


1461-08
 
10-21-08
 
Granting a special use permit for 1149 W. Irving Park Road (BP Products North
America, Inc.).


1465-08
 
11-4-08
 
Granting a variance for Lot 1 of the Aiani Subdivision.


1467-08
 
11-18-08
 
Approving a plat of subdivision for 307 North Street (Reif Subdivision).


1470-08
 
12-16-08
 
Repealing Ord. 1251-05, an ordinance approving a special use permit for
certain property located at the southeast corner of Thorndale Avenue and
Prospect Avenue (North Point Shopping Center - Mokena Partners, Inc.).


1471-08
 
12-16-08
 
Granting a variance for 1131-1139 and 1141 - 1149 Bryn Mawr Avenue (CNC
Graphics).


1526-10
 
12-7-10
 
Repealing Ord. 1422-07, an ordinance providing for the rezoning of certain
property and petition for special use permit (Pinnacle Property).


1545-10
 
9-7-10
 
Zoning property located at 19W130 Granville Avenue as R-1 Single Family
Residence District.


1556-10
 
12-21-10
 
Granting a variance for 1140 West Thorndale Avenue.


1557-10
 
12-21-10
 
Granting a variance for 730 Baker Drive.


1560-11
 
1-18-11
 
Granting a variance for 464 South Maple Street.


1564-11
 
2-8-11
 
Approving a special use permit for 1430 Industrial Drive.


1567-11
 
4-19-11
 
Adopting the 2011 Official Zoning Map.


1569-11
 
4-19-11
 
Granting variances for 860 West Irving Park Road.


1574-11
 
5-17-11
 
Granting a special use permit and variances for 409 West Irving Park Road.


1575-11
 
6-21-11
 
Granting variances for 207 and 215 South Maple Street.


1577-11
 
6-7-11
 
Granting a variance for 909 West Irving Park Road.


1578-11
 
6-7-11
 
Granting a special use permit for 853 Expressway Drive.


1579-11
 
6-7-11
 
Granting a special use permit for 1222 West Ardmore Avenue.


1586-11
 
8-2-11
 
Approving a special use permit for 127 North Walnut Street, Unit 1S.


1594-11
 
11-15-11
 
Granting a variance for 1150 West Irving Park Road.


1595-11
 
11-15-11
 
Granting a variance for 1149 West Irving Park Road.


1599-11
 
12-13-11
 
Granting a variance for 1149 West Irving Park Road.


1609-12
 
2-21-12
 
Amending the special use for a planned development for 2 Itasca Place.


1610-12
 
2-21-12
 
Granting variances for 360 North Rohlwing Road.


1611-12
 
2-21-12
 
Zoning property located at 19W090 Granville Avenue as R-1 zoning district.


1615-12
 
3-20-12
 
Adopting the 2012 Official Zoning Map.


1622-12
 
5-15-12
 
Granting a variance for 651 South Rohlwing Road.


1631-12
 
8-7-12
 
Granting a variance for 318 West Center Street.


1632-12
 
9-4-12
 
Approving variances for 1445 W. Norwood Avenue.


1637-12
 
11-20-12
 
Granting variances for 801 W. Bryn Mawr Avenue.


1638-12
 
11-20-12
 
Granting variances for 1431 Harmony Court.


1646-13
 
2-19-13
 
Granting a special use permit for 1100 N. Arlington Heights Road.


1647-13
 
3-19-13
 
Granting variances for 1159 W. Bryn Mawr.


1651-13
 
4-16-13
 
Granting variances for 100 Park Boulevard.


1652-13
 
4-16-13
 
Granting special use permits and variances for 1400 N. Arlington Heights Road.


1653-13
 
5-7-13
 
Granting a sign variance for 1400 N. Arlington Heights Road.


1654-13
 
5-7-13
 
Granting a special use permit and approving a class 1 site plan review for
1000 W. Irving Park Road.


1664-13
 
7-6-13
 
Approving a special use permit for 127 North Walnut Street, Unit 1SW.


1670-13
 
9-17-13
 
Granting a special use permit for 751 Expressway Drive.


1676-13
 
11-19-13
 
Granting variances for 431 South Oak.


1677-13
 
12-3-13
 
Granting variances for 1465 Industrial Drive.


1678-13
 
12-3-13
 
Granting variances for 1640 Norwood Avenue.


1684-14
 
1-21-14
 
Granting variances for 1101 W. Thorndale.


1685-14
 
1-28-14
 
Revising the legal description and map for Special Service Area Number Four.


1689-14
 
3-18-14
 
Amending a special use permit and granting variances for 1301 E. Irving Park
Road.


1690-14
 
3-18-14
 
Granting a variance for use of a dynamic display sign for 1301 E. Irving Park
Road.


1693-14
 
4-15-14
 
Approving a special use permit to allow an addition to Elmer H. Franzen
Intermediate School at 730 N. Catalpa.


1694-14
 
5-6-14
 
Granting signage variances and approving a master sign plan at 300 Park
Boulevard.


1695-14
 
5-6-14
 
Granting a variance for parking stall dimensions for 1025 Hilltop Drive.


1703-14
 
8-19-14
 
Granting a variance for a patio in the rear yard setback at 1000 West Irving
Park Road.


1730-15
 
2-17-15
 
Granting a variance for the front yard setback at 209 West North Street.


1731-15
 
2-17-15
 
Approving a special use permit to operate a gymnasium at 905 West Irving Park
Road.


1732-15
 
2-17-15
 
Approving variances for 1445 W. Norwood Avenue.


1733-15
 
3-17-15
 
Adopting the Village of Itasca 2015 Official Zoning Map.


1736-15
 
4-7-15
 
Granting variances for use and location of a dynamic display sign for 751 N.
Rohlwing Road.


1746-15
 
6-16-15
 
Rezoning the vacant real estate immediately south of 1145 N. Arlington
Heights Road from O/R Office Research District, in part, and R-1 Single
Family Residence District to R-3 General Residence District.


1749-15
 
6-16-15
 
Approving a special use permit to operate a school at 400 North Walnut Street.


1750-15
 
6-16-15
 
Approving variances for 400 E. Orchard Street.


1753-15
 
7-21-15
 
Granting a variance for 300 S. Walnut.


1754-15
 
7-21-15
 
Approving a special use permit to allow outdoor seating at 280 North Rohlwing
Road.


1755-15
 
7-21-15
 
Approving a special use permit to allow outdoor seating at 1480 Industrial
Drive.


1757-15
 
8-18-15
 
Approving a fence variance for 500 E. Walters Lane.


1758-15
 
8-18-15
 
Approving a fence variance for 401 S. Home Avenue.


1759-15
 
8-18-15
 
Approving a special use permit to allow outdoor storage at 1465 Hamilton
Parkway.


1763-15
 
10-6-15
 
Granting a special use and granting a variance for 105 S. Maple Avenue.


1769-15
 
10-20-15
 
Approving a fence variance for 403 W. North Street.


1770-15
 
10-20-15
 
Granting a signage variance at One Pierce Place.


1773-15
 
11-17-15
 
Approving variances for 444 Bonnie Brae Avenue.


1781-15
 
12-15-15
 
Approving variances for 464 South Lombard Street.


1782-15
 
12-15-15
 
Approving a fence variance for 144 W. George Street.


1783-15
 
12-15-15
 
Granting a special use permit and a variance for 1397 Glenlake Road.


1788-16
 
1-19-16
 
Granting variances for 1640 Glenlake, 1625 Norwood, and 1657 Norwood, all
commonly known as 1789 Norwood (Fellowes, Inc.)


1790-16
 
2-16-16
 
Approving a special use permit to allow outdoor storage at 751 N. Rohlwing
Road (Zippy Shell).


1794-16
 
3-1-16
 
Granting approval of an amended special use permit and variances for 400 East
Orchard (Itasca Country Club).


1797-16
 
3-15-16
 
Adopting the Village of Itasca 2016 Official Zoning Map.


1801-16
 
5-10-16
 
Granting a variance for 100 N. Walnut (Old Village Hall).


1802-16
 
5-17-16
 
Granting a special use permit and variance for 750 Expressway Drive (Amcor).


1804-16
 
6-21-16
 
Granting variances for 300 S. Walnut (Bhagat).


1810-16
 
8-2-16
 
Granting relief from the Itasca Building Code for 400 E. Orchard Street
(Itasca Country Club).


1811-16
 
8-2-16
 
Granting variances for 730 N. Catalpa (Franzen School).


1812-16
 
8-16-16
 
Granting special use permits with exceptions, plat of subdivision and Class I
site plan for the vacant real estate immediately north of the Medinah Woods
Townhomes (Route 53 Townhomes).


1813-16
 
8-16-16
 
Granting approval for an amended special use permit for 400 East Orchard
Street (Itasca Country Club).


1814-16
 
9-6-16
 
Granting variances for 900 N. Arlington Heights Road (Arlington Thorndale,
LLC).


1825-16
 
11-3-16
 
Granting a variance for 860 W. Irving Park Road (Holiday Inn - Itasca).


1826-16
 
11-15-16
 
Granting approval for a special use permit for 925 W. Thorndale Avenue (Major
Prime Plastics).


1835-16
 
12-20-16
 
Granting variances for 500 Park Boulevard (Kevence Corporation of America).


1836-17
 
1-3-17
 
Granting variances for 1100 N. Arlington Heights Road (Captive Resources).


1837-17
 
2-21-17
 
Granting variances for 404 Broker Avenue (Bozek).


1838-17
 
2-21-17
 
Granting variances for 300 Park Boulevard (Mortenson Construction).


1841-17
 
3-21-17
 
Adopting the Village of Itasca 2017 Official Zoning Map.


1846-17
 
6-20-17
 
Granting relief from the Itasca Building Code for 541 North Rush Street (St.
Peter the Apostle Catholic Church).


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE XI:  BONDS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




698-90
 
7-12-90
 
Authorizing the issuance of $2,995,000 Central Manufacturing District Special
Service Area Bonds.


789-93
 
5-26-93
 
Authorizing the issuance of $2,000,000 general obligation Library Bonds,
series 1993.


794-93
 
8-4-93
 
Authorizing the issuance of $1,390,000 general obligation Refunding Bonds,
series 1993.


838-94
 
12-13-94
 
Authorizing the issuance of Central Manufacturing District Special Service
Area Refunding Bonds, series 1994.


1014-98
 
12-17-98
 
Authorizing the issuance of $5,000,000 general obligation bonds, series 1998.


1017-99
 
1-26-99
 
Authorizing the issuance of $7,080,000 general obligation bonds, series 1999.


1143-02
 
8-13-02
 
Authorizing the issuance of $1,820,000 Central Manufacturing District Special
Service Area Refunding Bonds, Series 2002.


1156-02
 
11-19-02
 
Approving installment purchase agreements and authorizing the issuance of
$9,955,000 General Fund Certificates, Series 2002.


1330-06
 
8-1-06
 
Authorizing the issuance of $900,000 Spring Lake Special Service Area Bonds,
Series 2006.


1430-08
 
4-1-08
 
Authorizing the issuance and sale of not to exceed $1,750,000 General
Obligation Library Bonds, Series 2008A.


1431-08
 
4-1-08
 
Authorizing the issuance and sale of not to exceed $7,750,000 General
Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2008B.


1495-09
 
7-28-09
 
Authorizing the issuance of $50,000,000 Waterworks and Sewerage System
Revenue Bonds.


1496-09
 
7-28-09
 
Authorizing the issuance of $25,000,000 General Obligation Alternate Bonds.


1505-09
 
11-3-09
 
Providing for the issuance of not to exceed $25,000,000 General Obligation
Bonds.


1525-10
 
5-11-10
 
Refunding all or a portion of the $7,270,000 outstanding principal amount of
the General Fund Certificates, Series 2002, maturing in the years 2010 to
2022.


1665-13
 
8-6-13
 
Proposing the establishment of Special Service Area Number Four and the
issuance of bonds not to exceed $3,500,000.


1680-13
 
12-10-13
 
Establishing Special Service Area Number Four and authorizing the issuance of
not to exceed $3,500,000 bonds.


1681-13
 
12-10-13
 
Providing for the issuance of not to exceed $3,500,000 Special Service Area
Number Four Bonds, Series 2014.


1839-17
 
2-21-17
 
Authorizing the issuance of up to $6,500,000 Waterworks and Sewerage Revenue
Bonds.


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Illinois Compiled Statutes





References to 1952 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES



 

ILCS Cite
 
Code Section




Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.27
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 3
 
10.06


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 4
 
10.06


Ch. 5, Act 85, § 2
 
10.06


Ch. 5, Act 120, § 2.06
 
31.03


Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.
 
56.04


Ch. 5, Act 315, § 3
 
36.01


Ch. 5, Act 425, §§ 1 et seq.
 
35.05


Ch. 5, Act 425, § 83
 
35.05


Ch. 10, Act 5, § 1-3
 
36.01


Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-1.4
 
36.01


Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-3
 
36.01


Ch. 35, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.
 
34.15


Ch. 35, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.
 
34.15


Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq.
 
56.02


Ch. 40, Act 5, § 3-101
 
33.20


Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1062
 
53.68


Ch. 65, Act 5
 
10.02


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-1 et seq.
 
56.02


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2
 
10.02


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1
 
10.99, 53.65


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1
 
10.99


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-10
 
32.25


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.1
 
34.47


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.3
 
34.40


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2
 
34.45, 34.56


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-7
 
34.20


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-8
 
34.10


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.4
 
34.41


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 10-2.1-1 et seq.
 
32.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-12
 
53.65


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-2
 
53.65


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-8
 
53.65


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-2
 
53.65


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-33-1
 
117.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1
 
71.001, 75.10


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-48.2-1 - 11-48.2-7
 
154.20


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-139-1 et seq.
 
54.07


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-105
 
34.55


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 13-202
 
34.55


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-102
 
34.55


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-100 et seq.
 
56.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(h)
 
56.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(v)
 
56.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)
 
118.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401
 
118.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6)
 
118.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b)
 
118.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi)
 
118.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501 et seq.
 
118.20


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501
 
118.21


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(r)(1)
 
118.23


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(s)
 
118.24


Ch. 220, Act 50, § 1 et seq.
 
56.17


Ch. 220, Act 65, § 4
 
56.05


Ch. 225, Act 320 § 3.1
 
55.07


Ch. 225, Act 440, §§ 1 et seq.
 
155.02


Ch. 225, Act 460
 
111.09


Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.
 
112.27, 119.01, 119.05


Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.
 
112.27


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1-3.33
 
112.18


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 3-12(a)(11.1)
 
112.28


Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.
 
94.04


Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 - 57.17
 
53.01


Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.215
 
71.103


Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.220
 
71.103


Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360
 
71.103


Ch. 415, Act 5 § 4
 
55.07


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 3
 
71.103


Ch. 605, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.
 
56.02


Ch. 605, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.
 
70.35


Ch. 625, Art. IX
 
73.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq.
 
70.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.
 
75.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-105
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-106
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-107
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-108
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-111.8
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-112
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-113
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-116
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-120
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-125
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-126
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-130
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-131
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-132
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-133.1
 
71.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-135
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-136
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-137
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-138
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-139.1
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.7
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.10
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.15
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-141
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-145.001
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-147
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.2
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3a-5
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.6
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-153
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-154
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-155
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-156
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-157
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-158
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-159.1
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162.5
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-163
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166.1
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167.5
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-169
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.6
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.8
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-172
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-174
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-176
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-177
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-178
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-179
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-181
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-182
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187.1
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188
 
10.02, 70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-193
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-194
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-195
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-196
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-197
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-199
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-200
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-201
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-203
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205.1
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-207
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-208
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-209
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-210.01
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211.01
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-212
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214.1
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-217
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-101(d)
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609
 
72.12


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616
 
72.12


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-708
 
72.42


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-201
 
72.41


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-203
 
76.05, 76.06


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 4-203 - 4-212.1
 
72.47


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-203(b)
 
72.41


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-203(e)
 
72.42


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-213(b)
 
76.05, 76.06


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 5-201 et seq.
 
76.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101
 
76.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101(d)
 
72.42


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303
 
76.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303(e)
 
72.42


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-500
 
71.081


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 7-601
 
72.42


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-203
 
70.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-203.3(b)(4)
 
76.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-205
 
70.11


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-206
 
70.12


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301
 
70.01, 72.12


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-302
 
70.41


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-305
 
70.30


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306
 
70.31


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307
 
70.31, 70.32


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-308
 
70.33


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-309
 
70.34


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-310
 
70.35


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-311
 
70.36


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-312
 
70.37


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-313
 
70.38


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-401
 
76.03


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402
 
76.05


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-403
 
76.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-404
 
76.06


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406
 
76.07


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406(a)
 
76.07


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406(b)
 
76.07


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-409
 
76.08


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-410
 
76.09


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-415
 
76.07


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501
 
71.066, 72.42, 76.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1
 
76.03


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503(a)
 
76.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-504
 
76.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601
 
71.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-604
 
71.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605
 
71.001, 71.002


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605.1
 
71.002


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-606(a)
 
71.004


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-611
 
71.003


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-701
 
71.040


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-702
 
71.041


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-703
 
71.042


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-704
 
71.043


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-705
 
71.044


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-706
 
71.044


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707
 
71.047


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-708
 
71.046


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-709
 
71.048


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-710
 
71.096


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-711
 
71.106


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-801
 
71.020


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-802
 
71.021


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-803
 
71.022


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-804
 
71.023


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-805
 
71.024


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-806
 
71.025


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-901
 
71.060


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-902
 
71.061


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-903
 
71.062


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-904
 
71.063


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-905
 
71.064


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-906
 
71.065


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907
 
71.040, 71.066


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907.5
 
71.040


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-908
 
71.040


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1001
 
74.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002
 
74.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003
 
74.03


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003.1
 
74.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004
 
74.05


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004.1
 
74.13


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1005
 
74.06


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1006
 
74.07, 111.09


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1007
 
74.08


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1008
 
74.09


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1009
 
74.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1010
 
74.11


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1011
 
74.12


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201
 
71.080


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1202
 
71.081


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1204
 
70.31, 70.41


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1205
 
71.082


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301
 
72.11


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.1
 
72.12


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.2
 
72.12


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3
 
72.12


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3(c)
 
72.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3(d)
 
72.99


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1303
 
72.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304
 
72.01, 72.11


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1305
 
72.41


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1401
 
72.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1402
 
71.095


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403
 
73.20


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.1
 
73.08


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.2
 
73.23


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1404
 
73.21


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1405
 
73.22


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1406
 
71.097


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1407
 
71.098


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1410
 
71.099


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1411
 
71.100


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412
 
71.100


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412.1
 
71.101


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1413
 
71.103


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1414
 
71.045


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1416
 
71.104


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1418
 
71.105


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1420
 
71.067


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1425
 
71.083


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1502
 
73.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1503
 
73.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1504
 
73.03


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505
 
73.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505.1
 
73.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1506
 
73.05


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507
 
73.06


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507.1
 
73.07


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-100 et seq.
 
75.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-101
 
75.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-208
 
71.023, 71.024


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215
 
70.11, 71.066


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215(b)
 
72.11


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-601
 
74.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-712
 
79.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-713
 
79.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-801
 
70.01, 71.081


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-802(a)
 
70.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-803
 
70.01, 71.045, 71.081


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805
 
70.01, 71.045, 71.081


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et seq.
 
75.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-101
 
75.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-102
 
79.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-103
 
79.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-105
 
75.11


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-106
 
75.12


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-107
 
79.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109
 
75.13


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111
 
75.15, 79.01, 79.02, 79.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-114
 
75.14


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-316
 
79.02, 79.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-317
 
79.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 16-101 et seq.
 
71.001


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-501
 
72.40


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 16-0.1
 
76.10


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1
 
76.10


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1.5
 
76.10


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1
 
76.10


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1(a)(3) through (a)(11)
 
112.17


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1.1
 
112.17


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-3
 
112.17


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 36-1
 
72.40


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 36-1 et seq.
 
76.10


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 1
 
76.10


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 2
 
76.10


Ch. 720, Act 570, § 100
 
76.10


Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 100 et seq.
 
76.10


Ch. 720, Act 570, § 102
 
131.02


Ch. 720, Act 646, § 10
 
131.02


Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.
 
32.36, 76.10


Ch. 740, Act 105, §§ 1 et seq.
 
94.04


Ch. 750, Act 30, § 1 et seq.
 
130.01


Ch. 765, Act 340, § 1
 
154.26


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1952 CODE



 

1952 Code Section
 
1995 Code Section




Ch. 1, § 1
 
30.025


Ch. 1, § 2
 
30.026


Ch. 1, § 3
 
30.027


Ch. 1, § 4
 
30.028


Ch. 1, § 5
 
30.029


Ch. 2, § 6
 
31.01


Ch. 2, § 7
 
31.02


Ch. 2, § 9
 
31.03


Ch. 2, § 10
 
31.04


Ch. 2, § 11
 
31.10


Ch. 2, § 12
 
31.11


Ch. 2, § 13
 
31.12


Ch. 2, § 14
 
31.13


Ch. 2, § 15
 
31.14


Ch. 2, § 16
 
31.15


Ch. 2, § 17
 
31.16


Ch. 2, § 18
 
31.17


Ch. 2, § 19
 
31.18


Ch. 3, § 20
 
30.035


Ch. 3, § 21
 
30.036


Ch. 3, § 22
 
30.037


Ch. 3, § 23
 
30.038


Ch. 3, § 24
 
30.039


Ch. 3, § 24A
 
30.040


Ch. 3, § 25
 
30.041


Ch. 3, § 26
 
30.042


Ch. 3, § 27
 
30.043


Ch. 3, § 28
 
30.044


Ch. 3, § 29
 
30.045


Ch. 4. § 30
 
30.050


Ch. 4. § 31
 
30.051


Ch. 4, § 32
 
30.052


Ch. 4, § 33
 
30.053


Ch. 4, § 34
 
30.054


Ch. 4, § 35
 
30.055


Ch. 4, § 43
 
30.070


Ch. 4, § 44
 
30.071


Ch. 4, § 45
 
30.072


Ch. 4, § 47
 
30.073


Ch. 6, § 68
 
33.01


Ch. 6, § 69
 
33.02


Ch. 6, § 70
 
33.03


Ch. 6, § 71
 
33.04


Ch. 6, § 72
 
33.05


Ch. 6, § 73
 
33.06


Ch. 6, § 74
 
33.07


Ch. 6, § 75
 
33.08


Ch. 6, § 76
 
33.09


Ch. 8, § 87
 
30.001


Ch. 8, § 88
 
30.002


Ch. 8, § 89
 
30.003


Ch. 8, § 90
 
30.004


Ch. 8, § 91
 
30.005


Ch. 8, § 92
 
30.006


Ch. 8, § 93
 
30.007


Ch. 8, § 94
 
30.008


Ch. 8, § 95
 
30.009


Ch. 8, § 96
 
30.010


Ch. 8, § 97
 
30.011


Ch. 8, § 98
 
30.012


Ch. 8, § 99
 
30.013


Ch. 8, § 100
 
10.98


Ch. 8, § 101
 
10.98


Ch. 8, § 106
 
10.98


Ch. 8, § 107
 
10.98


Ch. 8, § 108
 
10.98


Ch. 8, § 109
 
10.98


Ch. 8, § 110
 
10.98


Ch. 8, § 112
 
10.98


Ch. 8, § 113
 
11.01


Ch. 8, § 114
 
34.01


Ch. 8, § 115
 
11.02


Ch. 8, § 117
 
30.014


Ch. 8, § 118
 
35.02


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 1
 
95.01


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 2
 
95.11


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 3
 
95.12


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 4
 
95.13


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 5
 
95.40


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 6
 
95.41


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 7
 
95.42


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 8
 
95.43


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 9
 
95.44


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 10
 
95.44


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 11
 
95.45


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 12
 
95.46


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 13
 
95.47


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 14
 
95.15


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 15
 
95.48


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 16
 
95.25


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 18
 
95.49


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 19
 
95.50


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 20
 
95.51


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 21
 
95.52


Ch. 9, Art. I, § 22
 
95.14


Ch. 9, Art. II, § 1
 
96.20


Ch. 9, Art. II, § 2
 
96.27


Ch. 9, Art. II, § 3
 
96.35


Ch. 9, Art. II, § 4
 
96.36


Ch. 9, Art. II, § 7
 
96.37


Ch. 9, Art. II, § 8
 
96.38


Ch. 9, Art. II, § 9
 
96.39


Ch. 13, § 381
 
90.36


Ch. 13, § 382
 
90.35


Ch. 13, § 383
 
90.37


Ch. 13, § 432
 
50.15


Ch. 13, § 433
 
50.16


Ch. 13, § 434
 
50.17


Ch. 13, § 435
 
50.18


Ch. 14, § 504
 
90.01


Ch. 14, § 505
 
90.02


Ch. 14, § 506
 
90.08


Ch. 14, § 507
 
90.09


Ch. 14, § 508
 
90.07


Ch. 14, § 509
 
90.03


Ch. 14, § 510
 
90.04


Ch. 14, § 511
 
90.05


Ch. 16, § 5.02
 
72.14


Ch. 16, § 5.09
 
72.13


Ch. 16, § 5.14
 
72.15


Ch. 16, § 10.01
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


Ch. 16, § 10.02
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


Ch. 16, § 10.03
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


Ch. 16, § 10.04
 
Ch. 78, Sch. III


Ch. 16, § 10.05
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IV


Ch. 16, § 10.07
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VI


Ch. 16, § 10.08
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VIII


Ch. 16, § 11.01
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


Ch. 16, § 11.02
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


Ch. 16, § 11.04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


Ch. 16, § 11.13
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


Ch. 16, § 12.01
 
75.15


Ch. 16, § 12.09
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


Ch. 16, § 12.11
 
Ch. 77, Sch. VII


Ch. 16, § 12.14
 
Ch. 77, Sch. VI


Ch. 16, § 12.15
 
95.55


Ch. 17, § 592
 
50.05


Ch. 17, § 593
 
50.05


Ch. 17, § 594
 
50.05


Ch. 17, § 595
 
50.03


Ch. 18, § 616
 
52.02


Ch. 18, § 617
 
52.03


Ch. 18, § 619
 
52.04


Ch. 18, § 620
 
52.05


Ch. 18, § 622
 
52.15


Ch. 18, § 623
 
52.16


Ch. 18, § 624
 
52.17


Ch. 18, § 625
 
52.18


Ch. 18, § 626
 
52.19


Ch. 18, § 633
 
52.06


Ch. 20, § 647
 
92.01


Ch. 20, § 648
 
92.02


Ch. 20, § 649
 
92.03


Ch. 20, § 653
 
94.03


Ch. 20, § 762
 
94.08


Ch. 21, § 747
 
90.06


Ch. 21, § 760
 
95.54


Ch. 21, § 761
 
95.53


Ch. 22, § 777
 
10.18


Ch. 22, § 778
 
10.18


§ 179
 
110.01


§ 180
 
110.02


§ 181
 
110.04


§ 182
 
110.05


§ 183
 
110.06


§ 184
 
110.03


§ 185
 
110.08


§ 186
 
110.11


§ 187
 
110.09


§ 188
 
110.10


§ 190
 
110.14


§ 191
 
110.12


§ 192
 
110.15


§ 193
 
110.07


§ 194
 
110.13


§ 195
 
110.99


§ 271
 
112.01


§ 272
 
112.15


§ 273
 
112.16


§ 274
 
112.17


§ 275
 
112.19


§ 276
 
112.18


§ 277
 
112.20


§ 278
 
112.21


§ 279
 
112.22


§ 280
 
112.23


§ 281
 
112.24


§ 282
 
112.35


§ 283
 
112.36


§ 284
 
112.26


§ 285
 
112.25


§ 286
 
112.37


§ 287
 
112.44


§ 288
 
112.38


§ 289
 
112.39, 112.41


§ 291
 
112.40


§ 292
 
112.42


§ 293
 
112.43


§ 294
 
112.27


§ 295
 
112.99


§ 431
 
114.99


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




--
 
8-15-56
 
T.S.O. VIII


105-56
 
2-7-56
 
30.015


108
 
8-6-57
 
10.98


123-58
 
9-23-58
 
151.01


125-58
 
11-4-58
 
T.S.O. IX


128-58
 
12-2-58
 
95.26 - 95.29


143-60
 
7-5-60
 
112.37


162-62
 
10-24-61
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


164-61
 
11-28-61
 
T.S.O. II


166-61
 
11-28-61
 
90.15 - 90.18


173-62
 
3-13-62
 
T.S.O. II


174-62
 
4-10-62
 
112.18, 112.20, 112.25, 112.39, 112.41


179-62
 
7-17-62
 
158.01 - 158.06, 158.15 - 158.31, 158.99


181-62
 
8-21-62
 
T.S.O. II


185-62
 
11-6-62
 
95.10


200-63
 
8-20-63
 
T.S.O. II


202-63
 
8-20-63
 
T.S.O. II


214-64
 
5-19-64
 
T.S.O. II


216
 
--
 
T.S.O. VII


218-64
 
7-21-64
 
10.99


218-64
 
--
 
112.99


222-64
 
10-6-64
 
T.S.O. II


223-64
 
9-22-64
 
112.20


227-65
 
2-23-65
 
T.S.O. II


231-65
 
7-20-65
 
50.09


231-65
 
7-20-65
 
50.07


232-65
 
--
 
53.06


234-65
 
8-3-65
 
32.15, 32.16


236-65
 
9-7-65
 
T.S.O. II


238-65
 
--
 
112.16, 112.37, 112.42


239-65
 
10-5-65
 
72.13; Ch. 77, Schs. II, III, VIII


258-66
 
9-20-66
 
T.S.O. II


258-67
 
9-19-67
 
T.S.O. II


259-67
 
1-3-67
 
T.S.O. VII


270-68
 
1-16-68
 
T.S.O. VII


275-68
 
7-2-68
 
T.S.O. II


277-68
 
7-3-68
 
T.S.O. II


279-68
 
7-30-68
 
T.S.O. II


284-68
 
10-15-68
 
T.S.O. II


285-68
 
10-15-68
 
T.S.O. II


287-69
 
3-4-69
 
96.50 - 96.52


290-69
 
12-17-68
 
91.01 - 91.03, 91.10, 91.11, 91.20 - 91.24, 91.99


292-69
 
6-17-69
 
T.S.O. VII


295-69
 
8-19-69
 
34.10


302-69
 
12-16-69
 
T.S.O. II


303-69
 
12-16-69
 
T.S.O. II


310-70
 
1-6-70
 
T.S.O. II


311-70
 
1-6-70
 
T.S.O. II


313-70
 
1-20-70
 
T.S.O. II


314-70
 
5-5-70
 
T.S.O. II


316-70
 
6-2-70
 
T.S.O. II


318-70
 
7-7-70
 
112.20


322-70
 
7-7-70
 
T.S.O. II


325-70
 
7-21-70
 
T.S.O. II


326-70
 
8-18-70
 
T.S.O. II


328-70
 
8-18-70
 
T.S.O. II


329-70
 
8-18-70
 
T.S.O. II


331-70
 
9-1-70
 
T.S.O. III


333-70
 
10-6-70
 
T.S.O. II


334-70
 
10-20-70
 
T.S.O. II


338-70
 
11-17-70
 
T.S.O. VII


339-70
 
11-17-70
 
T.S.O. II


340-70
 
11-17-70
 
T.S.O. II


343-71
 
1-5-71
 
113.01 - 113.06, 113.99


344-71
 
1-5-71
 
T.S.O. II


346-71
 
2-16-71
 
T.S.O. II


348-71
 
3-2-71
 
T.S.O. I


350-71
 
3-16-71
 
T.S.O. II


351-71
 
3-16-71
 
T.S.O. II


352-71
 
4-6-71
 
T.S.O. II


356-71
 
5-18-71
 
T.S.O. II


360-71
 
6-1-71
 
T.S.O. II


363-71
 
7-20-71
 
T.S.O. II


365-71
 
7-20-71
 
T.S.O. II


367-71
 
7-20-71
 
35.01


370-71
 
10-5-71
 
112.20


376-72
 
3-21-72
 
T.S.O. II


384-72
 
5-16-72
 
T.S.O. II


386-72
 
5-16-72
 
112.20


388-72
 
5-16-72
 
T.S.O. II


390-72
 
6-20-72
 
T.S.O. VII


394-72
 
8-15-72
 
T.S.O. II


397-72
 
8-15-72
 
T.S.O. II


400-72
 
9-5-72
 
T.S.O. II


405-72
 
12-5-72
 
T.S.O. II


407-73
 
1-2-73
 
T.S.O. II


410-73
 
2-6-73
 
T.S.O. II


415-73
 
4-17-73
 
T.S.O. II


416-73
 
5-15-73
 
T.S.O. II


417-73
 
6-5-73
 
T.S.O. IX


418-73
 
6-5-73
 
T.S.O. IV


420-75
 
6-5-73
 
112.20


421-73
 
6-5-73
 
T.S.O. II


428-73
 
11-6-73
 
T.S.O. II


430-73
 
11-20-73
 
T.S.O. II


431-73
 
12-4-73
 
Ch. 77, Sch. VII


435-74
 
4-2-74
 
112.42


436-74
 
5-7-74
 
T.S.O. II


439-74
 
8-6-74
 
T.S.O. IX


442-74
 
10-15-74
 
93.01 - 93.04, 93.99


450-76
 
4-20-76
 
32.01 - 32.05


451-76
 
4-20-76
 
33.20 - 33.24


454-76
 
8-17-76
 
90.19, 90.99


455-76
 
9-7-76
 
Ch. 77, Sch. VI


458-76
 
10-19-76
 
T.S.O. IX


459-77
 
1-18-77
 
72.15, 95.55; Ch. 77, Sch. VI


460-77
 
2-15-77
 
T.S.O. II


464-77
 
5-10-77
 
50.03


465-77
 
6-7-77
 
T.S.O. I


468-77
 
6-28-77
 
112.17


472-77
 
8-23-77
 
75.15


475-77
 
10-18-77
 
151.01


478-78
 
1-24-78
 
114.01 - 114.07


479-78
 
3-21-78
 
T.S.O. VII


486-78
 
9-19-78
 
30.016


487-78
 
10-3-78
 
T.S.O. V


489-78
 
12-5-78
 
T.S.O. II


492-79
 
1-16-79
 
151.01


497-79
 
6-19-79
 
T.S.O. II


500A-79
 
3-20-79
 
T.S.O. V


500-79
 
11-27-79
 
T.S.O. II


501-1980
 
1-8-80
 
112.42, 112.43


503-80
 
5-6-80
 
T.S.O. VII


506-80
 
9-2-80
 
T.S.O. III


508-80
 
9-23-80
 
T.S.O. VII


510-80
 
12-16-80
 
156.01 - 156.05


511-1981
 
1-6-81
 
T.S.O. I


513-81
 
4-7-81
 
112.20


516-1981
 
7-21-81
 
T.S.O. I


517-81
 
7-21-81
 
T.S.O. IX


521-81
 
12-15-81
 
110.16, 110.99; Ch. 77, Schs. IV and V


524-82
 
1-5-82
 
34.11, 34.12


525-82
 
1-5-82
 
34.20 - 34.21


527-82
 
3-16-82
 
T.S.O. II


528-82
 
4-6-82
 
112.20


531-82
 
8-17-82
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


534-82
 
9-28-82
 
T.S.O. V


535-82
 
9-28-82
 
T.S.O. III


537-82
 
10-5-82
 
155.01 - 155.04, 155.99


538-82
 
12-7-82
 
Ch. 78, Schs. I - IV, VI and VIII


539-83
 
1-25-83
 
94.01 - 94.10, 94.99


540-83
 
1-25-83
 
72.14


543-83
 
2-15-83
 
112.18, 112.20


545-83
 
3-1-83
 
112.18, 112.20


546-83
 
3-15-83
 
T.S.O. II


554-83
 
10-18-83
 
34.30 - 34.39, 34.99


559-84
 
3-27-84
 
T.S.O. II


560-84
 
4-17-84
 
53.52 - 53.56


561-84
 
5-1-84
 
T.S.O. II


565-84
 
6-26-84
 
T.S.O. II


575-84
 
--84
 
T.S.O. V


576-85
 
2-5-85
 
T.S.O. VII


579-85
 
2-26-85
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


583-85
 
5-14-85
 
53.01 - 53.09, 53.20 - 53.29, 53.35-53.43 , 53.99


585-85
 
5-28-85
 
112.20


586-85
 
6-11-85
 
T.S.O. II


587-85
 
6-18-85
 
32.25 - 32.31


588-85
 
6-25-85
 
T.S.O. III


589-85
 
7-2-85
 
T.S.O. II


595-85
 
8-13-85
 
72.12


597-85
 
9-3-85
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


600-85
 
10-8-85
 
112.20


601-1985
 
11-5-85
 
154.22, 154.24


604-85
 
12-3-85
 
96.01, 96.10 - 96.14, 96.2196.26, 96.28, 96.29, 96.41, 96.99


610-86
 
6-17-86
 
T.S.O. II


621-87
 
1-13-87
 
T.S.O. II


625-87
 
3-10-87
 
112.20


629-87
 
6-23-87
 
T.S.O. III


634-87
 
9-22-87
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


642-87
 
11-17-87
 
154.01 - 154.06, 154.20, 154.21, 154.23, 154.25, 154.26


643-87
 
12-15-87
 
T.S.O. II


647-88
 
2-9-88
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


648-88
 
--88
 
T.S.O. VI


649-88
 
2-16-88
 
152.01


650-88
 
5-3-88
 
35.03


652-88
 
5-17-88
 
34.31


653-88
 
5-24-88
 
T.S.O. II


654-88
 
6-7-88
 
T.S.O. II


655-88
 
6-7-88
 
T.S.O. X


659-99
 
8-6-88
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


662-88
 
9-27-88
 
T.S.O. X


671-89
 
5-6-89
 
T.S.O. II


674-89
 
8-15-89
 
115.01 - 115.14, 115.99


678-89
 
9-5-89
 
T.S.O. X


681-89
 
9-5-89
 
T.S.O. X


684-89
 
9-5-89
 
T.S.O. X


689-90
 
3-6-90
 
T.S.O. X


690-90
 
4-24-90
 
T.S.O. III


691-90
 
4-24-90
 
T.S.O. II


692-90
 
5-15-90
 
35.04


695
 
5-22-90
 
54.01 - 54.11, 54.99


697-90
 
6-5-90
 
50.01 - 50.04, 50.06, 50.08 - 50.10, 50.99


698-90
 
7-12-90
 
T.S.O. XI


700-90
 
8-14-90
 
52.40 - 52.44, 52.99


702-90
 
9-18-90
 
T.S.O. II


703-90
 
9-18-90
 
T.S.O. X


704-90
 
12-18-90
 
T.S.O. IX


707-91
 
2-12-91
 
52.07, 53.02


708-91
 
2-19-91
 
T.S.O. II


709-91
 
2-19-91
 
T.S.O. X


713-91
 
5-14-91
 
150.42, 150.43, 150.50 - 150.52, 150.80, 150.86, 150.87, 150.99


714-91
 
5-21-91
 
T.S.O. III


715-91
 
5-21-91
 
34.31


716-91
 
5-28-91
 
34.31


720-91
 
7-16-91
 
T.S.O. VI


724-91
 
9-3-91
 
T.S.O. X


725-91
 
9-3-91
 
T.S.O. II


730-91
 
10-15-91
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


733
 
10-22-91
 
54.03


734-91
 
10-22-91
 
T.S.O. I


736-91
 
10-22-91
 
T.S.O. III


742-92
 
2-11-92
 
30.017


743-92
 
2-18-92
 
153.01 - 153.03


746-92
 
5-16-92
 
35.04


748-92
 
9-1-92
 
33.01, 33.03, 33.10


749-92
 
9-1-92
 
112.20


750-92
 
11-24-92
 
T.S.O. IV


754-93
 
1-26-93
 
150.80


766-93
 
2-16-93
 
130.99


769-93
 
4-6-93
 
T.S.O. II


770-93
 
4-6-93
 
T.S.O. X


771-93
 
3-9-93
 
151.01


772-93
 
--
 
T.S.O. III


773-93
 
3-16-93
 
T.S.O. III


779-93
 
4-20-93
 
T.S.O. II


780-93
 
4-20-93
 
T.S.O. X


782-93
 
4-20-93
 
T.S.O. II


783-93
 
4-20-93
 
T.S.O. X


785-93
 
4-20-93
 
T.S.O. II


786-93
 
4-20-93
 
T.S.O. X


788-93
 
5-11-93
 
112.20


789-93
 
5-26-93
 
T.S.O. X


791-93
 
7-20-93
 
54.03


793-93
 
8-10-93
 
T.S.O. VII


794-93
 
8-10-93
 
T.S.O. X


800-94
 
1-25-94
 
159.01


801-94
 
2-22-94
 
52.07, 53.02


802-94
 
3-15-94
 
51.01


805-94
 
5-10-94
 
T.S.O. II


806-94
 
5-10-94
 
T.S.O. V


807-94
 
12-27-94
 
T.S.O. IV, T.S.O. VII


811-94
 
7-5-94
 
T.S.O. II


813-94
 
7-26-94
 
T.S.O. X


814-94
 
7-26-94
 
T.S.O. III


815-94
 
7-26-94
 
T.S.O. II


816-94
 
8-23-94
 
T.S.O. II


817-94
 
8-23-94
 
T.S.O. III


818-94
 
8-23-94
 
T.S.O. X


819-94
 
9-6-94
 
T.S.O. IX


820-94
 
9-6-94
 
110.16


821-94
 
8-23-94
 
153.02


822-94
 
9-27-94
 
50.03


823-94
 
9-27-94
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IX


824-94
 
9-27-94
 
T.S.O. II


825-94
 
10-11-94
 
T.S.O. X


826-94
 
11-15-94
 
T.S.O. X


827-94
 
11-15-94
 
T.S.O. X


828-94
 
11-15-94
 
T.S.O. X


829-94
 
11-15-94
 
T.S.O. X


830-94
 
11-15-94
 
T.S.O. X


831-94
 
11-15-94
 
T.S.O. X


832-94
 
11-15-94
 
T.S.O. X


833-94
 
11-15-94
 
T.S.O. X


834-94
 
11-15-94
 
T.S.O. X


835-94
 
11-15-94
 
T.S.O. X


838-94
 
12-13-94
 
T.S.O. XI


839-95
 
1-17-95
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IX


840-95
 
1-17-95
 
Ch. 77, Sch. VI


841-95
 
2-21-95
 
T.S.O. X


843-95
 
2-28-95
 
151.01


844-95
 
3-21-95
 
T.S.O. V


845-95
 
5-30-95
 
51.01


847-95
 
7-25-95
 
31.04, 31.17


848-95
 
8-8-95
 
T.S.O. II


849-95
 
9-19-95
 
31.10


850-95
 
11-7-95
 
30.105 - 30.112


Am. Ord. 850-95
 
8-2-03
 
30.110


851-95
 
11-21-95
 
150.80


851-95
 
11-14-95
 
T.S.O. II


852-95
 
11-14-95
 
T.S.O. X


853-95
 
11-14-95
 
T.S.O. III


853-95
 
12-12-95
 
T.S.O. III


854-95
 
12-12-95
 
T.S.O. III


855-95
 
12-12-95
 
T.S.O. III


861-96
 
1-2-96
 
34.30


862-96
 
1-2-96
 
T.S.O. X


863-96
 
1-2-96
 
T.S.O. X


864-96
 
1-2-96
 
T.S.O. X


865-96
 
1-2-96
 
T.S.O. X


866-96
 
1-2-96
 
T.S.O. X


867-96
 
1-2-96
 
T.S.O. X


868-96
 
1-16-96
 
32.32


869-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. II


870-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. III


871-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. II


872-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. III


873-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. II


874-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. III


875-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. II


876-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. III


877-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. II


878-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. III


880-96
 
2-6-96
 
T.S.O. III


881-96
 
2-6-96
 
T.S.O. II


882-96
 
2-6-96
 
T.S.O. II


883-96
 
2-6-96
 
T.S.O. III


884-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. II


885-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. III


886-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. III


887-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. X


888-96
 
1-16-96
 
T.S.O. X


889-96
 
2-6-96
 
T.S.O. X


894-96
 
3-5-96
 
157.01


895-96
 
3-12-96
 
T.S.O. X


911-96
 
5-14-96
 
T.S.O. II


912-96
 
5-14-96
 
T.S.O. X


913-96
 
5-14-96
 
T.S.O. II


915-96
 
5-28-96
 
35.04


916-96
 
6-4-96
 
T.S.O. III


919-96
 
6-25-96
 
T.S.O. X


920-96
 
6-25-96
 
T.S.O. II


921-96
 
6-25-96
 
T.S.O. III


928-96
 
8-13-96
 
T.S.O. III


930-96
 
9-3-96
 
T.S.O. III


932-96
 
10-1-96
 
T.S.O. X


933-96
 
10-1-96
 
35.03


934-96
 
10-1-96
 
T.S.O. II


936-96
 
10-8-96
 
T.S.O. X


937-96
 
10-8-96
 
T.S.O. X


938-96
 
10-22-96
 
T.S.O. X


939-96
 
11-19-96
 
T.S.O. II


940-96
 
11-19-96
 
T.S.O. II


941-96
 
11-19-96
 
T.S.O. II


942-96
 
11-19-96
 
T.S.O. II


944-97
 
1-21-97
 
T.S.O. III


945-97
 
1-21-97
 
T.S.O. X


946-97
 
1-21-97
 
T.S.O. II


947-97
 
3-11-97
 
T.S.O. II


948-97
 
4-8-97
 
112.01, 112.18, 112.20


949-97
 
4-22-97
 
T.S.O. IX


953-97
 
4-22-97
 
52.60 - 52.62


954-97
 
4-29-97
 
150.01


955-97
 
5-27-97
 
T.S.O. X


957-97
 
6-10-97
 
31.03


958-97
 
6-17-97
 
70.42


960-97
 
7-15-97
 
T.S.O. III


962-97
 
8-19-97
 
T.S.O. X


964-98
 
1-20-98
 
T.S.O. VI


965-97
 
8-19-97
 
T.S.O. X


967-97
 
9-16-97
 
T.S.O. I


968-97
 
9-16-97
 
T.S.O. III


969-97
 
9-16-97
 
T.S.O. II


970-97
 
9-16-97
 
T.S.O. X


971-97
 
9-16-97
 
T.S.O. II


972-97
 
9-16-97
 
T.S.O. X


973-97
 
10-8-97
 
112.20


974-97
 
11-4-97
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


975-97
 
11-4-97
 
34.60 - 34.67


976-97
 
11-4-97
 
T.S.O. X


978-97
 
12-2-97
 
T.S.O. X


980-98
 
1-20-98
 
T.S.O. X


981-98
 
3-17-98
 
153.02


983-98
 
2-3-98
 
T.S.O. X


984-98
 
2-3-98
 
Repealing Ch. 77, Sch. VIII


985-98
 
2-17-98
 
30.090 - 30.095


987-98
 
3-3-98
 
151.01


988-98
 
3-17-98
 
T.S.O. V


989-98
 
4-7-98
 
T.S.O. III


990-98
 
4-7-98
 
T.S.O. IV


992-98
 
4-7-98
 
31.05


993-98
 
6-2-98
 
Ch. 97


994-98
 
5-12-98
 
T.S.O. II


995-98
 
5-19-98
 
T.S.O. X


998-98
 
6-2-98
 
T.S.O. X


999-98
 
6-16-98
 
Ch. 98


1000-98
 
5-19-98
 
T.S.O. X


1001-98
 
7-21-98
 
T.S.O. X


1002-98
 
8-18-98
 
T.S.O. V


1004-98
 
10-6-98
 
30.035


1006-98
 
10-6-98
 
32.02


1007-98
 
10-6-98
 
T.S.O. X


1008-98
 
11-3-98
 
T.S.O. II


1009-98
 
11-3-98
 
T.S.O. X


1010-98
 
11-3-98
 
T.S.O. X


1011-98
 
11-3-98
 
159.01


1013-98
 
12-15-98
 
T.S.O. VII


1014-98
 
12-17-98
 
T.S.O. XI


1016-99
 
2-16-99
 
T.S.O. V


1017-99
 
1-26-99
 
T.S.O. XI


1019-99
 
3-2-99
 
Ch. 116


1020-99
 
3-16-99
 
159.01


1021-99
 
3-16-99
 
159.01


1024-99
 
6-15-99
 
T.S.O. III


1026-99
 
6-15-99
 
159.01


1028-99
 
7-6-99
 
52.01, 53.52


1029-99
 
7-6-99
 
96.10


1030-99
 
6-15-99
 
35.06


1032-99
 
7-6-99
 
T.S.O. X


1034-99
 
10-5-99
 
157.01


1035-99
 
10-5-99
 
33.10


1036-99
 
10-5-99
 
T.S.O. X


1037-99
 
10-5-99
 
T.S.O. X


1038-99
 
10-19-99
 
97.02, 91.12


1039-99
 
11-2-99
 
T.S.O. III


1040-99
 
11-2-99
 
Ch. 77, Schs. II, VII, VIII; Ch. 78, Schs. I, VIII, IX


1042-99
 
11-16-99
 
112.25


1044-99
 
12-7-99
 
T.S.O. X


1045-00
 
1-4-00
 
T.S.O. X


1046-00
 
1-18-00
 
T.S.O. II


1047-00
 
3-7-00
 
T.S.O. X


1048-00
 
3-7-00
 
T.S.O. II


1049-00
 
3-7-00
 
T.S.O. III


1050-00
 
3-7-00
 
T.S.O. X


1051-00
 
3-7-00
 
T.S.O. IX


1052-00
 
3-21-00
 
T.S.O. X


1053-00
 
12-19-00
 
34.71 - 34.87


1055-00
 
6-20-00
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


1057-00
 
6-20-00
 
T.S.O. X


1059-00
 
6-20-00
 
T.S.O. X


1063-00
 
9-5-00
 
153.01 - 153.03


1064-00
 
9-5-00
 
T.S.O. IX


1066-00
 
9-5-00
 
T.S.O. IV


1067-00
 
9-5-00
 
T.S.O. IX


1068-00
 
9-5-00
 
T.S.O. X


1070-00
 
10-3-00
 
T.S.O. V


1073-00
 
11-21-00
 
T.S.O. X


1074-00
 
12-19-00
 
T.S.O. X


1075-01
 
2-6-01
 
159.01


1078-01
 
2-20-01
 
T.S.O. X


1079-01
 
2-20-01
 
T.S.O. X


1080-01
 
3-20-01
 
150.01 - 150.06, 150.42, 150.43, 150.50 - 150.52, 150.86, 150.87, 150.99;
renumbering 150.15 as 150.80, 150.20 as 150.21, 150.75 and 150.76 as 150.40;
repealing 150.02, 150.15 - 150.17, 150.30, 150.31, 150.50, 150.51, 150.99


1083-01
 
4-17-01
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


1084-01
 
4-17-01
 
T.S.O. II


1086-01
 
4-17-01
 
T.S.O. X


1087-01
 
4-17-01
 
T.S.O. X


1088-01
 
5-1-01
 
159.01


1091-01
 
6-19-01
 
T.S.O. X


1092-01
 
6-19-01
 
T.S.O. X


1093-01
 
6-19-01
 
T.S.O. II


1094-01
 
6-19-01
 
T.S.O. II


1097-01
 
8-7-01
 
T.S.O. VIII


1098-01
 
8-7-01
 
T.S.O. X


1099-01
 
8-21-01
 
97.11


1100-01
 
8-21-01
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1101-01
 
10-2-01
 
Ch. 78, Schs. I, II, III and IV; repealing Ch. 78, Sch. V


1102-01
 
9-18-01
 
T.S.O. IX


1104-01
 
9-18-01
 
T.S.O. II


1105-01
 
9-18-01
 
T.S.O. X


1106-01
 
9-18-01
 
T.S.O. III


1108-01
 
10-16-01
 
T.S.O. X


1109-01
 
10-16-01
 
T.S.O. X


1110-01
 
10-16-01
 
T.S.O. X


1111-01
 
10-2-01
 
72.02, 72.10


1113-01
 
11-20-01
 
Ch. 78, Schs. I and II


1115-01
 
12-18-01
 
T.S.O. II


1116-01
 
12-18-01
 
T.S.O. II


1117-01
 
12-18-01
 
T.S.O. II


1119-02
 
3-19-02
 
110.16


1120-02
 
1-15-02
 
T.S.O. X


1121-02
 
1-15-02
 
T.S.O. IX


1122-02
 
1-15-02
 
159.01


1123-02
 
2-5-02
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1124-02
 
2-19-02
 
130.02


1127-02
 
3-19-02
 
T.S.O. X


1130-02
 
3-19-02
 
112.18


1131-02
 
4-16-02
 
159.01


1132-02
 
4-16-02
 
T.S.O. X


1133-02
 
5-7-02
 
93.01, 93.03, 93.04, 93.06, 93.07


1136-02
 
5-21-02
 
T.S.O. X


1140-02
 
7-16-02
 
Repealing 90.25 - 90.29


1141-02
 
7-16-02
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


1143-02
 
8-13-02
 
T.S.O. XI


1146-02
 
9-3-02
 
T.S.O. X


1147-02
 
9-3-02
 
T.S.O. X


1152-02
 
11-5-02
 
T.S.O. X


1153-02
 
12-17-02
 
T.S.O. II


1156-02
 
11-19-02
 
T.S.O. XI


1158-03
 
1-21-03
 
31.03


1159-03
 
4-15-03
 
T.S.O. X


1162-03
 
7-1-03
 
T.S.O. III


1163-03
 
7-1-03
 
T.S.O. II


1164-03
 
7-1-03
 
T.S.O. X


1168-03
 
7-15-03
 
T.S.O. X


1169-03
 
7-15-03
 
T.S.O. X


1173-03
 
7-15-03
 
T.S.O. X


1174-03
 
8-9-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1175-03
 
8-19-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1176-03
 
8-19-03
 
T.S.O. II


1177-03
 
8-19-03
 
T.S.O. II


1178-03
 
8-19-03
 
T.S.O. X


1179-03
 
10-21-03
 
110.16


1180-03
 
9-2-03
 
T.S.O. X


1181-03
 
9-2-03
 
112.20


1183-03
 
10-21-03
 
79.01 - 79.04, 79.99


1184-03
 
10-21-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1185-03
 
11-4-03
 
T.S.O. X


1186-03
 
11-4-03
 
159.01


1187-03
 
11-18-03
 
T.S.O. VII


1188-03
 
12-2-03
 
159.01


1189-03
 
12-2-03
 
T.S.O. VII


1191-04
 
1-6-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1192-04
 
1-6-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1193-04
 
1-6-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1194-04
 
1-20-04
 
T.S.O. X


1195-04
 
2-3-04
 
31.03


1196-04
 
3-2-04
 
T.S.O. II


1197-04
 
3-2-04
 
T.S.O. X


1199-04
 
4-20-04
 
112.20


1200-04
 
4-20-04
 
112.20


1202-04
 
4-20-04
 
T.S.O. X


1204-04
 
5-4-04
 
150.51


1205-04
 
8-17-04
 
36.01 - 36.06, 36.99


1207-04
 
5-18-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1208-04
 
11-2-04
 
153.02


1209-04
 
6-15-04
 
T.S.O. X


1211-04
 
7-6-04
 
T.S.O. VII


1213-04
 
8-10-04
 
T.S.O. X


1217-04
 
8-10-04
 
T.S.O. X


1218-04
 
8-17-04
 
T.S.O. X


1219-04
 
9-7-04
 
55.01 - 55.13, 55.99


1221-04
 
9-21-04
 
112.20


1223-04
 
10-5-04
 
T.S.O. II


1224-04
 
10-10-04
 
T.S.O. II


1225-04
 
10-5-04
 
T.S.O. X


1226-04
 
10-19-04
 
90.10


1227-04
 
10-19-04
 
159.01


1228-04
 
10-19-04
 
130.01


1229-04
 
10-19-04
 
70.99, 72.99


1231-04
 
11-16-04
 
90.16


1234-05
 
2-1-05
 
159.01


1235-05
 
1-25-05
 
T.S.O. X


1236-05
 
2-15-05
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1237-05
 
2-15-05
 
T.S.O. X


1238-05
 
3-15-05
 
110.16, 110.99


1239-05
 
3-15-05
 
T.S.O. X


1240-05
 
3-15-05
 
T.S.O. X


1241-05
 
3-29-05
 
T.S.O. X


1242-05
 
4-19-05
 
T.S.O. II


1243-05
 
4-5-05
 
T.S.O. IX


1244-05
 
4-5-05
 
T.S.O. X


1245-05
 
4-5-05
 
T.S.O. X


1246-05
 
4-5-05
 
T.S.O. X


1247-05
 
4-5-05
 
T.S.O. X


1248-05
 
4-19-05
 
153.04


1250-05
 
4-19-05
 
T.S.O. X


1251--5
 
4-19-05
 
T.S.O. X


1253-05
 
5-3-05
 
159.01


1254-05
 
5-3-05
 
112.20


1255-05
 
5-3-05
 
112.20, 159.01


1256-05
 
5-3-05
 
34.40, 34.41


1257-05
 
5-17-05
 
90.01 - 90.06, 90.08 - 90.10, 90.17, 90.20, 90.25 - 90.31, 90.36, 90.37, 90.99


1258-05
 
6-7-05
 
79.03


1259-05
 
6-7-05
 
112.20


1260-05
 
6-7-05
 
112.20


1261-05
 
6-21-05
 
T.S.O. X


1262-05
 
6-21-05
 
T.S.O. X


1263-05
 
9-20-05
 
111.01 - 111.13, 111.99


1264-05
 
6-21-05
 
T.S.O. X


1265-05
 
6-21-05
 
117.01 - 117.03, 117.99


1267-05
 
8-16-05
 
T.S.O. X


1268-05
 
8-16-05
 
T.S.O. X


1269-05
 
9-6-05
 
T.S.O. X


1270-05
 
9-20-05
 
T.S.O. X


1271-05
 
9-20-05
 
T.S.O. II


1272-05
 
9-20-05
 
T.S.O. X


1273-05
 
11-1-05
 
T.S.O. X


1274-05
 
11-1-05
 
32.35, 32.36, 52.07, 53.02


1275-05
 
11-1-05
 
154.28


1276-05
 
11-15-05
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1277-05
 
11-15-05
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1278-05
 
11-15-05
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1280-05
 
11-15-05
 
T.S.O. X


1281-05
 
11-15-05
 
T.S.O. X


1282-05
 
11-15-05
 
T.S.O. X


1283-05
 
11-15-05
 
T.S.O. X


1284-05
 
11-15-05
 
T.S.O. II


1285-05
 
12-6-05
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


1287-06
 
1-17-06
 
159.01


1288-06
 
1-17-06
 
T.S.O. X


1289-06
 
1-17-06
 
T.S.O. X


1290-06
 
2-7-06
 
159.01


1291-06
 
3-7-06
 
T.S.O. X


1292-06
 
2-7-06
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IV


1295-06
 
2-7-06
 
T.S.O. IV


1296-05
 
2-21-06
 
Repealing 30.120 - 30.122


1297-06
 
2-21-06
 
Repealing 30.080 - 30.082


1300-06
 
3-7-06
 
T.S.O. X


1302-06
 
3-21-06
 
T.S.O. X


1303-06
 
3-21-06
 
T.S.O. X


1306-06
 
4-18-06
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


1307-06
 
4-18-06
 
112.20


1308-06
 
4-18-06
 
112.20


1310-06
 
4-18-06
 
T.S.O. X


1311-06
 
5-2-06
 
T.S.O. III


1312-06
 
5-2-06
 
112.20


1313-06
 
5-2-06
 
T.S.O. X


1314-06
 
5-2-06
 
159.01


1315-06
 
5-2-06
 
159.01


1316-06
 
5-2-06
 
159.01


1317-06
 
6-20-06
 
T.S.O. III


1318-06
 
6-13-06
 
T.S.O. VII


1319-06
 
6-20-06
 
T.S.O. X


1320-06
 
6-20-06
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


1321-06
 
9-19-06
 
72.99


1322-06
 
9-19-06
 
T.S.O. X


1323-06
 
6-13-06
 
T.S.O. III


1324-06
 
7-11-06
 
T.S.O. II


1325-06
 
7-18-06
 
T.S.O. X


1326-06
 
7-18-06
 
T.S.O. X


1327-06
 
7-18-06
 
96.28


1328-06
 
8-1-06
 
153.02


1329-06
 
1-24-07
 
T.S.O. X


1330-06
 
8-1-06
 
T.S.O. XI


1331-06
 
9-5-06
 
T.S.O. I


1332-06
 
8-15-06
 
T.S.O. III


1333-06
 
9-5-06
 
157.01


1334-06
 
9-5-06
 
T.S.O. X


1335-06
 
9-19-06
 
159.01


1336-06
 
9-19-06
 
T.S.O. III


1337-06
 
10-3-06
 
T.S.O. X


1338-06
 
10-3-06
 
T.S.O. X


1340-06
 
10-17-06
 
T.S.O. X


1341-06
 
10-17-06
 
T.S.O. X


1342-06
 
10-31-06
 
T.S.O. X


1343-06
 
12-5-06
 
T.S.O. X


1344-06
 
11-21-06
 
T.S.O. III


1345-06
 
11-21-06
 
T.S.O. IX


1346-06
 
12-19-06
 
T.S.O. X


1347-06
 
11-21-06
 
T.S.O. X


1348-06
 
11-21-06
 
T.S.O. X


1349-06
 
1-9-07
 
T.S.O. X


1350-06
 
12-5-06
 
T.S.O. X


1351-06
 
12-5-06
 
T.S.O. X


1352-06
 
12-5-06
 
T.S.O. X


1353-06
 
12-5-06
 
T.S.O. X


1354-06
 
12-5-06
 
T.S.O. IX


1355-06
 
12-5-06
 
159.01


1356-06
 
12-19-06
 
159.01


1357-06
 
12-19-06
 
T.S.O. IX


1358-06
 
12-19-06
 
T.S.O. III


1360-06
 
1-16-07
 
95.56


1361-07
 
1-9-07
 
150.51


1362-07
 
1-9-07
 
T.S.O. III


1363-07
 
1-16-07
 
T.S.O. X


1364-07
 
1-16-07
 
T.S.O. X


1366-07
 
2-6-07
 
112.20


1367-07
 
2-6-07
 
112.28


1368-07
 
3-6-07
 
T.S.O. X


1369-07
 
3-20-07
 
T.S.O. III


1370-07
 
3-20-07
 
72.40


1371-07
 
3-20-07
 
T.S.O. X


1372-07
 
3-20-07
 
T.S.O. X


1373-07
 
3-20-07
 
T.S.O. X


1374-07
 
4-3-07
 
T.S.O. X


1375-07
 
4-3-07
 
T.S.O. I, T.S.O. IX


1376-07
 
4-17-07
 
70.02, 70.99


1377-07
 
4-17-07
 
T.S.O. X


1378-07
 
4-17-07
 
99.01 - 99.05, 99.99


1379-07
 
4-17-07
 
T.S.O. IX


1380-07
 
4-17-07
 
T.S.O. X


1382-07
 
6-5-07
 
159.01


1383-07
 
5-1-07
 
112.20


1384-07
 
5-1-07
 
T.S.O. X


1385-07
 
5-22-07
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


1386-07
 
6-5-07
 
159.01


1387-07
 
6-19-07
 
T.S.O. III


1390-07
 
7-17-07
 
T.S.O. X


1391-07
 
7-17-07
 
T.S.O. X


1392-07
 
7-17-07
 
T.S.O. X


1393-07
 
7-24-07
 
70.99


1394-07
 
7-24-07
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1395-07
 
9-4-07
 
T.S.O. X


1397-07
 
9-4-07
 
T.S.O. III


1398-07
 
9-18-07
 
T.S.O. X


1399-07
 
9-18-07
 
T.S.O. X


1402-07
 
10-2-07
 
T.S.O. X


1403-07
 
10-16-07
 
110.17


1404-07
 
10-16-07
 
T.S.O. X


1405-07
 
10-16-07
 
T.S.O. X


1413-07
 
12-18-07
 
116.40, 116.50


1414-07
 
12-18-07
 
T.S.O. VII


1416-07
 
12-18-07
 
T.S.O. VII


1418-07
 
12-18-07
 
118.01 - 118.05


1419-07
 
12-18-07
 
118.20 - 118.24


1420-07
 
12-18-07
 
56.01- 56.25


1421-07
 
12-18-07
 
T.S.O. X


1422-07
 
12-18-07
 
T.S.O. X


1423-07
 
12-18-07
 
T.S.O. II


1424-08
 
1-8-08
 
95.56


1426-08
 
1-8-08
 
30.080, 30.081


1427-08
 
1-29-08
 
T.S.O. X


1428-08
 
2-19-08
 
30.110


1430-08
 
4-1-08
 
T.S.O. XI


1431-08
 
4-1-08
 
T.S.O. XI


1432-08
 
4-1-08
 
T.S.O. X


1433-08
 
4-1-08
 
159.01


1434-08
 
4-1-08
 
T.S.O. X


1436-08
 
4-8-08
 
T.S.O. X


1438-08
 
5-20-08
 
150.80


1439-08
 
5-6-08
 
T.S.O. IX


1440-08
 
12-16-08
 
T.S.O. X


1442-08
 
5-20-08
 
T.S.O. X


1444-08
 
5-20-08
 
T.S.O. II


1445-08
 
5-20-08
 
112.20


1446-08
 
- -08
 
159.01


1448-08
 
7-15-08
 
T.S.O. X


1451-08
 
9-2-08
 
T.S.O. X


1452-08
 
9-2-08
 
T.S.O. X


1453-08
 
9-2-08
 
112.20


1454-08
 
9-2-08
 
T.S.O. X


1455-08
 
9-16-08
 
T.S.O. X


1456-08
 
9-9-08
 
T.S.O. X


1459-08
 
10-7-08
 
153.02


1461-08
 
10-21-08
 
T.S.O. X


1462-08
 
11-4-08
 
150.80


1464-08
 
11-4-08
 
150.01 - 150.09, 150.11, 150.12, 150.21, 150.25, 150.31, 150.35 - 150.37,
150.39, 150.51, 150.99; repealing 92.01 - 92.16, 150.40, 150.44, 150.50


1465-08
 
11-4-08
 
T.S.O. X


1466-08
 
11-18-08
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


1467-08
 
11-18-08
 
T.S.O. X


1469-09
 
3-3-09
 
159.01


1470-08
 
12-16-08
 
T.S.O. X


1471-08
 
12-16-08
 
T.S.O. X


1474-09
 
1-20-09
 
T.S.O. III, T.S.O. IV


1475-09
 
1-20-09
 
T.S.O. IV


1476-09
 
1-27-09
 
T.S.O. III


1478-09
 
2-10-09
 
112.20


1481-09
 
11-18-08
 
155.01, 155.05, 159.01


1482-09
 
3-10-09
 
T.S.O. III


1484-09
 
5-19-09
 
T.S.O. III, T.S.O. IV


1485-09
 
5-19-09
 
T.S.O. III


1486-09
 
5-12-09
 
T.S.O. IV


1490-09
 
7-7-09
 
T.S.O. VIII


1494-09
 
7-28-09
 
T.S.O. II


1495-09
 
7-28-09
 
T.S.O. XI


1496-09
 
7-28-09
 
T.S.O. XI


1499-09
 
8-18-09
 
T.S.O. IV


1505-09
 
11-3-09
 
T.S.O. XI


1506-09
 
11-3-09
 
119.01


1512-09
 
12-15-09
 
131.01, 131.02, 131.99


1516-10
 
1-19-10
 
154.22


1519-10
 
2-16-10
 
112.20


1520-10
 
3-16-10
 
159.01


1522-10
 
5-4-10
 
112.20


1523-10
 
5-4-10
 
112.20


1524-10
 
5-4-10
 
31.19


1525-10
 
5-11-10
 
T.S.O. III, T.S.O. XI


1526-10
 
12-7-10
 
T.S.O. X


1527-10
 
5-18-10
 
159.01


1531-10
 
6-29-10
 
T.S.O. I


1533-10
 
7-20-10
 
159.01


1537-10
 
8-17-10
 
53.65 - 53.91


1538-10
 
8-17-10
 
T.S.O. III


1541-10
 
8-17-10
 
159.01


1545-10
 
9-7-10
 
T.S.O. II, T.S.O. X


1546-10
 
9-21-10
 
32.25


1547-10
 
9-21-10
 
112.37


1548-10
 
10-19-10
 
159.01


1549-10
 
10-19-10
 
159.01


1550-10
 
11-2-10
 
54.03, 54.04


1551-10
 
11-16-10
 
76.10


1553-10
 
12-21-10
 
52.01, 52.02, 52.25, 52.28, 54.02, 54.06


1554-10
 
11-17-10
 
T.S.O. VII


1555-10
 
12-21-10
 
52.63, 52.99


1556-10
 
12-21-10
 
T.S.O. X


1557-10
 
12-21-10
 
T.S.O. X


1559-11
 
1-18-11
 
T.S.O. VII


1560-11
 
1-18-11
 
T.S.O. X


1562-11
 
2-8-11
 
131.02


1563-11
 
2-9-11
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IV


1564-11
 
2-8-11
 
T.S.O. X


1567-11
 
4-19-11
 
T.S.O. X


1569-11
 
4-19-11
 
T.S.O. X


1570-11
 
4-19-11
 
54.03, 54.04


1571-11
 
6-7-11
 
34.45 - 34.49


1572-11
 
6-7-11
 
34.55 - 34.59


1574-11
 
5-17-11
 
T.S.O. X


1575-11
 
6-21-11
 
T.S.O. X


1576-11
 
7-16-11
 
34.15


1577-11
 
6-7-11
 
T.S.O. X


1578-11
 
6-7-11
 
T.S.O. X


1579-11
 
6-7-11
 
T.S.O. X


1581-11
 
6-21-11
 
T.S.O. VII


1582-11
 
6-21-11
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


1583-11
 
6-21-11
 
53.36


1585-11
 
8-16-11
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


1586-11
 
8-2-11
 
T.S.O. X


1590-11
 
11-15-11
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1593-11
 
11-15-11
 
150.81


1594-11
 
11-15-11
 
T.S.O. X


1595-11
 
11-15-11
 
T.S.O. X


1596-11
 
12-13-11
 
54.03, 54.04


1599-11
 
12-13-11
 
T.S.O. X


1600-11
 
12-13-11
 
T.S.O. VII


1601-11
 
12-13-11
 
150.37


1602-11
 
12-13-11
 
55.11


1603-12
 
1-17-12
 
150.37


1604-12
 
1-17-12
 
55.11


1605-12
 
1-17-12
 
159.01


1606-12
 
1-17-12
 
150.11, 150.37


1607-12
 
2-21-12
 
76.10


1609-12
 
2-21-12
 
T.S.O. X


1610-12
 
2-21-12
 
T.S.O. X


1611-12
 
2-21-12
 
T.S.O. II, X


1614-12
 
3-20-12
 
130.03, 130.99


1615-12
 
3-20-12
 
T.S.O. X


1616-12
 
4-3-12
 
T.S.O. III


1617-12
 
4-3-12
 
112.20


1618-12
 
4-3-12
 
112.20


1620-12
 
4-17-12
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


1622-12
 
5-15-12
 
T.S.O. X


1624-12
 
6-19-12
 
112.20


1625-12
 
6-19-12
 
112.20


1628-12
 
7-3-12
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1629-12
 
7-3-12
 
159.01


1630-12
 
7-24-12
 
153.02


1631-12
 
8-7-12
 
T.S.O. X


1632-12
 
9-4-12
 
T.S.O. X


1634-12
 
10-2-12
 
112.18


1635-12
 
10-2-12
 
112.20


1636-12
 
11-20-12
 
32.02


1637-12
 
11-20-12
 
T.S.O. X


1638-12
 
11-20-12
 
T.S.O. X


1639-12
 
11-20-12
 
T.S.O. I


1640-12
 
11-20-12
 
52.63


1645-13
 
1-15-13
 
T.S.O. IX


1646-13
 
2-19-13
 
T.S.O. X


1647-13
 
3-19-13
 
T.S.O. X


1648-13
 
4-2-13
 
112.20


1649-13
 
4-2-13
 
112.20


1651-13
 
4-16-13
 
T.S.O. X


1652-13
 
5-7-13
 
T.S.O. X


1653-13
 
5-7-13
 
T.S.O. X


1654-13
 
5-7-13
 
T.S.O. X


1656-13
 
5-21-13
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1657-13
 
5-21-13
 
110.15


1658-13
 
6-4-13
 
112.20


1659-13
 
6-4-13
 
112.20


1661-13
 
6-18-13
 
T.S.O. IV


1662-13
 
6-18-13
 
T.S.O. IV


1664-13
 
5-7-13
 
T.S.O. X


1665-13
 
8-6-13
 
T.S.O. XI


1666-13
 
8-20-13
 
112.20


1667-13
 
8-20-13
 
96.28


1668-13
 
8-20-13
 
112.01, 112.02, 112.15 - 112.30, 112.36, 112.37, 112.39 - 112.43, 112.99


1669-13
 
8-20-13
 
119.01 - 119.06


1670-13
 
9-17-13
 
T.S.O. X


1671-13
 
10-15-13
 
150.21


1672-13
 
10-15-13
 
112.20


1673-13
 
10-15-13
 
112.20


1676-13
 
11-19-13
 
T.S.O. X


1677-13
 
12-3-13
 
T.S.O. X


1678-13
 
12-3-13
 
T.S.O. X


1679-13
 
12-3-13
 
159.01


1680-13
 
12-10-13
 
T.S.O. XI


1681-13
 
12-10-13
 
T.S.O. XI


1684-14
 
1-21-14
 
T.S.O. X


1685-14
 
1-28-14
 
T.S.O. X


1689-14
 
3-18-14
 
T.S.O. X


1690-14
 
3-18-14
 
T.S.O. X


1691-14
 
4-1-14
 
50.03


1692-14
 
4-15-14
 
112.20


1693-14
 
4-15-14
 
T.S.O. X


1694-14
 
5-6-14
 
T.S.O. X


1695-14
 
5-6-14
 
T.S.O. X


1696-14
 
5-20-14
 
T.S.O. VII


1697-14
 
5-20-14
 
32.45 - 32.52


1700-14
 
7-1-14
 
31.20


1701-14
 
7-1-14
 
30.110


1703-14
 
8-19-14
 
T.S.O. X


1705-14
 
6-16-15
 
131.01, 131.02


1706-14
 
9-16-14
 
71.122 - 71.125, 98.01 - 98.08, 98.10, 98.11


1707-14
 
10-7-14
 
112.20


1708-14
 
10-7-14
 
112.20


1709-14
 
10-21-14
 
54.03, 54.04


1710-14
 
11-4-14
 
97.02


1711-14
 
11-4-14
 
150.90


1713-14
 
12-9-14
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1714-14
 
12-16-14
 
116.02, 116.10, 116.12, 116.13, 116.30 - 116.36, 116.38


1716-14
 
12-9-14
 
Repeals 70.50 - 70.57


1720-14
 
12-16-14
 
T.S.O. VII


1721-14
 
12-16-14
 
112.20


1722-14
 
12-16-14
 
112.20


1723-15
 
1-20-15
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1724-15
 
1-20-15
 
51.01


1725-15
 
3-3-15
 
53.36


1729-15
 
2-17-15
 
130.04


1730-15
 
2-17-15
 
T.S.O. X


1731-15
 
2-17-15
 
T.S.O. X


1732-15
 
2-17-15
 
T.S.O. X


1733-15
 
3-17-15
 
T.S.O. X


1735-15
 
4-7-15
 
T.S.O. VIII


1736-15
 
4-7-15
 
T.S.O. X


1737-15
 
4-21-15
 
112.20


1738-15
 
4-21-15
 
112.20


1739-15
 
4-21-15
 
112.20


1740-15
 
4-21-15
 
112.20


1741-15
 
4-21-15
 
112.20


1742-15
 
4-21-15
 
112.20


1743-15
 
11-3-15
 
76.10


1744-15
 
5-5-15
 
T.S.O. VII


1746-15
 
6-16-15
 
T.S.O. X


1747-15
 
6-16-15
 
T.S.O. VII


1748-15
 
6-16-15
 
T.S.O. VII


1749-15
 
6-16-15
 
T.S.O. X


1750-15
 
6-16-15
 
T.S.O. X


1751-15
 
7-7-15
 
151.01


1753-15
 
7-21-15
 
T.S.O. X


1754-15
 
7-21-15
 
T.S.O. X


1755-15
 
7-21-15
 
T.S.O. X


1757-15
 
8-18-15
 
T.S.O. X


1758-15
 
8-18-15
 
T.S.O. X


1759-15
 
8-18-15
 
T.S.O. X


1760-15
 
8-18-15
 
30.060 - 30.062


1761-15
 
8-18-15
 
30.110


1762-15
 
8-18-15
 
150.25


1763-15
 
10-6-15
 
T.S.O. X


1764-15
 
10-20-15
 
112.20


1765-15
 
10-20-15
 
112.20


1766-15
 
10-20-15
 
112.20


1767-15
 
10-20-15
 
150.11, 150.37


1768-15
 
10-6-15
 
30.045, 30.046


1769-15
 
10-20-15
 
T.S.O. X


1770-15
 
10-20-15
 
T.S.O. X


1771-15
 
10-20-15
 
112.20


1773-15
 
11-17-15
 
T.S.O. X


1774-15
 
11-17-15
 
T.S.O. VII


1775-15
 
12-1-15
 
T.S.O. VII


1776-15
 
12-1-15
 
55.13


1780-15
 
12-1-15
 
T.S.O. VII


1781-15
 
12-15-15
 
T.S.O. X


1782-15
 
12-15-15
 
T.S.O. X


1783-15
 
12-15-15
 
T.S.O. X


1784-15
 
12-15-15
 
54.03, 54.04


1788-16
 
1-19-16
 
T.S.O. X


1789-16
 
2-16-16
 
150.37


1790-16
 
2-16-16
 
T.S.O. X


1791-16
 
2-16-16
 
T.S.O. VII


1792-16
 
3-1-16
 
112.20


1794-16
 
3-1-16
 
T.S.O. X


1795-16
 
3-1-16
 
T.S.O. VII


1796-16
 
3-1-16
 
T.S.O. VII


1797-16
 
3-15-16
 
T.S.O. X


1799-16
 
4-19-16
 
112.20


1801-16
 
5-10-16
 
T.S.O. X


1802-16
 
5-17-16
 
T.S.O. X


1803-16
 
6-7-16
 
T.S.O. VII


1804-16
 
6-21-16
 
T.S.O. X


1805-16
 
6-7-16
 
52.02, 54.03, 54.04, 54.06


1806-16
 
7-5-16
 
112.20


1807-16
 
7-5-16
 
112.18


1808-16
 
7-5-16
 
112.20


1810-16
 
8-2-16
 
T.S.O. X


1811-16
 
8-2-16
 
T.S.O. X


1812-16
 
8-16-16
 
T.S.O. X


1813-16
 
8-16-16
 
T.S.O. X


1814-16
 
9-6-16
 
T.S.O. X


1815-16
 
9-6-16
 
54.03, 54.04


1817-16
 
9-20-16
 
33.03


1818-16
 
10-4-16
 
110.17, 150.80, 155.01 - 155.05, 155.99, 159.01


1819-16
 
10-18-16
 
T.S.O. VII


1820-16
 
10-18-16
 
T.S.O. VII


1821-16
 
10-18-16
 
T.S.O. VII


1822-16
 
10-18-16
 
T.S.O. VII


1823-16
 
10-18-16
 
T.S.O. VII


1824-16
 
10-18-16
 
Ch. 78, Sch. III


1825-16
 
11-3-16
 
T.S.O. X


1826-16
 
11-15-16
 
T.S.O. X


1835-16
 
12-20-16
 
T.S.O. X


1836-17
 
1-3-17
 
T.S.O. X


1837-17
 
2-21-17
 
T.S.O. X


1838-17
 
2-21-17
 
T.S.O. X


1839-17
 
2-21-17
 
T.S.O. XI


1840-17
 
3-7-17
 
131.01, 131.02, 131.99


1841-17
 
3-21-17
 
T.S.O. X


1842-17
 
4-4-17
 
150.11, 150.37


1843-17
 
5-2-17
 
112.20


1844-17
 
5-16-17
 
112.20


1846-17
 
6-20-17
 
T.S.O. X


 
The Village of
Itasca, Illinois
Zoning Ordinance
Printed 08/2012
Back of Cover Page
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TOC - 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
1.00 TITLE 1 - 1
2.00 INTENT AND PURPOSE 2 - 1
3.00 RULES AND DEFINITIONS
3.01 Rules 3 - 1
3.02 Definitions 3 - 1
4.00 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4.01 Interpretation 4 - 1
4.02 Separability 4 - 1
4.03 Amendment 4 - 1
4.04 Scope of Regulations 4 - 2
4.05 Use and Bulk Regulations 4 - 3
4.06 Lot Coverage – Permitted Accessory Building, Structure and
Uses Chart
4 - 3
4.07 Home Occupations 4 - 6
4.08 Lot Area and Dimension 4 - 6
4.09 Access to Public Streets 4 - 7
4.10 Number of Buildings on a Zoning Lot 4 - 7
4.11 Two Uses on a Zoning Lot 4 - 7
4.12 Rezoning of Public and Semi-Public Areas 4 - 7
4.13 Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses 4 - 8
4.14 Temporary Buildings 4 - 9
4.15 Performance Standards 4 - 9
4.16 Existing Special Uses 4 - 9
4.17 Uses No Specifically Permitted in District 4 - 9
4.18 Temporary Model Home Regulations 4 - 10
4.19 Landscaping 4 - 10
4.20 Fences 4 - 14
4.21 Public Water and Sanitary Sewers 4 - 19
4.22 Boats, Snowmobiles on or off Trailers; Recreational Vehicles 4 - 19
4.23 Public Utility and/or Services Uses 4 - 20
4.24 Required Water and Sewer and Other Public Improvements 4 - 20
4.25 Required Recording of Plats 4 - 20
4.26 Child Care Centers 4 - 20
4.27 Adult Use Provisions 4 - 20
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TOC - 2
5.00 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
5.01 Statement of Purpose 5 - 1
5.02 Authority to Continue Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures,
and Uses
5 - 1
5.03 Exempted Buildings, Structures, and Uses 5 - 1
5.04 Restrictions of Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures and
Uses Thereof
5 - 2
5.05 Condemnation of Non-Conforming Buildings and Structures 5 - 4
5.06 Non-Conforming Use of Buildings or Structures 5 - 5
5.07 Non-Conforming Use of Land 5 - 6
6.00 ZONING DISTRICTS
6.01 Districts 6 - 1
6.02 Maps 6 - 1
6.03 District Boundaries 6 - 2
6.04 Annexed Territory 6 - 2
6.05 Zoning of Public Ways 6 - 3
7.00 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7.01 Purpose and Intent 7 - 1
7.02 Residence District Provision 7 - 1
7.03 Deleted per Ordinance 1131-02 7 - 2
7.04 R-1 Single-Family Residence District 7 - 2
7.05 R-2 Single-Family Residence District 7 - 5
7.06 R-3 General Residence District 7 - 8
8.00 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8.01 Purpose and Intent 8 - 1
8.02 Business District Provisions – All Business Districts 8 - 1
8.03 B-1 Local Business District 8 - 1
8.04 B-2 Community Business District 8 - 4
8.05 B-3 Service Business District 8 - 11
8.06 B-4 Traditional Downtown North Business District 8 - 15
8.07 B-5 Traditional Downtown South Business District 8 - 18
8.08 B-6 Irving Park Road Business District 8 - 20
9.00 O-R OFFICE RESEARCH DISTRICT
9.01 Purpose and Intent 9 -1
9.02 Permitted Uses 9 - 1
9.03 Special Uses 9 - 2
9.04 Required Conditions 9 - 3
9.05 Floor Area Ratio 9 - 4
9.06 Minimum Lot Size 9 - 5
9.07 Yard Requirements 9 - 5
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TOC - 3
9.08 Maximum Lot Coverage 9 - 5
9.09 Building Height 9 - 5
9.10 Signs 9 - 5
9.11 Off-Street Parking and Loading 9 - 5
10.00 ROC REGIONAL OFFICE CENTER DISTRICT
10.01 Purpose and Intent 10 - 1
10.02 Permitted Uses 10 - 1
10.03 Primary Uses 10 - 2
10.04 Secondary Uses 10 - 2
10.05 Special Uses 10 - 3
10.06 Required Conditions 10 - 4
10.07 Area and Bulk Regulations 10 - 5
10.08 Concept and Site Plan Review Procedures 10 - 7
11.00 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11.01 Purpose and Intent 11 - 1
11.02 Manufacturing District Provisions 11 - 1
11.03 M – Limited Manufacturing District Uses 11 - 6
11.04 Yard Requirements 11 - 13
11.05 Maximum Lot Coverage 11 - 14
11.06 Building Height 11 - 14
11.07 Floor Area Ratio 11 - 14
11.08 Signs 11 - 14
11.09 Off-Street Parking and Loading 11 - 14
12.00 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12.01 Purpose and Intent 12 - 1
12.02 General Provisions 12 - 1
12.03 Additional Regulations – Parking 12 - 3
12.04 Location of Accessory Off-Street Parking 12 - 9
12.05 Schedule of Parking Requirements 12 - 10
12.06 Off-Street Parking Chart 12 - 15
12.07 Additional Regulations – Off Street Loading 12 - 16
12.08 Schedule of Loading Requirements 12 - 17
12.09 Bicycle Parking 12 - 18
13.00 SIGNS
13.01 General Requirements 13 - 1
13.02 Definitions 13 - 5
13.03 Sign Provisions 13 - 5
14.00 ADMINISTRATION
14.01 General Provisions 14 - 1
14.02 Zoning Administrator 14 - 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TOC - 4
14.03 Zoning Certificates 14 - 2
14.04 Certificate of Occupancy 14 - 2
14.05 Certificate for Continued Occupancy of Non-Conforming
Uses
14 - 3
14.06 Zoning Board of Appeals 14 - 3
14.07 Plan Commission 14 - 5
14.08 Appeals 14 - 6
14.09 Variations 14 - 7
14.10 Amendments 14 - 11
14.11 Special Uses 14 - 14
14.12 Planned Development 14 - 17
14.13 Site Plan Review 14 - 36
14.14 Fees 14 - 48
14.15 Violation, Penalty Enforcement 14 - 48
15.00 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
15.01 Applicability 15 - 1
15.02 General Rules 15 - 1
15.03 Permitted Uses 15 - 7
15.04 Special Uses 15 - 8
15.05 Non-Conforming Users 15 - 16
15.06 Annual Reporting of Information 15 - 17
ILLUSTRATIONS
Examples of Residential Lot Definitions 16 - 1
R-1 Single Family Resident District 16 - 2
R-2 Single Family Resident District 16 - 3
R-3 General Residence District 16 - 4
Vision Clearance 16 - 5
Fence Location 16 - 6
Illustration of Lot Definitions (Lot Width, etc.) 16 - 7
Building Height 16 - 8
SECTION 1 TITLE
1 - 1
1.00 TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and referred to as the “Itasca Zoning Ordinance.”
The official date for adoption and effective date of this Ordinance for the
purposes of amortization, discontinuation of uses, and for any section which
references date of adoptions, or effective date shall be the date of the original
adoption of Ordinance 594-85 of August 6, 1985, and such date shall not be
modified due to subsequent amendments of this Ordinance.
SECTION 1 TITLE
1 - 2
SECTION 2 INTENT AND PURPOSE
2 - 1
2.00 INTENT AND PURPOSE
This Ordinance is adopted for the following purposes:
1. To promote and protect public health, safety, morals, comfort, and general
welfare of the people.
2. To divide the Village of Itasca into zones or districts restricting and regulating
therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use
of buildings, structures and land for residence business, manufacturing and
other specified uses.
3. To protect the character and the stability of the residential, business, and
manufacturing areas with the Village of Itasca and to promote the orderly and
beneficial development of such areas.
4. To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to property.
5. To prevent additions to or alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or
structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations imposed
hereunder.
6. To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare by providing for off-street parking of motor
vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles.
7. To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in the
interest of public health, safety, comfort, and general welfare.
8. To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures as
far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by regulating the use and
bulk buildings in relations to the land surrounding them.
9. To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the Village of
Itasca.
10. To provide for the gradual elimination of those uses, buildings, and structures
which are incompatible with the character of the districts in which they are
made or located, including without being limited thereto:
a. Elimination of such uses of unimproved lands or lot areas when the
existing rights of the persons in possession thereof are terminated, or when
the uses to which they are devoted are discontinued; and
b. Elimination of uses to which such buildings and structures are devoted if
they are adaptable for permitted uses; and
SECTION 2 INTENT AND PURPOSE
2 - 2
c. Elimination of such buildings and structures when they are destroyed or
damaged in major part or when they have reached the age fixed by the
corporate authorities or the municipality as the normal useful life of such
buildings or structures.
11. To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and
bodies as provided herein.
12. To prescribe the penalties for the violation of the provisions of this Ordinance
or any amendments thereto.
13. To protect the air, water, and land resources of the Village from the hazards of
pollution.
14. To protect land and buildings and the lawful uses of land and buildings from
natural hazards including flooding and erosion.
15. To encourage development of the zoning districts so that there is compliance
with the General Development Plan, as amended.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 1
3.00 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3.01 RULES
In the construction of this Ordinance, the rules and definitions contained in this
Section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
1. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
2. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words
in the plural number shall include the singular number.
3. The phrase “used for” shall include the phrases “arranged for”, “designed
for”, “intended for”, “maintained for”, and “occupied for”.
4. The word “shall” is mandatory.
5. The word “may” is permissive.
6. All measured distances, expressed in feet, shall be to the nearest integral foot.
If a fraction is one half (1/2) foot or more, the integral foot next above shall be
taken.
7. The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Ordinance, shall
be interpreted as here defined.
3.02 DEFINITIONS
ACCESSORY
BUILDING,
STRUCTURE OR USE
An accessory building, structure, or use is one which:
1. Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or
principal use; and
2. Is subordinate in building area, intensity of use, or
purpose to the principal use served; and
3. Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity
of occupants of the principal building or principal use
served; and
4. Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal
building or principal use served, with the single
exception of such accessory off-street parking
facilities as are permitted to be located elsewhere on
the same zoning lot with the building or use served.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 2
ADULT USES Any commercial or recreational use which purveys, sells,
offers for sale, exhibits or displays sexually orientated
materials or entertainment, including, but not limited to,
adult book stores, adult motion pictures theaters, adult
mini-motion picture theaters, adult drive-in theaters, adult
massage parlors, massage schools or services, adult escort
services, adult modeling studios, adult art studios or
galleries and eating and/or drinking establishments having
sexual oriented performances.
Adult Bookstore: Adult bookstore means an establishment
having more than twenty five (25) percent of its stock and
trade in books, films, video cassettes (whether for viewing
off premises or on premises), or magazines and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
as defined herein.
Adult Cabaret: Adult cabaret means a cabaret, which
features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar
entertainers.
Adult Entertainment: Adult entertainment means any
exhibition or any adult-oriented motion pictures, live
performance, display or dance of any type which has a
significant or substantial portion of such performance any
actual or simulated performance of specified sexual
activities or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical
area, removal of articles of clothing or appearing
unclothed, pantomime, modeling, or any other personal
service offered to customers.
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater: Adult mini-motion
picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity
of less than fifty (50) persons regularly used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities specified anatomical areas, ad defined herein, for
observation by patrons thereof.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: Adult motion picture theater
means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or
more persons regularly used for presenting material having
as a dominant theme or presenting material distinguished
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 3
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined therein, for
observation by patrons therein.
Massage Parlor: An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric
or magnetic treatment, or similar treatment or manipulation
of the human body is administered, unless such treatment
or manipulation is administered by a medical practitioner,
chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist, or similar
professional person licensed by the State. This definition
does not include an athletic club, health club, school,
gymnasium, or similar manipulation of the human body is
offered as an incidental or accessory service.
Sexual Encounter Establishment: An establishment other
than a hotel, motel, or similar establishment offering
accommodations, which for any form of consideration,
provides a place where two or more persons may
congregate, associate, or consort in connection with
specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified
anatomical areas. This definition does not include an
establishment where medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
State engages in sexual therapy.
Sexual Oriented Business: Sexually oriented business shall
mean any premises to which the public patrons or members
are invited or admitted and which are so physically
arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms,
compartments, or stalls separate from the common areas of
the premises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented
motion pictures, or where an entertainer provides adult
entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or
member when such adult entertainment is held, conducted,
operated, or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. A
sexually oriented business further includes, without being
limited to, any adult bookstores, adult motion picture
theaters, adult mini-motion picture establishments, adult
cabaret, adult entertainment studio or any premises that is
physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised
or represented as an adult studio, sensitivity, modeling
studio or any other term of like import.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 4
Specified Anatomical Areas:
1. Less than complete and opaquely covered:
a. Human genitals, pubic region
b. Buttocks and anus
c. Female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the aureole.
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state
even if completely or opaquely.
Specified Sexual Activities:
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;
2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy;
3. Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttock or female breasts.
ALLEY An alley is a dedicated minor public right-of-way, not
more than twenty-four (24) feet in width, affording a
secondary means of access to abutting property and not
intended for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATION Alteration shall mean any change in size, shape, character,
occupancy, or use of a building or structure.
ALTERNATIVE
TOWER STRUCTURE
Alternative tower structure means man-made trees, clock
towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative
design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the
presence of antennas and telecommunications towers.
AMUSEMENT
MACHINES
Amusement machines are any mechanical, electronic,
and/or coin operated games and/or devised for the
amusement of patrons. This definition shall not be
construed to include coin operated music players, coin
operated mechanical kiddy rides, or coin operated
television.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL An animal hospital is any building or portion thereof
designed or used for the care, observation or treatment or
domestic animals.
ANTENNA Antenna is any structure or device used to receive or
radiate electromagnetic waves as defined by the FCC or
any successor agency.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 5
ANTENNA
STRUCTURES
Antenna structures are those structures which include the
radiating and/or receive system, its supporting structures
(see Telecommunications Towers), and any appurtenance
mounted thereon as defined by the FCC or any successor
agency.
APARTMENT (See “Dwelling”)
APARTMENT
HOTEL
(See “Dwelling”)
ARCADE An arcade is a continuous area at ground level, open to a
street or plaza, which is open and unobstructed to a height
of not less that twelve (12) feet, and which is accessible to
the public at all times. Any portion of an arcade occupied
by building columns, landscaping, statuary, or pools shall
be considered to be a part of an arcade for the purpose of
computing a floor area premium credit. The term “arcade”
shall not include off-street loading areas, driveways, offstreet
parking areas, or pedestrian ways accessory thereto.
Arcade, Enclosed: An enclosed arcade is one with less than
twenty-five (25) percent of its perimeter abutting a street or
plaza.
Arcade, Entrance to: An entrance to an arcade is an
opening in a building wall, or between building walls, side
lot lines, or rear lot lines, at around level, unobstructed by
any solid matter, but this shall not be construed to prohibit
air curtains.
Arcade, Unenclosed: An unenclosed arcade is one with
twenty-five (25) percent or more of its perimeter abutting a
street or plaza.
AREA, GROSS The gross area of a parcel or development is the total area,
which excludes right-of-way already dedicated but
includes other land uses and private streets.
AREA, NET The net area of a parcel or development is the area of the
actual tract of land upon which the buildings are proposed
to be located. This area shall include the site for all
principal and accessory building(s) and associated parking
area, but does not include common open space or
recreational facilities, or the vehicular circulation system,
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 6
either private or public.
ATRIUM An atrium is covered space which extends vertically two
(2) or more stories through the building.
ATTIC The space between the ceiling beams of the top habitable
story and the roof rafters.
AUDITORIUM Auditorium is a room, hall or building made a part of a
church, theater, school, recreation building or other
building assigned to the gathering of people as an audience
to hear lectures, plays and other presentations.
AUTOMOBILE
LAUNDRY
(CAR WASH)
An automobile laundry is a building, or portion thereof,
containing facilities for washing motor vehicles, using
automatic production-line methods and may have a chain
conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other
mechanical devices.
AUTOMOBILE
SERVICE STATION
(GAS STATION)
Any building or premises used for dispensing or offering
for sale of automotive fuels or oils having pumps and fuel
storage tanks; also, where battery, tire and other similar
services are rendered, but only if rendered wholly within
the building. When dispensing, selling, or offering for
sale, of any fuels or oils incidental to the conduct of a
public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public
garage. Auto service stations shall not include the sales or
storage (new or used) of automobiles, trailers, or other
vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE
WRECKING YARD
An automobile wrecking yard is any place where three (3)
or more motor vehicles, not in running condition, or the
parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being
restored to operation; or any land, building or structure
used for the wrecking or storing of such automobiles or the
parts thereof.
AWNING An awning shall include any structure made of cloth, metal
or other materials with a rigid frame attached to a building
and projecting over a thoroughfare when the same is so
erected as to permit its being raised to a position flat
against the building when not in use.
BACK HAUL
NETWORK
Back haul network means the lines that connect a
provider’s towers/cell sites to one or more cellular
telephone switching offices, and/or long distance
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 7
providers, or the public switched telephone network.
BANQUET HALL Banquet hall is a building, or portion thereof, primarily
intended to accommodate large groups of diners or patrons.
BASEMENT A portion of a building located that is partly or completely
below grade. If the floor of any basement is less than two
feet, six inches (2’6”) below such grade, or if the ceiling of
such basement is more than five feet, zero inches (5’0”)
above such grade, the basement shall be counted as a
“story” for the purpose of height regulations.
BLOCK A block is a tract of land bounded by street rights-of-way,
or by a combination of street rights-of-way and public
parks, cemeteries, railroad and utility rights-of-way,
bulkhead lines or shorelines of waterways, or corporate
boundary lines.
BOARDING HOUSE
(See “Lodging House”)
BUILDABLE AREA Buildable area is that area remaining on a lot after all yard
requirements have been complied with.
BUILDING A building is any structure, with a permanent roof,
separated on all sides from adjacent open space by exterior
or party walls, built for support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals chattels or moveable property or any
kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land acting
as a subordinate station for the distribution of electric
current of other utilities.
Building Accessory: (See “Accessory Building, Structure
or Use”)
Building, Completely Enclosed: A building separated on
all sides from the adjacent open space or from other
buildings or structures by a permanent roof and party wall,
and by exterior walls pierced by only windows and normal
entrance or exit doors.
Building, Detached: A detached building is one
surrounded by open space on the same zoning lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT Building height shall be measured as the vertical distance
from established grade to the highest point of the building.
In determining height limits, penthouses, roof tanks,
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 8
bulkheads, chimneys, and similar roof structures shall not
be included unless the aggregate of such structures exceed
one-third (1/3) of the area of the roof or the building and
provided the height of such structures is not more than
fifteen (15) feet above the roof level. If a penthouse or any
other structure provides for residential accommodations or
commercial use in part or total, then such area providing
for such use shall be included in the building height
measurement.
BUILDING LINE The line nearest the front of and across a zoning lot,
establishing the minimum open space to be provided
between the front line of a building or structure and the
street right-of-way line. (See Setback Line).
BUILDING,
STRUCTURE OR
PRINCIPAL USE
A principal building, structure or use is the primary
structure or
building housing the use (permitted or special) permitted
within the district, in contradiction to Accessory Building,
Structure or Use.
BUILDING,
TEMPORARY
A temporary building is a structure designed, built, erected,
or occupied for short and/or intermittent periods of time
and shall include tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, trailers,
and other roofed structures on wheels or other supports,
used for residential, business, mercantile, storage,
commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly,
educational, or recreational purposes. For the purpose of
this definition, “roof” shall include an awning or other
similar covering whether or not it is permanent in nature.
BULK Bulk is the term used to determine the size and placement
of buildings or structures; and the location of same with
respect to one another, and includes the following:
a. Size and height of buildings;
b.Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot
lines, streets, or to other buildings;
c. Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor
area ratio);
d.All open spaces allocated to buildings;
e. Amount of lot area and lot width provided per dwelling
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 9
unit.
BUSINESS OR
SERVICE
A business or service is any occupation, employment, or
enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or
which occupies time, attention, labor and materials or
where services are offered for compensation.
CANOPY A canopy shall include any structure, other than an awning,
made of cloth, metal, or other materials, with frames
attached to a building, projected over a thoroughfare, and
carried by a frame supported by the ground, sidewalk or
building and not capable of being raised to a position flat
against the building when not in use.
CARPORT A carport is a roofed automobile shelter with two (2) or
more open sides.
CAR WASH (See “Automobile Laundry”).
CELLAR (See “Basement”).
CEMETERY A cemetery is a parcel of land or structure dedicated to and
at least a portion of which is being used for the interment
of human remains. A cemetery may include crematories,
mausoleums, and columbariums.
CHILD CARE CENTER
(DAY CARE CENTER)
Childcare center is a day care center which receives
preschool or school-aged children, or both, for
short term or extended hours of care, or out of school
hours, and which provide essential personal care,
protection, supervision, training and programs to meet the
needs of the children served. (See “Nursery Schools”).
CLINIC (See “Health Care Facilities”).
CLUB OR LODGE
(PRIVATE)
Club or lodge, private, is a group or association of persons
who are bona fide members paying dues, which owns,
hires, or leases a building, or portion thereof; the use of
such premises being restricted to members and their guests.
The affairs and management of such private club or lodge
are conducted by a Board of Directors, Executive
Committee, or similar body chosen by the members or
owners. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on
such premises, to members and their guests, provided
adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are
available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 10
their guests shall be allowed provided it is secondary and
incidental to the promotion of some other common
objective of the organization, and further provided that
such a sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with
the applicable federal, state and municipal laws.
CLUSTERING (OF
RESIDENCES)
A clustering is a grouping of residential structures around
courts, cul-de-sacs, or short streets more closely than in
conventional residential plans, in order to preserve natural
site amenities and open space.
COMMON CARRIER Individual or organization holding itself out to the general
public to provide motor vehicle or rail transportation of
persons or property over regular routes and without right of
refusal if the approved fare or charge is paid.
COMMUNITY CENTER A community center is a building, together with lawful
accessory buildings and uses, used for recreational or
cultural activities and not operated for profit. Membership
shall be restricted to persons living in a specific
geographical area but shall not be based upon any other
criteria.
Community Center, Theatrical: A theatrical community
center is a building or portion thereof, used for a not-forprofit
organization chartered by the State of Illinois, or
local political jurisdiction, which has its purpose(s) the
promotion, instruction, study, and production of theater art
forms.
Community Recreational Facility: Community
recreational facilities include swimming and/or other sport
facilities, not operated for profit. Membership shall be
restricted to persons living in a specific geographical area
and shall not be based upon any other criteria.
COMPLETELY
ENCLOSED
STRUCTURE
A completely enclosed structure is a building enclosed by a
permanent roof and by solid exterior walls pierced only by
windows and customary entrance and exit doors.
COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN
A comprehensive plan is a plan for the Village, including
graphic and written proposals, indicating the general
locations recommended for the streets, parks, schools,
public buildings, land use areas, and all physical
developments of the Village including any unit or part of
such plan separately adopted, and any amendment to such
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 11
plan and parts thereof, recommended by the Village Plan
Commission (See Section 4.04.5) and adopted by the
Village Board of Trustees.
CONDOMINIUM A condominium is a form of real estate ownership in
which designated units, including volumes of space, are
owned by individual owners who, by virtue of their unit
ownership, have joint use of, interest in, and ownership of
halls, entrance ways, service facilities, lands and such other
improvements as may be included in the Condominium
Declaration required by the Condominium Property Act of
the State of Illinois.
CONTIGUOUS Contiguous means in contact, adjoining, or touching
another structure, property, or boundary as distinguished
from being adjacent.
CONTRACTOR’S AND
CONSTRUCTION
OFFICES
A contractor’s or construction office is any office or other
place of business that is occupied by a person or entity
engaged in the business of contracting with an owner of
land to build, improve, alter, repair or ornament the
land, or a structure thereon, through the furnishing of
materials, fixtures, apparatus, machinery, labor or services.
COOPERATIVE Cooperative is a mutual ownership of property by
shareholders in which title to the land and building is held
by a corporation.
CURB LEVEL Curb level is the level of the established curb in front of
the building measured at the center of such front. Where a
building faces on more than one (1) street, the curb level
shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center
of the front of each street. Where no curb level has been
established, it shall be deemed to be the established level
of the center line of the street surface in front of a building
or structure measured at the enter line of such front.
DENSITY The number of facilities, individuals, dwelling units, or
housing buildings per unit of land.
DENSITY, GROSS Gross density is the numerical value used as measurement
for the general intensity of a residential development.
Gross density is obtained by dividing the total number of
dwelling units in a development by the gross area (in
acres) within the development, the result being the number
of swelling units per gross acre of land (See “Floor Area
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 12
Ratio – F.A.R.” also).
DENSITY, NET Net density is the numerical value used as a measurement
for the specific intensity of that portion of a development
upon which buildings are placed. Net density is obtained
by dividing the total number of dwelling units in a
development by the net area (in acres) within the
development, the result being the number of dwelling units
per net acre of land. (See “Floor Area Ratio – F.A.R.”
also).
DETENTION BASIN The detention basin is a covered or uncovered reservoir
designed to temporarily hold an excessive accumulation of
stormwater so as to reduce peak flow in a stormwater
drainage system.
DEVELOPMENT Development means any man-made change to real estate,
including but not limited to land, buildings, or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT- ALLY
DISABLED PERSON
A developmentally disabled person is a person suffering
from a developmentally disabling disease, including, but
not limited to, mental retardation, epilepsy, autism,
cerebral palsy, or dyslexia.
DISTRIBUTION Distribution is the process by which commodities get to the
consumer. Distribution shall not be interpreted as
warehousing.
DISTRICT A district is an area within (incorporated and/or
unincorporated areas) which certain uniform regulations
and requirements or various combinations thereof apply
under the provision of this Ordinance.
DORMER A projection from a sloping roof that contains a window.
DOWNTOWN DESIGN
GUIDELINES
Detailed guidelines and specifications governing building
architecture and improvements to public streetscapes
within the “Traditional Downtown” area.
DRIVE-IN
ESTABLISHMENT
A drive-in establishment is a place of business being
operated for the sale and purchase, at retail, of food and
other goods, services, or entertainment, which is designed
and equipped so as to allow its patrons to be served or
accommodated while remaining in their automobiles.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 13
DRIVEWAY A driveway is an accessway for motor vehicles from a
street to an off-street building, facility, or a parking area.
DWELLING A dwelling is a building, or portion thereof, designed or
used exclusively for residential occupancy including
single-family dwellings, two family dwellings, and
multiple-family dwellings, but not including mobile
homes, hotels, motels, rooming, boarding, or lodging
houses.
Dwelling, Apartment: An apartment is a room, or suite of
rooms, in a multiple-family building which is arranged,
designed, used or intended to be used as a single
housekeeping unit. Complete bath (water closet, tub
and/or shower and sink) and kitchen facilities (sink, stove,
refrigerator, and storage facilities) permanently installed,
must always be included for each separate apartment.
Dwelling, Apartment – Elderly: An apartment for the
elderly is a room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family
building which is arranged, designed, used or intended to
be used as a single housekeeping unit. Complete kitchen
and bath facilities may or may not be included for each
separate apartment.
Dwelling, Apartment – Hotel: An apartment hotel in
which at least ninety (90) percent of the hotel
accommodations are for occupancy by the permanent
guest. An apartment hotel having not less than fifty (50)
guestrooms, may have a dining room open to the public
which is accessible only from an inner lobby or corridor.
DWELLING UNIT A dwelling unit consists of one (1) or more rooms, which
are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one
(1) family only. Individual bathrooms and complete
kitchen facilities, permanently installed, shall be included
in each dwelling unit.
Dwelling Unit, Efficiency: An efficiency dwelling unit
consists of one (1) principal room for living, sleeping, and
eating plus facilities for cooking and complete bath and
toilet facilities.
Dwelling Unit, Modular: A modular dwelling unit is a
factory-fabricated transportable building designed to be
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 14
used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a
building site into a modular structure that will be a finished
building in a fixed location on a permanent foundation.
The term is intended to apply to major assemblies, and
does not include prefabricated panels, trusses, plumbing
trees, and other prefabricated sub-elements incorporated
into a structure at the site. For the purpose of this
Ordinance, a modular unit shall be deemed a Single Family
Dwelling and shall not be deemed a Mobile Home.
Dwelling Unit, Multiple-Family: A multiple-family
dwelling unit is a building or portion thereof, consisting of
three (3) or more dwelling units which may have a
common entrance. The definition of multiple-family
dwelling unit may include, but shall not be limited to, the
following terms: apartment, condominium, cooperative,
quadrominimium, three-flat, and triplex.
Dwelling Unit, Single-Family – Detached: A singlefamily
detached dwelling unit is building containing a
single dwelling unit only, which is separated from all other
dwelling units by open space on all sides.
Dwelling Unit, Single-Family – Attached (Group,
Rowhouse, or Townhouse): An attached single-family
dwelling is a building attached by common vertical side
walls, without openings and two outside wall adjoining
open space, consisting of not more than five (5) dwelling
units with each dwelling unit having two (2) separate
entrances at grade level. An attached single-family unit
shall include the terms “townhouse” and “rowhouse”.
Dwelling, Semi-Detached: A two-family which is joined to
one (1) other dwelling by a party wall.
Dwelling Unit, Two-Family: A two-family dwelling unit is
a building consisting of two (2) dwelling units which may
be either attached, side-by-side, or one (1) above the other,
with each dwelling unit having a separate or combined
entrance or entrances.
EASEMENT An easement is an authorization or grant by a property
owner for the use by another and for a specific purpose, or
any designated part of this property.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 15
EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTION,
PRIVATE
A private educational institution is every private school or
educational institution, however, designated, which offers
a program of college, professional, preparatory, high
school, junior high school, elementary, kindergarten, or
any combination thereof; but such term does not include:
a. Any institution which is under the supervisory
jurisdiction of an established Illinois Public School
District, or
b. Any activity offering instruction which is carried on
by a single teacher, tutor, or instructor having a total
enrollment of not more than eight (8) students, or
c. Any day care of foster home care having eight (8)
children or less, under twelve (12) years of age,
including all children of the operator’s or owner’s
family, living on premises.
No private educational institution shall be deemed a home
occupation.
EXCAVATING –
FILLING
Excavating – filling, shall mean any substantial changing
of the
grade or sub-grade of a tract of land by cutting, scraping,
grading, trenching, digging, filling-in, or otherwise
reshaping the natural contour of the ground. The following
shall not be construed as excavating – filling:
a. Any cutting, grading, trenching, digging, or
backfilling or any foundation of a building approved
for construction.
b. Top dressing in area of existing homes, which top
dressing does not change the drainage patterns.
FAA FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.
FAMILY A family is one (1) or more persons related by blood,
marriage, or adoption, or a group of not more than five (5)
persons not so related maintaining a common household in
a dwelling unit.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 16
FAMILY CARE HOME
FOR THE
DEVELOPMEN- TALLY
DISABLED
Is a dwelling for five (5) or fewer developmentally
disabled person, in which the program’s size and content
are structured to meet the individual, social, habilitative,
and respite needs of the persons residing therein, in a
residential community setting. Prior to admitting residents,
this dwelling shall comply with applicable licensing
standards of the appropriate Federal, State, or local
agencies, and may, in addition, house such minimum staff
persons as may be required to meet the standards of the
licensing agencies.
FENCE A structure or natural growth, used as a boundary, screen,
separation, means of privacy, protection on confinement:
(See Section 4.20)
Fence, Natural: A natural fence is a fence of natural
growth, such as trees, deciduous shrubs, evergreens, etc.
Fence, Open: A fence, including gates, where more than
fifty percent (50%) of the face area of the fence consists of
openings when viewed at right angles.
Fence, Semi-Solid: A fence, including gates, where less
than fifty percent (50%) of the face area of the fence
consists of openings when viewed at right angles.
Fence, Solid: A fence, including gates, which conceals
from view of adjoining properties, open storage of
materials, and/or operations conducted behind the fenced
area. A solid fence shall have no openings of the face area
when viewed at right angles.
FESTIVAL A festival is any fair, festival, or similar activity where
patrons watch or participate in entertainment, including,
but not limited to, music, shows, concerts, and revivals.
For the purpose of this ordinance, a Carnival or Circus
shall be deemed a festival.
FLASHPOINT Flashpoint is the lowest temperature at which the vapor of
a volatile liquid will ignite with a flash.
FLOOR AREA –
BUILDING/
STRUCTURES
For the purpose of determining the floor area ratio,
maximum allowable floor area, conversions of existing
structures and maximum size of business establishments.
Floor area shall be defined as the sum of the horizontal
area of floor space contained in all floors, including a
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 17
basement floor only when having exposed exterior walls
that extend more than an average of four (4) feet above
grade, or as specified below; of a building or buildings on
a zoning lot, measured in square feet from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls of each building, or from the
center line of party walls separating two buildings or areas.
Such floor area shall also include:
1. space devoted to elevator shafts and stairwells at each
floor;
2. floor space used for mechanical equipment when the
structural headroom exceeds seven feet, zero inches
(7’0”) in height, except equipment such as bulkheads,
water tanks and cooling towers when located on the
roof, whether or not such equipment is in the open or
enclosed;
3. where any building consists of, or is devoted entirely
to, the housing of mechanical or electrical equipment
(commonly referred to as a public or private utility
substation), the sum of the gross horizontal area of
said building shall be its floor area;
4. interior space above any great room or open multistory
element as measured on the plane of the floor of
each full story;
5. floor space devoted to interior balconies, mezzanines
and enclosed porches;
6. floor space devoted to accessory uses in the principal
building and in any accessory building or buildings;
and
7. floor space devoted to enclosed off-street parking and
off-street loading.
FLOOR AREA – OFF
STREET PARKING
AND LOADING
For the purpose of determining off-street and off-street
loading requirements only: the sum of the gross horizontal
areas of the several floors of the building or portion
thereof, devoted to such use requiring off-street parking
and off-street loading. However, such floor area shall not
include atriums, elevator shafts; floor area devoted to offstreet
parking or loading facilities, including aisles, ramps
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 18
and maneuvering space; or basement floor area unless used
for human occupancy or such area is devoted to retailing
activities, to the production or processing of goods or
business or professional offices, or uses, or for uses
incidental to the principal use of the building, except as
provided herein.
FLOOR AREA RATIO The numerical value obtained through dividing the total
floor area of a building or buildings by the gross lot area
on which such building or buildings are located.
FRONTAGE Frontage is all the property fronting on one (1) side of a
street between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets,
measured along the line of the street, or if dead ended, then
all of the property abutting on one (1) side between an
intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
GARAGE, PRIVATE A private garage is an accessory building or an accessory
portion of the principal building, or both, which is situated
on the same lot as the principal building, intended and
used to store motor vehicles designated to carry not more
than ten (10) passengers. Such a garage may be used for
the storage of not more than one (1) truck having a load
capacity of greater than one (1) ton and shall not include
facilities for service or repair of commercial or public
vehicles. All temporary outdoor storage of motor vehicles,
in other than residential districts, waiting to be repaired
shall be screened by a solid wall or fence not less than six
(6) feet in height.
GARAGE, PUBLIC -
MAJOR REPAIR
First Division Motor Vehicles: A public garage – major
repair shall include the repair of the complete line of First
Division Motor Vehicles including the rebuilding of
engines or major reconditioning or reconstruction of worn
of damaged motor vehicles of parts thereof; body, frame or
fender straightening or reconstruction and painting of
vehicles or parts thereof. All temporary outdoor storage of
motor vehicles waiting to be repaired shall be screened by
a solid wall or fence not less than six (6) feet in height.
GARAGE, PUBLIC -
MINOR REPAIR
First Division Motor Vehicles: A public garage – minor
repair shall include incidental or minor repair, replacement
of worn or damaged parts and minor motor or tune-up
services, but not including any operation included within
the definition of public garage, major repair (First Division
Motor Vehicles). All temporary outdoor storage of motor
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 19
vehicles waiting to be repaired shall be screened by a solid
wall or fence not less than six (6) feet in height.
First and Second Division Motor Vehicles: A public
garage – major repair – general; shall include all
automotive services permitted under Public Garage –
Major Repair, and shall include all classes of motor
vehicles, trailers and recreational vehicles.
GARAGE, PUBLIC
PARKING
A public parking garage is any structure intended to be
used for the temporary, daily, or off-street parking of
passenger vehicles and commercial vehicles under one and
one-half (1-1/2) tons rated capacity and availability to the
public, whether for compensation, free, or an
accommodation to clients or customers.
GARAGE, STORAGE A storage garage is any building used for the storage only
of motor vehicles pursuant to previous arrangements and
not to transients, and where not equipment, parts, fuel,
grease or oil is sold and vehicles are not equipped,
serviced, repaired, hired or sold.
GOLF COURSE Public, semi-public or private golf courses are grounds
over which the game of golf is played, including accessory
buildings and land uses incidental thereto, and consisting
of at least sixty (60) acres for each standard nine-hole
course and thirty (30) acres for nine-hole, par-3” course.
GRADE (FOR
DETERMINATION OF
BUILDING OR
STRUCTURE HEIGHT)
Grade is defined as follows:
1. As applied to a building ten feet, zero inches
(10’0”) or less from a street property line, grade
shall be the established sidewalk elevation at the
centerline of the street surface shall be used.
2. As applied to a building more than ten feet, zero
inches (10’0”) from a street property line, grade
shall be the average finished ground elevations at
the building walls.
3. As applied to a building facing two (2) streets
having different elevations, grade shall be
determined by the sidewalk elevation of where no
sidewalk is established, the elevation at the center
line at the street surface at the lower level street
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 20
4. Buildings in the Business, Office Research,
Regional Office Center and Manufacturing
Districts, when adjacent to a residence district, the
building height is to be measured from the average
of the grade elevation at the property line adjoining
the residence district.
GRADING (See Excavating-Filling)
GUEST, PERMANENT A permanent guest is a person who occupies or has the
right to occupy a hotel or apartment hotel accommodation
as his/her domicile and place of permanent residence
HEALTH CLUB Any establishment where members or nonmembers use
equipment or space for the purpose of physical exercise.
HEALTHCARE
FACILITIES (HEALTH
CENTERS)
Clinic: A clinic is a building containing an association or
group of physicians, dentists, clinical psychologists, and
similar professional healthcare practitioners, including
allied professional assistants who are assembled for the
purpose of carrying on their professions. The healthcare
facility may include apothecary, dental and medical
laboratories, and/or x-ray facilities, but shall not include
in-patient care and/or operating rooms for major surgery.
Hospital: A hospital is any institution, place, building, or
agency, public or private, whether organized for profit, or
not, devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of
facilities for the diagnosis and treatment or care of two (2)
or more unrelated persons admitted for overnight stay or
longer in order to obtain medical care, including obstetric,
psychiatric, and nursing or care of illness, disease, injury,
infirmity, or deformity.
The term “hospital”, without regard to length of stay, shall
also include:
1. Any facility which is devoted primarily to
providing psychiatric and related services and
programs for the diagnosis and treatment or care of
two (2) or more unrelated persons suffering from
emotional or nervous disease; and
2. All places where pregnant women are received,
cared for, or treated during delivery irrespective of
the number of patients received.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 21
The term “hospital” includes general and specialized
hospitals, tuberculosis sanitaria, mental or physical
hospitals and sanitaria, and includes maternity homes,
lying-in-homes, and homes for unwed mothers in which
aid is given during delivery.
HEIGHT Height means when referring to a Telecommunications
Tower or other structure, the distance measured from the
finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the
Telecommunications Tower or other structure, including
the base pad and Antenna Structures.
HOME OCCUPATION Home occupation is any gainful occupation or profession
engaged in by the occupant of a dwelling at or from the
dwelling, where such home occupation is incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
(See Section 4.07)
HOTEL A hotel is a building which is used as a temporary abiding
place, by transient guests, for remuneration, with or
without meals, containing five (5) or more guests rooms or
suites where no provision for cooking is made in any
individual guest room or suite, and which may provide
maid, butler and linen service.
HOTEL – EXTENDED
STAY
An extended stay hotel is a building which is used as a
temporary abiding place for transient guests, for
remuneration, with or without meals, containing five (5) or
more guest or suites where provisions for cooking may be
made in any individual guest room or suite, and which may
provide maid, butler and linen service for a non-permanent
guest when recommended by the Plan Commission (see
Section 4.04.5) and approved by the Village Board as a
special use where the time limit for a transient guest is
extended to no more than 120 days through such special
use (see definition – “transient guest”).
JUNK YARD An open area where waste, used or second-hand materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed,
disassembled or handled, including but not limited to,
scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and
bottles. A junkyard includes an auto-wrecking yard, but
does not include such uses as are conducted entirely within
enclosed buildings.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 22
KENNEL A kennel is any premises, or portion thereof, in which
three (3) or more dogs, cats, or other household domestic
animals over four (4) months of age, or any combination
thereof, are kept or where more than two (2) such animals
are maintained, boarded, bred, or cared for in return for
remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale.
LAUNDERETTE A launderette is a business that provides coin-operated,
self-service type washing, drying, dry-cleaning, and
ironing facilities, provided that:
1. Not more than four (4) persons, including owners,
are employed on the premises; and
2. No pick-up or delivery service is maintained.
LODGING HOUSE A lodging house is a residential building, or portion
thereof, other
(including boarding than a motel or hotel, containing
lodging rooms which & rooming house) accommodate
persons who are not members of the keeper’s family.
Lodging with or without meals is provided for
compensation on a weekly or monthly basis.
LODGING ROOM A lodging room is a room rented as sleeping and living
quarters but without cooking facilities and with or without
an individual bathroom. In a suite of rooms without
cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping
accommodations shall count as one (1) lodging room.
LOT Lot is a parcel of land, which is either a “Lot of Record” or
a “Zoning Lot”.
Lot of Record: Lot of record is a lot which is part of a
subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds of the County; or a parcel
of land, the deed to which was recorded in the Office of
said Recorder of Deeds pursuant to the Illinois Compiled
Statutes (revised) Chapter 109 (Plats Act), paragraph I(b).
Lot, Corner: A corner lot is one (1) situated at the
intersection of two (2) or more streets, where the interior
angle of such intersection coterminous with the right-ofway
lines of such streets does not exceed one hundred
thirty-five (135) degrees (See illustrations).
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 23
Lot, Interior: An interior lot is any lot other than a corner
lot.
Lot, Reversed Corner: A reversed corner lot, the rear of
which abuts upon either side of another lot, whether across
an alley or not.
Lot, Through: A through lot is any interior lot, which has a
pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) substantially
parallel streets. (See illustrations).
Lot, Zoning: A zoning lot is a single tract of land, which
(at the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by
its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or
built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control, and
meets the requirements of a buildable lot as specified
herein, therefore, a zoning lot or lots may or may not
coincide with a lot of record. A parcel of land may not be
declared to be a zoning lot where such zoning lot crosses
zoning district boundary lines.
LOT AREA Lot area, except as hereinafter provided within specific
zoning districts, the area of a lot shall be the area of a
horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines.
LOT COVERAGE Lot coverage is that portion or percentage of a lot
permitted to be covered by buildings or structures.
LOT DEPTH Lot depth is the mean horizontal distance between the front
lot line and the rear lot line, measured within the
boundaries (See Illustrations).
LOT LINE A property boundary line of any lot held in single or
separate ownership, except that where any portion of the
lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall
be deemed to be the street or alley right-of-way lines.
LOT LINE, FRONT That boundary line of a lot which is along an existing or
dedicated street lot line and which is established by the
owner as a front lot line. On corner lots, the owner may
select either street lot line as the front line.
LOT LINE, REAR That boundary of a lot which is most distant from, and is,
or is approximately, parallel to the front lot line. If the rear
lot line is less than ten (10) feet in length, or if the lot
forms to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 24
deemed to be line ten (10) feet in length with the lot,
parallel to and at the maximum distance from the lot line.
(See Illustrations).
LOT, RESERVE (FLAG
LOT)
A buildable lot where access is obtained by way of a
narrow strip of land (reserve strip) from a dedicated street
only, where each lot shall contain a minimum of one (1)
acre exclusive of the portion of the lot used as the reserve
strip, except where a specific zoning district requires more
than one (1) acre of land. The minimum width of the
reserve strip shall be not less than thirty-four (34) feet.
LOT LINE, SIDE Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH The minimum horizontal distance measured anywhere
within the buildable area. (See illustration and Section
3.02 Definition of buildable area).
MARQUEE A marquee shall include any hood or awning of permanent
construction projecting from the wall of a building above
an entrance and/or extending over a thoroughfare.
MINI-WAREHOUSE A building containing separate storage areas of varying
sizes which are leased or rented on an individual basis.
MOTEL A motel is a series of attached, semi-attached or detached
guest rooms or suites for the accommodation primarily of
automobile transient guests which does not include
individual cooking or kitchen facilities and which provides
the unit with convenient access to off-street parking spaces
for the exclusive use of the guests or occupants of the
premises.
MOTOR FREIGHT
TERMINAL
A building and premise in which freight, brought by motor
truck or railroad, is received, sorted, and/or stored for
routing for local, intrastate and/or interstate shipment by
common carrier. Stored freight shall not be interpreted as
operating a warehouse. (See Section 3.02, Common
Carrier).
MOTOR VEHICLE A motor vehicle is every vehicle which is self-propelled
and which vehicle is capable of being licensed for
operation upon the streets and highways of the State of
Illinois. For this Ordinance, motor vehicles are divided
into two (2) divisions.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 25
First Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed
for the carrying of not more than ten (10) persons and all
vehicles having gross vehicle weight rating (GVW) of
6,000 pounds or less.
Second Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed
for carrying more than ten (10) persons, those designed or
used for living quarters and those motor vehicles which are
designed for pulling or carrying freight or cargo, and those
motor vehicles of the First Division remodeled for use and
used as motor vehicles of the Second Division.
Vehicle Abandoned: Abandoned vehicles are all vehicles
in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of
being driven in its condition; or any other vehicle that has
not been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or
more, and is apparently deserted or a vehicle which is not
properly displaying license plates and/or a vehicle sticker.
Vehicle Antique: An antique vehicle is a motor vehicle that
is more than twenty-five (25) years of age which is driven
on the highways only going to and returning from an
antique auto show or exhibition, for servicing or
demonstration, or a fire-fighting vehicle more than twenty
(20) years old which is not used a fire-fighting equipment
but is used only for the purpose of exhibition or
demonstration.
Vehicle, Commercial: A commercial vehicle is any vehicle
operated for the transportation of persons or property in the
furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, and
all vehicles displaying commercial advertising or
commercial name.
Vehicle, Motorcycle: A motorcycle is every motor vehicle
having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed
to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with
the ground, but excluding a tractor.
Vehicle, Motor Driven Cycle: A motor driven cycle is
every motorcycle and every motor scooter with less than
one hundred fifty (150) cubic centimeter piston
displacement including motorized pedal cycles.
Vehicle, Motorized Pedal Cycle: A motorized pedal cycle
is a bicycle type vehicle which has tires with an overall
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 26
inflated diameter of nineteen (19) inches or more, with
fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power
equipped with a power drive system that functions directly
or automatically only and not requiring clutching or
shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged,
and a helper motor with a cylinder capacity not exceeding
fifty (50) cubic centimeter displacement, which produces
no more than two point zero (2.0) brake horsepower, and is
capable of propelling the vehicle at a maximum speed of
no more than thirty (30) m.p.h. on level ground.
Vehicle, Recreational: (See Recreational Vehicle).
MOVING AND
STORAGE BUILDING
A building in which household goods and similar materials
brought by motor truck are received and stored for future
recall. Stored freight and household goods shall not be
interpreted as operating a warehouse.
NO-IMPACT
ANTENNAS
No-Impact Antennas means Antennas that are placed on a
building or other exiting structure and meet any one of the
following conditions: (1) are screened, placed behind
louvers or in a steeple, or otherwise made virtually
invisible to a casual observer from the ground level; (2) are
painted or otherwise camouflaged so as to be nor more
obtrusive than the building or structure on which they are
paced when viewed by a casual observer from the ground
level; or (3) are whip-shaped, stick, shaped, or
cylindrically-shaped and are no more than five (5) feet in
Height (such Height shall not include the Height of the
building or any penthouse on which the Antennas may be
placed, and if the Antenna Structure is partially obscured
by a parapet, the Antennas will be considered No-Impact
so long as they do not extend more than five (5) feet above
the parapet).
NO-IMPACT TOWER No-Impact Tower means a Telecommunications Tower
that meets any one of the following conditions: (1) is a
replacement of an existing structure, such as an athletic
field light standard; (2) is so camouflaged that a casual
observer would not recognize the telecommunications
purpose of the No-Impact Tower; or (3) is disguised as a
bell tower, steeple, or similar architectural element
designed to blend or coordinate with surrounding
structures.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 27
NON-CONFORMING
BUILDING OR
STRUCTURE
Non-conforming building or structure is any building or
structure or portion thereof where the use of which is not
permitted in the zoning district in which the building or
structure is located, but which conformed with all codes,
ordinances, and other legal requirements applicable at the
time such building or structure was established.
NON-CONFORMING
LOT
A lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of the
Zoning Ordinance but that fails by reason of such
adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present
requirements of the Zoning District.
NON-CONFORMING
USE
Non-conforming use is any use of land, buildings, or
structures or portion thereof where the use of which is not
permitted in the zoning district in which the use is located,
but which use conformed with all of the codes, ordinances,
and other legal requirements applicable at the time such
use was established.
NOT-FOR-PROFIT or
NOT-FOR- PROFIT
CORP.
Not-for-profit, or not-for-profit corporation is any
corporation chartered as such by the State of Illinois; no
part of its income of which is distributable to its members,
directors, or officers; provided, however, that the payment
of reasonable compensation for services rendered and the
making of distributions upon dissolution or final
liquidation, as permitted by the Corporation Act of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, shall not be deemed a
distribution of income.
NOTICE, LEGAL
PUBLICATION
Notice, legal publication, shall be in compliance with
Chapter 100
NOTICES, of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
NOXIOUS MATTER
Material which is capable of causing injury or malaise to
living organisms or property by biological or chemical
activity and is capable of causing detrimental effects upon
the health or the psychological, social, or economic wellbeing
of human beings.
NURSERY SCHOOLS Nursery schools mean day care centers which receive
children between the ages of two (2) and six (6) years and
which are established and professionally operated
primarily for educational purposes to meet the
development needs of the children served. (See Child Care
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 28
Center).
NURSING HOME An establishment for the care of children or the aged or
infirm. Such a home does not contain equipment for
medical and surgical care or for the treatment of disease or
injury nor does it prove care for maternity or mental
illness.
OCTAVE BAND A term denoting all frequencies between any given
frequency and double that frequency.
OCTAVE BAND
FILTER
An electrical frequency analyzer designed according to
standards formulated by the American Standards
Association and used in conjunction with a sound level
meter to take measurements in specific octave intervals.
(American Standard or Sound-Level Meters, A.S.S. No.
224-3-1944) or as required under subsequent amended
regulation.
OFFICE A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs
of a business, profession, service, industry, or government.
OFFICE,
PROFESSIONAL
Professional office is an office of recognized profession
such as but not limited to architects, attorneys, engineers,
doctors, etc., maintained for the conduct of that profession
but not including clinics or hospitals.
OFF-STREET
LOADING & UNLOADING
SPACE OR
BERTH
Off-street loading and unloading space or berth is a hardsurfaced
area of land other than a street, the principal use
of which is for loading and unloading of goods or materials
from motor vehicles and trailers, to avoid undue
interference with streets, alleys, and access drives. Such
space shall comply with Section 12.00 of this Ordinance.
OFF-STREET PARKING
SPACE
Off-street parking space is a space within a public or
private parking area in compliance with the requirements
set forth in Section 12.00 in this Ordinance.
OPEN SALES LOT Open sales lot is a lot or parcel of land used or occupied
for the purpose of buying, selling, rental, or trading of all
goods and commodities and including the storage of same
prior to rental, sale, or exchange.
OPEN SPACE 1. Public Open Space: Public open spaces are areas
permanently reserved for open space purposes which
are owned, operated, and maintained by a local
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 29
political jurisdiction with no limitations on access or
use.
2. Private Open Space: Private open spaces are areas
reserved by the owners’ choice, which are under
private ownership and management and which have
some limitations on access or use and are not
controlled by public entities.
3. Planned Residential Open Space
a. Private Open Space: Private open space is a parcel
of land located immediately adjacent to an
individual dwelling unit, owned and maintained by
its resident(s), and reserved exclusively for their
use.
b. Common Open Space: Common open space is a
parcel or parcels of land exclusively of permanent
buildings or structures, reserved primarily for the
leisure and active recreational use of a planned
residential development, residents and owners,
operated, and maintained by such residents/owners
as an undivided portion of such land, or where
such land is in common ownership, generally
through a homeowners association.
PARKING AREA,
PRIVATE
Parking area, private, is an open, hard-surfaced area, other
than a street, designed, arranged, and made available for
the storage of private passenger automobiles or other
vehicles as specifically provided for in this Ordinance for
occupants of the building or buildings for which the
parking area is accessory thereto. Parking area, private,
shall comply with requirements of Section 12.00 of this
Ordinance.
PARKING AREA,
PUBLIC
Parking area, public, is an open, hard-surfaced area, other
than a street, intended to be used for the temporary, daily,
off-street parking of passenger automobiles and
commercial vehicles and available to the public whether
for compensation, free, or as an accommodation to clients
or customers. Commercial vehicles shall be limited to
those vehicles rated at one (1) ton or less, and shall not
include any combination of a trailer or a semi-trailer.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 30
PARKING AREA,
TRUCK
A truck parking area is any land used or intended to be
used for the storage and parking of trucks, trailers, or
tractors, and which includes commercial vehicles, loading
or unloading.
PARKWAY That part of the public street right-of-way not occupied by
the street pavement and located between the back of the
curb or edge of street pavement and the sidewalk or
property line as well as the dividing strip of a roadway.
PARTICULATE
MATTER
Matter which is suspended in or discharged into the
atmosphere in a finely divided from as a liquid or solid at
atmospheric temperature and pressure.
PARTY WALL A wall starting from the foundation and extending
continuously through all stories to or above the roof
without openings which separate one (1) building or tenant
from another, and is in joint use by each building or tenant.
PERFORMANCE
STANDARD
A criteria to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic, or noxious
matter, vibration, fire, and explosive hazards, glare, or heat
generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PERSON Person means any individual, partnership, corporation,
association, proprietorship, or other legal entity.
PERSONAL
WATERCRAFT
A vessel that uses an inboard motor powering a water jet
pump as its primary source of motor power and that is
designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing, or
kneeling on the vessel, rather that the conventional manner
of sitting or standing inside the vessel, and includes vessels
that are similar in appearance and operation but are
powered by an outboard or propeller drive motor.
PERSONAL WIRELESS
FACILITY
Personal Wireless Facility is any facility for the provision
of Personal Wireless Services as defined by the FCC or
any successor agency.
PERSONAL WIRELESS
SERVICES
Personal Wireless Services are commercial mobile
services, unlicensed wireless services and common carrier
wireless exchange access services as defined by the FCC
or any successor agency.
PLANNED
DEVELOPMENT
Planned development means a parcel of land or contiguous
parcels of land of a size sufficient to create its own
character, controlled by a single landowner or by a group
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 31
of landowners in common agreement as to control, to be
developed as a single entity, the character of which is
compatible with adjacent parcels, and the intent of the
zoning district or districts in which it is located; the
developer or developers may be granted relief from
specific land-use regulations and design standards and may
be awarded certain premiums in return for assurances of an
over all quality of development, including any specific
feature which will be of exceptional benefit to the Village
as a whole and which would not otherwise be required by
the Zoning Ordinance. The area of a planned development
shall remain under one (1) ownership or unified control
unless safeguards are provided that, in the opinion of the
Plan Commission (See Section 4.04.5) and Board of
Trustees of the Village of Itasca, will provide for the
continuation of the original planned development concept.
PLAZA A plaza is an open area at a level accessible to the public at
all times, and which is unobstructed from its lowest level
to the sky. Any portion of a plaza occupied by
landscaping, statuary, pools, and open recreation facilities
shall be considered to be a part of the plaza for the purpose
of computing a floor area premium credit. The term
“plaza” shall not include off-street loading areas,
driveways, off-street parking areas, or pedestrian ways
accessory thereto.
Plaza Enclosed: An enclosed plaza is one with less than
twenty-five (25) percent of its perimeter abutting a street or
plaza.
Plaza, Unenclosed: An unenclosed plaza is one with
twenty-five (25) percent or more of its perimeter abutting a
street or plaza.
PORCH A roofed open area, which may be screened, attached to a
part of and with direct access to or from a building.
PORTABLE STORAGE
CONTAINERS
A transportable, fully enclosed, box-like receptacle or
container that is designed and used for the temporary
storage or shipment of household goods, wares, materials,
and/or equipment. Such containers are uniquely designed
for their ease of loading to and from a transport vehicle.
RECREATIONAL
CENTER
A recreational center is a building, buildings, or use of land
operated on a profit basis, with or without membership
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 32
requirements for the provision of entertainment, sport, or
health activities delivered directly to the consumer;
including but not limited to a skating rink, bowling alley,
pool hall, racquet club, swim club, health club, indoor golf
center, or indoor archery, pistol, or rifle range. Accessory
sales of related sporting goods may occupy not more than
ten (10) percent of the total floor area. Recreational areas
shall not include Teen Recreational and Dance Centers.
RECREATIONAL
VEHICLE
A recreational vehicle is every vehicle originally designed
or permanently converted and used for living quarters or
for human habitation and not used as a commercial
vehicle, including but not limited to any camper, house car,
house trailer, or private living coach.
RECYCLING CENTER A lot or parcel of land, with or without buildings, upon
which used materials are separated and/or processed for
shipment for eventual reuse or conversion into new
products.
RECYCLING PLANT A facility in which recyclables such as newspapers,
magazines, books, and other paper products; glass, metal,
cans; plastics, and other products are recycled, reprocessed
and/or treated to return such products to a condition in
which they may again be used in new products.
REFUSE Refuse is all waste products resulting from human
habitation, except sewage.
RELIGIOUS
INSTITUTION
Religious institution means a building in which persons
regularly assemble for religious worship intended
primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for
propagating a particular form of religious belief.
RESEARCH
LABORATORY
A building, or group of buildings, in which are located
facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or
experimentation, but not facilities principally for the
manufacture or sale of products.
RESIDENTIAL
VEHICLE
(See definition of Motor Vehicle – First Division)
RESTAURANT A restaurant is a retail establishment engaged primarily in
the sale of prepared food and/or drinks of any kind for
consumption therein; provided, however, that a drive-in
restaurant shall not be considered a restaurant within the
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 33
concept of this definition.
RESTAURANT DRIVEIN
A drive-in restaurant is a building or portion thereof where
food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for
consumption and where all or a portion of the consumption
takes place or is designed to take place outside of the
confines of the building.
RETAIL Retail refers to the sale of commodities directly to
customers when such commodities are used or consumed
by the customer and not purchased primarily for the
purpose of resale.
RETENTION A wet bottom stormwater storage area that is designed to
be maintained with free water surface or pond.
RIGHT-OF-WAY Right-of-way is a strip of land dedicated to the public and
occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk,
railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline,
water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another
special use. The use of the term “right-of-way” for land
platting purposes in the Village of Itasca shall mean every
right-of-way hereinafter established and shown on a Final
Plat which is to be separate and distinct from the lots or
parcels adjoining such right-of-way, and not included with
the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-ofways
intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm drains, or any other use involving
maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to
public use by the make of the Plat on which such right-ofway
is established.
RINGLEMANN CHART A chart which is described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines
Information Circular 6888, and on which are illustrated
graduated shades of gray for use in estimating the lightobscuring
capacity of smoke.
RINGLEMANN
NUMBER
The number of the area on the Ringlemann Chart that
coincides most nearly with the light-obscuring capacity of
smoke.
SANITARY LANDFILL A sanitary landfill shall mean any site used for the disposal
of refuse from (a) more than one (1) residential premises,
or (b) one (1) or more commercial, industrial
manufacturing or municipal operations, where refuse is
disposed of without creating nuisances or hazards to the
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 34
public health or safety by confining refuse to the smallest
practical area by employing approved power equipment,
and covering with a layer of compacted earth or suitable
cover material at the conclusion of each day’s operation.
SCHOOL, TEHNICAL A specialized instruction establishment providing on-site
training of business, commercial, and/or trade skills such
as accounting, data processing, and computer repair. This
classification excludes establishments providing training in
an activity that is not otherwise permitted in the zone.
SETBACK The minimum horizontal distance between a right-of-way
line and the nearest wall in a building or side of a structure
facing such street line or edge of the area of operation of a
principal use when no building or structure is involved.
SIDEWALK A paved surface or leveled areas generally paralleling and
usually separated from the street used as a pedestrian
walkway.
SIDEWALK LEVEL Sidewalk level is the level of the established sidewalk in
front of the building measured at the center of such front.
Where a building faces on more than one (1) street, the
sidewalk level shall be the average of the levels of the
sidewalk at the center of the front of each street. Where no
sidewalk level has been established, it shall be deemed to
be the established level of the center line of the street
surface in front of a building or structure measured at the
center line of such front.
SIGN A name, identification, description, display or illustration
which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly
upon a building or other outdoor surface or piece of land;
and which directs attention to an object, product, place,
activity, person, institution, organization or business.
However, a sign shall not include the following:
1. any display of an official court or official public
notices;
2. the flag emblem or insignia of a nation, political
unit or school;
3. a sign located completely within an enclosed
building, unless the context is intended to be
viewed from a street.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 35
Banner: A banner is a flag, pennant, ribbon, streamers,
bunting, valance of similar items and any emblem,
insignia, coat of arms, logo of a corporation, company, or
religious group made of fabric or flexible material,
including plain or blank fabric, with or without enclosing
framework. Such banner shall be classified as a sign for
the purpose of this Ordinance, except as provided in (b)
above.
Street, Banner: All banner signs which are placed over or
across any street or public way shall be hung to withstand a
horizontal wind pressure of thirty-five (35) pounds per
square foot. No such banner sign shall be erected over or
across any street or public way without the permission of
the Village Board and shall meet the requirements
specified for temporary signs.
SIGN, BUSINESS A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted or to a commodity, service or entertainment
conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where such
sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, DYNAMIC
DISPLAY
Any sign that appears to have movement or appears to
change, caused by any method other than physically
removing and replacing the sign or its components,
whether the apparent movement or change is in the
display, the sign structure itself, or any other component of
the sign. This includes a sign that incorporates a
technology or method allowing the sign face to change the
image without having to physically or mechanically
replace the sign face or its components. This also includes
any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking, or
animated display and any sign that incorporates rotating
panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input,
“digital ink” or any other method or technology that allows
the sign face to present a series of images or displays.
SIGN, ENTRANCE A sign whose copy is limited to the name, logo, trademark
or other identifying symbol and address of a building,
business, development or establishment or any
combination when located on the premises and located
immediately above or adjacent to such entrances where
such sign is not above the first floor and does not exceed
twelve (12) square feet in area.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 36
SIGN, FLASHING Any illuminated sign on which any artificial light is not
maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color, at
all times, when such is in use. For the purpose of this
Ordinance, any moving sign shall be considered a flashing
sign.
SIGN, GROSS
SURFACE AREA OF
The entire area within a single continuous perimeter,
enclosing the extreme limits of a sign. However, such
perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying
outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral
part of the display. If a sign has two faces that are parallel,
not more than two feet apart, and supported by the same
pole[s] or structure[s], the gross surface area of the sign is
one-half the area of the two faces.
SIGN,
GROUND(MONUMENT)
A sign other than a pole sign, placed upon or supported by
the ground independent of any other structure, where the
entire bottom of the sign is in contact with, or in close
proximity to, the ground.
SIGN, INFLATABLE
(INFLATABLE
ADVERTISING
DEVICE)
A portable advertising device that is supported primarily
by compressed air or other gases. Such devices may be
sealed from escaping or may be maintained in an inflatable
condition by means of a fan or blower, which is designed
to maintain air pressure inside the device which is greater
than the atmospheric pressure outside the device.
SIGN, LANTERN -
POST
A lantern post sign is a pole type sign including an electric
lantern light on which a nameplate may be attached.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES
ADVERTISING
A sign, display, device, notice, figure, painting, drawing,
message, placard, poster, billboard or other thing which is
visible from a street and which advertises the products or
services not sold or offered on the land or in the structure
upon which the sign is attached.
SIGN, POLE A pole sign is a sign mounted on a free standing pole or
other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is not
less than eight (8) feet above grade.
SIGNS, POLITICAL OR
CAMPAIGN
A temporary sign announcing or supporting political
candidates or issues in connection with any national, state
or local election.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 37
SIGN, PORTABLE A freestanding sign that is not permanently anchored or
secured to either a building or the ground.
SIGN, PROJECTING A projecting sign shall include any sign which is attached
to a building or other structure and extends more than
eighteen (18) inches beyond the building.
SIGN, PYLON A pylon sign is a sign mounted on a tower-like structure or
free standing pole.
SIGN, TEMPORARY A temporary sign shall include any sign, banner, pennant,
valance, or advertising display constructed of cloth,
canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wall board or other light
materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed
for a limited period of time.
SIGN, WALL A wall sign shall include all flat signs of solid face
construction which are affixed flush against a building or
other structure and attached to the exterior front, rear, or
side wall of any building or structure.
SIGN, WINDOW
(WINDOW DISPLAY)
A window sign or display shall include any sign or
advertising display, attached to the inside or outside of a
window. All signs similar in nature to the aforementioned
signs, shall be classified as signs for the purpose of this
Ordinance and subject to all provisions contained therein.
SIGN, ZONING
DISTRICT
Signs denoting or identifying an entire manufacturing
district, planned development, subdivision or office park
may be permitted, notwithstanding any other contrary
provision of this Ordinance provided:
1. The sign denotes or identifies an entire zoning
district or contiguous area.
2. The sign shall be a ground sign only and shall not
exceed fifty (50) square feet of surface area.
3. Plans and specification shall be submitted with the
application for sign permit, showing distances from
all streets, sidewalks, residences, sign design,
landscaping (if any), intended lighting (if any) and
any other necessary information.
4. The Board of Trustees shall approve same, and
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 38
authorize the Building Department to issue sign
permit.
SNOWMOBILE A self-propelled device designed for travel on snow or ice
or natural terrain steered by skis or runners, and supported
in part by skis, belts, or cleats.
SPECIALTY PROPCRAFT
A vessel that is similar in appearance and operation to a
personal watercraft but that is powered by an outboard or
propeller driven motor.
STABLE, PRIVATE A private stable is any accessory structure which provides
shelter for equine, for the exclusive use of the occupants of
the premises, but in no event is rented to the public.
STORAGE Storage is a space or area in the same building as the
principal use for the storing of goods or merchandise
which are distributed or utilized on the premises.
STORY Story is that portion of a building included between the
surface of any floor and surface of the floor next above it,
or if there is not a floor above, the space between and the
ceiling next above it and in the case of a split level story,
the surface of the floors at different elevations and the
ceilings next above such floors, provided that there is more
than four (4) feet difference in elevation between the levels
of the floors of such a story. A basement shall be counted
as a story for the purposes of this Ordinance as provided
under the definition of “basement.”
STORY, HALF Half-story is that portion of a building or structure under a
gable, hip or mansard roof, the wall plates of which on at
least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more that four
and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the finished floor of each
story.
STREET A street is a primary means of vehicular access to abutting
properties, whether designated as a street, avenue,
highway, road, boulevard, lane, throughway, or however
otherwise designated, except driveways to buildings,
whether in public or private ownership.
1. Arterial Street: An arterial street is a major or
minor street of greater continuity which is intended
to serve as a large volume traffic-way for both
immediate area and regions beyond, and may be
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 39
designated on the Village’s Comprehensive Plan, as
amended, as a principal or minor arterial, parkway,
tollway, freeway, expressway, or equivalent term to
identify those streets comprising the basic structure
of the street plan.
2. Collector Street: A collector street is a secondary
street used primarily to carry traffic from minor
streets to arterial streets.
3. Minor Street: A minor street is a street of limited
continuity used primarily for access to abutting
residential properties.
4. Frontage Road: A frontage road is a minor street
paralleling, adjacent and often within the right-ofway
of an arterial street which provides access to
local street systems and protection from through
traffic.
5. Other Streets:
a. Cul-de-Sac Street is a minor street of short
length, having one (1) end open to traffic
and being permanently terminated at the at
the other end by vehicular turnaround.
b. Private Street is an undedicated street which
is privately owned and maintained, or an
easement of access benefiting a dominant
tenant.
STRUCTURAL
ALTERATION
Structural alteration is any change to supporting members
of a building such as the addition, removal or alteration of
bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or foundations, or
any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls except
such repairs or replacement or existing members as may be
necessary for the safety of the building.
STRUCTURE Structure is anything constructed or erected which required
location on the ground or is attached to something having
location on the ground, including a fence or free-standing
wall. A tower, pole, equipment, antenna and a sign,
billboard or other advertising medium, detached or
projecting, shall be construed to be a structure.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 40
Structure, Detached: A detached structure is any structure
having no party wall or common wall with other structure.
Bridges, tunnels, breezeways, and other similar means of
connecting one (1) structure to another shall not, for the
purposes of this Ordinance, be considered to constitute a
party wall or a common wall.
Structure, Temporary: Except as hereinafter provided, a
temporary structure is a structure designed for a limited
period of time or tenure on a zoning lot. A sign, billboard
or other advertising device detached or projecting shall not
be constructed to be a temporary structure.
SWIMMING POOL,
PERMANENT
A permanent swimming pool is built above or below grade
which may have a foundation and cannot be readily
disassembled.
SWIMMING POOL,
PORTABLE
A portable swimming pool is maintained above grade
which can readily be disassembled and stored and which
has a capacity of one thousand (1,000) gallons of water or
greater. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a portable
swimming pool is presumed to require re-erection each
year.
SWIMMING POOL,
PRIVATE (SINGLEUSE)
A private swimming pool, single-use, is a swimming pool
and the apparatus and equipment pertaining to the
swimming pool, maintained by an individual for the sole
use of a family and guests, without charge for admission,
and not for the purpose of profit in connection with any
business operated for profit, located on a lot as an
accessory use to a residence.
SWIMMING POOL,
PUBLIC
A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment
pertaining to the swimming pool, maintained and operated
by a municipality or other unit of government for the
general public, whether or not an admission fee is charged.
SWIMMING POOL,
QUASI PUBLIC
A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment
pertaining to the swimming pool, maintained and operated
by a hotel or motel for the exclusive use by the room
occupants and their guests.
TAVERN OR LOUNGE A tavern or lounge is a building, or portion thereof, where
liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises but not
including restaurants where the principal business is
serving food.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 41
TEENAGE
RECREATION AND
DANCE CENTER
A building designed and equipped for the conduct for
teenage activities such as but not limited to dancing, sports
and other customary and usual recreational activities where
no alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed on premises.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
TOWERS
Telecommunications Towers means any structure that is
designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of
supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
similar communications purposes, including self-support
lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The
term includes radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, Alternative Tower Structures, and the
like. This includes the structure and support thereto.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
TOWERS OR
ANTENNAS, PREEXISTING
Pre-Existing Telecommunications Tower or Antennas
means any Telecommunications Tower or Antenna for
which a building permit or conditional use permit has been
properly issued prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance, including permitted Telecommunications
Towers and Antennas that have not yet been constructed so
long as such approval is current and not expired.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
TOWER AND
ANTENNA
ORDINANCE
Telecommunications Tower and Antenna Ordinance shall
refer to Section 15.00 et seq. of this ordinance.
THEATER A theater is any building or structure designed for the
enactment of dramatic performances and/or showing of
motion pictures. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a
dinner theater shall be deemed a restaurant. A drive-in
movie picture theater, adult amusement, or entertainment
theaters and drive-in theaters are deemed separate and
distinct uses.
TOWER A structure which may be attached to a building or may be
detached and affixed to the ground and is used in the
generation of electrical power or to support a windmill or
other equipment.
TRADITIONAL
DOWNTOWN
The Traditional Downtown encompasses the B-4
Traditional Downtown North, B-5 Traditional Downtown
South, and B-6 Irving Park Road Corridor zoning districts,
in their entirety.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 42
TRANSIENT GUEST A non-permanent guest who occupies, or has the right to
occupy a hotel or motel room for a period of no longer that
thirty (30) days.
UNLICENSED
WIRELESS SERVICE
Unlicensed Wireless Service is that service which offers
telecommunications services using duly authorized devices
which do not require individual licenses by the FCC, but
does not mean the provision of direct-to-home satellite
services as defined by the FCC or any successor agency.
USE Use is any purpose for which a structure or a tract of land
may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or
occupied; also, any activity, occupation, business, or
operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in or on
a structure or on a tract of land, and shall comply with all
performance standards contained in this Ordinance.
Use, Principal: Principal use is the main use of land or
buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory
use. The principal use may be either a Permitted or a
Special Use.
Use, Special: Special use is a use, either public or private,
which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be
properly classified as a Permitted Use in a particular
district or districts.
Use, Lawful: The use of any building, structure or land
that conforms with all of the regulations of this Ordinance
or any amendment hereto and which conforms with all of
the codes, ordinances and other legal requirements, as
existing at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or
any amendment thereto, for the structure or land that is
being considered.
Use, Permitted: Any use which is or may be lawfully
established in a particular district or districts, provided it
conforms with all requirements, regulations, and when
applicable, performance standards of this Ordinance for the
district in which such use is located.
VARIATION A variation is a relaxation of the terms of the Zoning
Ordinance where such variations will be in harmony with
the general purpose and intent and not contrary to the
public interest, and where, due to conditions, peculiar to
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 43
the property and not the direct result of the actions of the
owner, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result
in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship. Variation
may be granted in the use, construction, or alteration of a
building or structure, or in the use of land.
VETERINARY CLINIC Veterinary clinic is a facility rendering surgical and
medical treatment to animals (household pets), and
providing for overnight accommodations for animals under
treatment or observation. For the purpose of this
ordinance, animals shall be deemed to be ordinary
household pets, excluding equines or other such animals
not normally housed or cared for entirely within the
confines of a residence.
VETERINARY
HOSPITAL
A veterinary hospital is a facility rendering surgical and
medical treatment to animals, and having no limitation on
overnight accommodations for such animals. Crematory
facilities shall not be allowed in a veterinary hospital
unless approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency and the Village Board. For the purpose of this
Ordinance, where a veterinary hospital is permitted, a
veterinary clinic shall also be permitted.
WAREHOUSE A warehouse is a building, structure, or part thereof used
principally for the storage of any goods or merchandise,
and not for retail sale of such goods.
WATERCRAFT Every description of watercraft used or capable of being
used as a means of transportation on water. Watercraft
includes, but is not limited to, personal watercrafts,
specialty prop-crafts, and other boats.
WHOLESALE
ESTABLISHMENT
Wholesale establishment is any building wherein the
primary occupation is the sale of merchandise in gross for
resale and any such building wherein the primary
occupation is the sale of merchandise to institutional,
commercial, and industrial consumers and not for retail
sale of such goods an merchandise.
YARD A yard is an open space on the same zoning lot with a use,
building or structure unoccupied and unobstructed from its
lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted in
Section 4.06.8. A yard extends along a lot line, and to
such a depth or width specified in the yard requirements,
for the zoning district in which such zoning is located.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 44
(See illustrations)
Yard, Front: A front yard is a yard extending along the full
length of the from lot line between the side lot lines to a
depth specified in the yard requirements for the zoning
district.
Yard, Rear: A rear yard is a yard extending along the full
length of the rear lot line between the side lot lines to a
depth specified in the yard requirements for the zoning
district.
Yard, Side: A side yard is a yard extending along a side
lot line between the front and rear yards to width specified
in the yard requirements for the zoning district.
Yard, Corner: A corner yard is a side yard which adjoins
any street to a width specified in the yard requirements for
the zoning district.
ZERO LOT LINE Zero lot line is a development approach in which a
building is sited on one (1) or more lot lines with no yard.
ZONING
ADMINISTRATOR
The Zoning Administrator is that person designated as
Zoning Administrator by ordinance or resolution of the
Village Board and such deputies as may be appointed by
the Village Board. The Zoning Administrator is hereby
authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance, making such determinations,
interpretations and orders as are necessary therefore, and
requiring such plats, plan and other descriptive material in
connection with applications/permits as are necessary to
comply with this Ordinance.
ZONING BOARD The Zoning Board is the Village of Itasca Zoning Board of
Appeals (see Section 14.06 and Section 4.04.5).
ZONING CERTIFICATE A zoning certificate is a certificate issued by the Zoning
Administrator with approval of the Village Board,
certifying that any proposed use, building or structure to be
located on a zoning lot is in accordance with all of the
regulations of this Ordinance.
ZONING DISTRICT A zoning district is a section or sections of territory for
which the regulations and requirements governing use, lot,
and bulk of buildings and premises are uniform.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 45
ZONING LOT (See Lot, Zoning)
ZONING MAP A zoning map is the map incorporated herein, as part
hereof, designating a zoning district.
SECTION 3 RULES & DEFINITIONS
3 - 46
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 1
4.00 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4.01 INTERPRETATION
1. Minimum Requirement: The provisions herein shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, morals and
welfare.
2. Relationship with Other Laws: Where the conditions imposed by any
provision herein upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the bulk of
buildings, are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision herein, or any other law,
ordinance, resolution rule or regulations of any kind the regulations which are
more restrictive (or which impose higher standards or requirements) shall
govern.
3. Effect of Existing Agreement: The Ordinance is not intended to abrogate
any easement, covenant or another private agreement, provided that where the
regulations of the Ordinance are more restrictive (or impose higher standards
or requirements) than such easements, covenants or other private agreements,
the requirements herein shall govern.
4.02 SEPARABILITY
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Village of Itasca that several
provisions of this Ordinance are separable in accordance with the following:
1. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of
any provisions not specifically included in said judgment.
2. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of
any provision of this Ordinance to a particular property, building or other
structures such judgment shall not affect the application of said provisions to
any other property, building or structure not specifically included in said
judgment.
4.03 AMENDMENT
Ordinance No. 800-94, relating to the zoning of land is hereby amended and all
other ordinance of parts of ordinance of the Village of Itasca unconstitutional or
conflicting with this Ordinance, to the extent of the inconsistency only, are hereby
superseded.
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 2
4.04 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS
1. Change in Building, Structures or Uses: Except as may otherwise be
provided, all buildings or structures erected hereafter, all uses of land or
buildings established hereafter, all structural alternations, reconstruction, or
relocations, or existing buildings or structures occurring hereafter, and all
enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter, shall be
subject to all regulations herein which are applicable to the zoning district in
which such buildings, uses or land shall be located.
2. Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures and Uses: Any lawful building,
structure, or use existing at the time of the enactment of the Zoning Ordinance
may be continued, even though such building, structure, or use does not
conform to the provisions herein for the district in which it is located, and
whenever a district shall be changed hereafter, the then existing lawful use
may be continued, subject to the provisions in Section 5.00.
3. Building or Structure: Where the word “building” is used in this Ordinance,
it shall also include structure. (See Section 3.02, Definitions)
4. Building Permits: Where a building permit for construction of a building or
structure or part thereof has been issued in accordance with law prior to the
effective date of the Ordinance, and provided that construction is begun within
ninety (90) days of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to
completion, said building or structure may be completed in accordance with
the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit was issued, and
further may, upon completion, be occupied under a Certificate of Occupancy
by the use of which originally designated subject thereafter to the provisions
of Section 5.00.
5. Consultants: The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, and the
Village Board, may utilize the services of professional consultants for
research, investigation, and professional opinion, for assistance in arriving at
recommendations or decisions. The applicant whose request to the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, or Village Board, requires the use of
such professional services, shall reimburse the Village the reasonable cost it
incurred for the services rendered by its consultants, within ten (10) days after
the submission of the bill by the Village. The consultants shall bill for their
services at the same hourly rate which they normally charge municipal clients.
The Village consultants shall include but not be limited to the persons who
provide the Village with advice in the field of engineering, law, planning,
traffic, design, and finance.
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 3
4.05 USE AND BULK REGULATIONS
1. Control Over Use: No building structure or land shall hereafter be used or
occupied and no building or part thereof, or other structure shall be erected,
raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered except in
conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is
located, except as otherwise provided by law, as authorized by a pre-existing
section of this Ordinance.
2. Control Over Bulk: All new buildings and structures shall conform to the
building regulations established herein for the district in which each building
shall be located, except that chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire
towers, stacks and necessary mechanical appurtenances shall be permitted to
exceed the maximum height provisions when erected in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this Ordinance and all other ordinances of the Village
of Itasca.
4.06 LOT COVERAGE
1. Maintenance of Yards, Courts and other Open Spaces: The maintenance
of yards courts, and other open spaces and minimum lot area legally required
for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or
of the property in which it is located, as long as the building is in existence.
Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts or other open spaces of
minimum lot area allocated to any building, shall by virtue of change of
ownership or for any reason be used to satisfy yard, court, or other open
space, or minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
2. Division of Zoning Lots: No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be divided
into two (2) or more zoning lots unless all improved zoning lots resulting from
each subdivision shall conform with all the applicable bulk regulations of the
zoning district in which the property is located.
3. Access Across Residential Property: No land which is located in a
residential district shall be used for vehicular access purposes to any lot which
is located in a building or manufacturing district, or used for any purpose not
permitted in a residence district except in the case of an approved special use
or planned development.
4. Location of Required Open Space: All yards, courts and other open spaces
allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be located on the same zoning
lot as such building or dwelling group, or as otherwise provided herein.
5. Required Yards for Existing Buildings: No yards, nor or hereafter
provided, for a building existing on the effective date of the zoning ordinance
shall subsequently be reduced below or further reduced below if already less
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 4
than the minimum yard requirements of the Ordinance for the equivalent new
construction.
6. Front Yard Setback and Corner Side Yard: On streets in business districts
only where a front yard and/or corner side yard setback has been maintained
for buildings existing on lots or tracts having a frontage of fifty (50) percent or
more of the total frontage on one (1) side of that portion of any street lying
between two (2) intersection street, there shall be maintained a front yard
setback of not less than the average setback of the aforementioned existing
buildings or twenty-five (25) feet, and a corner side yard not less than the
average of the aforementioned existing buildings or twenty-five (25) feet,
when recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Village
Board.
Any changes in the front yard setback and/or corner side yard requirement
shall be submitted to the Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5) for its review
and recommendation, and for the consideration for approval by the Village
Board.
7. Vision Clearance – Corner Lots: All corner lots where deemed necessary
shall proved for a clear sight distance (traffic view obstruction triangle), not
less than three (3) feet in height above the elevation at the center line of the
traveled way, free from all buildings, structures, plant materials, play
equipment, or parking, loading, or storage uses which would interfere with or
obstruct vision in accordance with the following specifications (see
illustrations).
All Zoning Districts, a sight distance of not less than twenty-five (25) feet
measured along the intersection street right-of-way line bordering corner lots.
Exceptions to the above requirement may be granted by authority of the
Village Board where intersections are protected by existing stop signs or
traffic control signals and, in the opinion of the Village Board, reduced sight
distances do not create an unsafe condition.
8. Permitted Accessory Buildings, Structures, and Uses: The following
accessory buildings, structures, and uses (see table below) may be
obstructions in required yards as follows, but in no case shall any accessory
building or structure be located in any required easement or interfere with
drainage runoff. Any accessory building or structure shall not be located
closer than ten (10) feet to another building.
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 5
PERMITTED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
Yard
Item
Front
Side
Corner
Side
Rear
Max. Allowable
Projection
into
Required
Setback/Yard
Minimum
Distance
to
Property
Line
Allowed
in Front
of
Building?
a) accessory buildings & structures No No No Yes Varies 5’ No
b) awnings or canopies up to 8’
wide for residential buildings
Yes Yes Yes Yes 6’ 3’ Yes
c) awnings or canopies up to 10’
wide for commercial buildings
Yes Yes Yes Yes 10’ Board
appr. req.
when over
ROW
Yes
d) arbors & trellises Yes No Yes Yes 3’ side &
corner side
5’ rear Yes
e) window A/C units Yes Yes Yes Yes 2’ 4’ Yes
f) central A/C & heat pumps No No No Yes 4’ - No
g) architectural entrance structures
to lots of 1 acre or more to subdivisions
having 25 or more lots or
dwelling units
Yes Yes Yes Yes - 6’ Yes
h) balconies, unenclosed Yes Yes Yes Yes 10’ rear & 3’
side/front
3’ Yes
i) bay windows Yes Yes Yes Yes 2’ 4’ Yes
j) attached chimneys Yes Yes Yes Yes 2’ 4’ Yes
k) eaves & gutters on principal
buildings or attached accessory
buildings
Yes Yes Yes Yes 2, 4’ Yes
l) flagpoles Yes Yes Yes Yes 10’ front 6’ Yes
m) garages, detached No No No Yes - 5’ Yes
n) garages, attached No No No Yes 20’ 6’ Yes
o) open entrances, entrance porches
& stoops
Yes Yes Yes Yes 6’ 3’ Yes
p) open off-street loading spaces
accessory to non-residential uses
No Yes No Yes 0’ 6’ Yes
q) entrance porches and stoops,
unenclosed
No Yes No Yes 0’ 5’ Yes
r) ornamental light standard
s) playground & laundry drying
equipment
No No No Yes 20’ 5’ No
t) signs & nameplates See Section 13 yes
u) sills, belt courses, cornices &
ornamental features of a principal
building
Yes Yes Yes Yes 18 inches 4-1/2 ft. Yes
v) steps, four feet (4’) or less above
grade which are necessary for access
Yes Yes Yes Yes 6’ side
10’ rear
3’ front
3’ Yes
w) swimming pools, private when
conforming with other Village
Codes & Ordinances
No No No Yes 25’ 15’ No
x) tennis courts, private No No No Yes 25’ 15’ No
y) terraces, patios, decks, & outdoor
fireplaces
No Yes No Yes 6’ side
25’ rear
3’ side
15’ rear
No
z) towers No No No Yes 0’ 10’ no
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 6
9. No private, permanent improvements of any kind or description are allowed at
any time between the property line, curb and/or edge of pavement line, or in,
or across any sidewalk, parkway, or other public way except for an approved
mail box, buried water and sewer services and other facilities specifically
permitted by the Village Board, or otherwise permitted under a valid franchise
agreement. (Also see Section 4.19.5(m) and Section 12.03.9).
4.07 HOME OCCUPATIONS
In all Residential Districts, a home occupation shall be permitted without
requiring a Special Use Permit and Public Hearing provided that:
1. It is conducted entirely within the dwelling and not in any accessory building
by a person residing in the dwelling and only when such home occupation is
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
2. The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation is from within the
dwelling unit and the portion of the dwelling unit devoted to such occupation
shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling.
3. There is no display, activity, or storage of equipment and/or materials that will
indicate from the exterior of the dwelling that it is a being used in whole, or in
part, for any use other than a dwelling.
4. No product assembled or made on premises shall be offered for sale in any
dwelling unit.
5. There is no manufacturing, repair, or storage of major or heavy equipment.
6. Teaching of musical instruments, arts and crafts, and dancing shall be
conducted only in a single family detached dwelling and then to not more that
four (4) pupils at one time.
Home occupations not meeting the above criteria shall be permitted by Special
Use only.
4.08 LOT AREA AND DIMENSION
1. Lots or Parcels of Land of Record: Any single lot or parcel of land which
was of record at the time of adoption of the Ordinance that does not meet the
requirements for minimum lot width or area may be utilized for a permitted
use subject to the provisions set forth in Section 3 below, lots in combination.
This provision shall apply even though such lots fail to meet the requirements
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 7
for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided
that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or
width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in
which such lot is located.
2. Lot Area Greater than Fifteen (15) Acres: A lot, or contiguous area of lots,
as defined in Section 3.02 when fifteen (15) acres or larger shall be developed
as a planned development special use. (See Section 14.12).
3. Lots in Combination: If two or more lots or a combination of lots with
contiguous frontage in single ownership are of record at the effective date of
this Ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet at least one-half (1/2)
of the required minimum lot area, two-thirds (2/3) of the requirement
minimum lot width, or both required under this Ordinance, the lots involved
shall be considered to be a single zoning lot for the purposes of this
Ordinance; and no portion of said zoning shall be used, sold or developed in a
manner which diminishes compliance with the lot width and area
requirements established by this Ordinance, nor shall any division of any
parcel be made which creates a lot width or area below the minimum
requirements stated in this Ordinance.
4.09 ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREET
Except as otherwise provided for herein, every building shall be constructed or
erected upon a lot or parcel of land, which abuts upon a public street, unless a
permanent easement of access to a public street was of record prior to the
adoption of the Ordinance.
4.10 NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT
Except in the case of a planned development, not more than one (1) principal
detached building shall be located on a zoning lot, nor shall a principal detached
building be located on the same zoning lot with any other principal building.
4.11 TWO USES ON A ZONING LOT
Where two (2) or more Permitted or Special Uses, each requiring a minimum lot
area, are provided on the same zoning lot, the required lot area for such uses shall
be the sum of the areas required for each individual use.
4.12 REZONING OF PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC AREA
An area indicated on the zoning map as a public park, recreation area, public
school site, cemetery or other similar open space, shall not be used for any other
purpose than that which it is zoned and planned for, and when the use of the area
is discontinued, it shall be rezoned to the most restrictive adjoining district until
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 8
appropriate zoning is authorized by the Village Board of Trustees within three (3)
months after the day of application filed for rezoning.
4.13 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
1. Accessory Uses shall be compatible with the principal use and shall not be
established prior to the establishment of the principal use, and shall not
include the keeping, propagation, or culture or pigeons, poultry, or livestock,
whether or not for profit. Private swimming pools shall be a permitted
accessory use in any Residence District, provided it conforms with the
regulations of this Ordinance and other applicable ordinances of the Village of
Itasca.
2. No accessory building, unless it is structurally a part of the principal building
and unless it conforms with requirements of accessory building for Special
Uses, shall be erected or altered, or moved to a location within ten (10) feet of
the nearest wall of the principal building, or within the required area for front
or side yard of the lot. An accessory building in a rear yard shall be not less
than five (5) feet from any property line.
3. No accessory building shall encroach upon the side yard of a corner lot which
is adjacent to the street, nor upon that side yard of a reversed corner lot which
is adjacent to the street, nor upon the rear yard of a through lot.
4. No accessory building shall have more than one (1) story, nor exceed eighteen
(18) feet in height, unless otherwise permitted and approved as accessory to
business and manufacturing uses, or to authorize Special Uses. The maximum
square footage shown as follows, applies to the aggregate of all accessory
buildings and/or structures including garages, the lesser of ten (10) percent of
the area of the Zoning Lot or
R-1 Single-Family Residence District 864 square feet
R-2 Single-Family Residence District 792 square feet
R-3 General Residence District 720 square feet
In all other Zoning Districts, the aggregate areas of accessory buildings and/or
structures shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the principal building or
structure unless other wise recommended by the Plan Commission (See
Section 4.04.5) and approved by the Village Board. (See Sections 3.02,
Definitions)
5. Towers and/or antennas as accessory structures if the following criteria are
met:
a. That no part of any tower and/or antenna shall project more than fifteen
(15) feet above actual building height, or fifteen (15) feet above the
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 9
maximum building height for the Zoning District in which it is located,
whichever is lower.
b. The setback for the base of any tower and/or antenna shall be a minimum
of ten (10) feet from all property lines and any public easements, for
towers and/or antennas up to thirty (30) feet in height. For towers and/or
antenna over thirty (30) feet in height, required setback shall be increased
two (2) feet for every one (1) foot of increased tower and/or antenna
height. All elements of the tower and/or antenna shall be setback a
minimum of ten (10) feet from any public easements.
c. All towers and/or antennas shall be in compliance with all adopted codes
and ordinance of the Village as well as any current applicable rules and
regulations of the FCC and/or FAA and the Electronic Industries
Association Manual on Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and
Antenna Supporting Structures, document RS-222C (Revision of RS-
222B) dated March, 1976, or as amended and any and all building codes
and ordinances of the Village of Itasca and other applicable regulatory
agencies.
6. Portable storage containers may be permitted as accessory structures to a
residential use if the following criteria are met, and subject to the following
limitations:
a. Portable storage containers shall be permitted only on lots containing
single-family detached dwellings or townhomes.
b. A maximum of one (1) portable storage container shall be permitted on
any one (1) zoning lot.
c. No portable storage container shall exceed eight (8) feet in height, eight
(8) feet in width, or sixteen (16) feet in length, and the total volume shall
not exceed 1,024 cubic feet.
d. Portable storage containers shall be located on hard surfaces and outside
of required yard setbacks where it is possible to do so.
e. Portable storage containers shall be in good condition, and free of rust and
other visible deterioration.
f. The location of any permitted portable storage container shall not exceed
thirty (30) days within any one- (1) year period on any one (1) zoning lot.
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 10
7. Attached and unattached garages located in residential districts are subject to
the following limitations:
a. The garage door height shall be no more than nine (9) feet in height.
b. In residential districts, garage doors shall not be of a roll-up type of
design.
4.14 TEMPORARY BUILDINGS
1. A temporary real estate office may be allowed when recommended by the
Plan Commission (See Section 4.05.5) and approved by the Village Board in
conjunction with a new housing development, limited to the selling or renting
of new units in such development, but in no case to be in operation for more
than one (1) year following completion of construction of said housing
development, unless approval is obtained from the Village Board of an
extension of said time period.
2. Temporary buildings for construction purposes may be allowed in any zoning
district for a period not to exceed two (2) years or until the designated time
period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has
ceased or unless approval to extend the time period is obtained from the
Village Board.
4.15 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The performance standards identified in the M-Limited Manufacturing District
shall also apply to all Zoning Districts.
4.16 EXISTING SPECIAL USES
Where a use is classified as a Special Use and exists as a permitted use at the date
of the adoption of this Ordinance, it shall be considered a legal special use,
without further action by the Village Board of Trustees, the Zoning Administrator
or the Plan Commission, except as herein provided.
4.17 USES NOT SPECIFICALLY PERMITTED IN DISTRICT
When a use is not specifically listed in the sections devoted to Permitted Uses, it
shall be assumed that such uses are hereby expressly prohibited unless by a
written recommendation of the Plan Commission after public hearing and
subsequent approval by the Village Board, it is determined that said use is similar
to and not more objectionable than other uses listed, then such uses may be
permitted.
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 11
4.18 TEMPORARY MODEL HOME REGULATIONS
Temporary model homes may be used to offer for sale or rental dwelling units
located within the same subdivision or planned development in which the model
home is located when recommended by the Plan Commission (See Section
4.05.5) and approved by the Village Board. The following regulations shall
govern the operations of a model home.
1. Upon request by the Village the owners of the property shall provide
information relating to the use of the model home, including but not limited
to, a record of sales for rentals made from the model home.
2. Building materials may be stored within the model home but not upon the lot
on which a model home is situated.
3. Sales offices, rental offices and construction offices may be contained in a
model home; provide that the appearance of the model home is not
substantially different from that of the other dwelling units in the subdivision
or planned development and as provided in Section 4.14.
4. A temporary off-street parking lot may be permitted if recommended by the
Plan Commission (See Section 4.04.5) and approved by the Village Board.
Exterior floodlights may be used to illuminate the model home; provided that
lights are sufficiently screened so that private dwelling units and traffic are not
adversely affected by the floodlights.
5. Signs. (Allowable). (See Section 13.00)
4.19 LANDSCAPING
1. A Landscape Plan where any landscaping and/or Plan is required under this
Zoning Ordinance, shall be submitted and shall include the following:
a. A title block, including the name of the plan, designer’s name, scale of the
plan, north point and date of the plan.
b. List of botanical and common names of all types and varieties of plant
material to be installed.
c. The number (quantity) of each type of plant material to be installed.
d. Key numbers on the landscape plan to identify where each type of plant
material is to be installed.
e. Contouring, shaping and preparation of landscape area.
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 12
f. Use and placement of non-plant elements within the area to be landscaped.
g. The landscape plan shall also incorporate existing significant trees, three
(3) inches in caliper or larger, and other existing natural vegetation which
is to be preserved on the site.
2. The landscape requirements may include natural fences.
3. Landscape materials shall be selected and sited to produce a hardy droughtresistant
landscape area. Selection shall include: consideration of soil type
and depth; spacing for opacity; exposure to sun, wind and water; slope and
contours of the site; building walls, overhangs and compatibility with existing
native vegetation preserved on site.
4. Screening and Buffering:
a. Screening shall be used to reduce or eliminate the visual impacts of the
following:
(1) Service areas and facilities, including trash containers an loading
areas.
(2) Storage areas.
(3) Off-street parking.
(4) At and above grade electrical and mechanical equipment, such as
transformers, heat pumps and air conditions.
(5) Other areas or uses as required by this Ordinance.
Screening may be accomplished by sight, obscuring plant materials
generally evergreens), earth berms, walls, fences or other design
techniques. Buffering shall be used to mitigate adverse visual impacts,
dust, noise, or pollution and provide compatibility between dissimilar
adjoining uses. Special consideration will be given to buffering and
screening between residence and business and/or industrial uses in usually
sensitive areas.
5. Planting and Maintenance:
a. No sight obscuring plant material exceeding three (3) feet in height, at
maturity above street grade, shall be located within a triangular area
measured twenty-five (25) feet from the intersections of any two (2) street
right-of-way lines in compliance with Section 4.06.8 of this ordinance.
Existing trees located within the twenty-five (25) foot triangular area of
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 13
any such intersections shall be maintained to allow eight (8) feet of vision
clearance below the lowest hanging branches in areas facilitating vehicular
traffic.
b. Plant materials, including deciduous and evergreen trees, shall not cause a
hazard. Landscape plant material overhanging walks pedestrian paths, and
seating areas shall be pruned to a minimum height of eight (8) feet, and to
a minimum height of fifteen (15) feet over streets and vehicular traffic
areas.
c. Landscape plant materials shall be selected which do not generally
interfere with utilities above or below ground level at maturity.
d. Landscape plant materials shall be installed in accordance with current
standards of the American Association of Nurserymen.
e. Landscape plant materials shall be properly guyed and staked in
accordance with current industry standards as necessary. Stakes and guy
wires shall not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
f. Plant materials shall be hardy and have vigorous root systems, and be free
from defects, diseases and infections.
g. Deciduous trees shall be fully branched, have a minimum caliper of three
(3) inches (measured six (6) inches above ground level) and a minimum
height of fourteen (14) feet at the time of planting.
h. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in height, fully
branched.
i. Shrubs shall be supplied in a minimum eight (8) inch burlap balls or one
(1) gallon containers with a minimum height spread of twelve (12) to
eighteen (18) inches.
j. Ground cover plants shall be planted so that an effective covering is
obtained within three (3) growing seasons.
k. Appropriate methods of care and maintenance of landscape plant materials
shall be provided by the owner of the property.
l. Landscape plant materials, other than grass and approved parkway trees,
shall not be planted or allowed on public property or in parkways.
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 14
4.20 FENCES
1. General Requirements
a. Fences, walls or shrubbery shall not be erected, constructed, or maintained
in conflict with the corner lot vision clearance requirements established in
Section 4.06.8 of this Ordinance.
b. No fence of shrubbery may be erected, constructed or maintained to
impede natural stormwater run off on any portion of a lot or any adjoining
lot or land.
c. Where there is a change in grade between adjoining lots, the height of
fences shall be measured from the average grade within six (6) feet on
either side of the line where the fence is to be erected. If the grade change
is greater than one (1) foot within this twelve (12) foot area, it will be
necessary to provide a detail showing the cross section of the terrain at the
fence line. This detail shall be reviewed by the Building Commissioner to
determine the average grade height.
d. Fences shall be permitted within the rear yard and interior side yard only
of reversed corner lots.
2. Required Fences: The following fences are required and shall be constructed
as follows:
a. A minimum five (5) foot solid fence is required along the lot line of lots in
districts zone business and manufacturing where such lot line abuts a lot in
the Residence District when the residential use predates the business or
manufacturing use. Fences up to eight (8) foot in height or landscaping in
lieu of fences may be allowed if recommended and/or required by the Plan
commission and approved by the Village Board.
b. A minimum five (5) foot high solid fence shall be erected along the lot
line of lots in R-3 Residence Districts which are being developed with
multi-family swelling units as described under Section 3.01 where such lot
lines abut a lot in R-1 or R-2 Single-Family Residence Districts. Fences
up to eight (8) feet in height or landscaping in lieu of fences may be
allowed and/or required if recommended by the Plan Commission and
approved by the Village Board. The purpose of the fence is to effectively
screen the activities of the multi-family dwelling units in the R-3 General
Residence District from the R-1 and R-2 Single-Family Residence
District.
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 15
3. Swimming Pools: Swimming pools shall be completely enclosed with a
minimum four (4) feet high fence and gate. Fences shall be constructed of
chain link or other materials equivalent to the following chain link
specifications:
a. Fence fabric shall have a maximum two (2) inch opening and shall be
made of galvanized or plastic coated eleven (11) gauge steel wire or
equivalent aluminized steel wire grid. Line posts, terminal posts, swing
gate posts and braces shall be of galvanized steel pipe of H column
construction. Post heights shall be sufficient to accommodate the fabric
and shall extend a minimum of two (2) feet into concrete footings. The
bottom on the wire mesh fabric shall not be installed more then three (3)
inches above grade. The spacing of posts shall not be greater than ten (10)
feet on center. Swing gates shall employ positive self-closing devices
with suitable latches and padlocks. The latch shall be located a minimum
of thirty-six (36) inches above grade.
b. An equivalent fence shall be defined as one which provides equal or better
protection against the possibility of a person accidentally falling into the
swimming pool. The Building Commissioner shall determine such
equivalency.
c. If the swimming pool is so located on the lot that a fence, with gate, on the
lot or elsewhere meets the above requirements, a separate fence around the
swimming pool is not required. If said fence terminates within three (3)
inches of a dwelling, garage or any structure on the premises and is
otherwise arranged so that the only access to the pool necessitates that a
person pass through two or more lockable doorways or the gate in the
fence, the fence need not be continuous, but may be interrupted by said
structures.
d. When the pool is not in use under the supervision of the owner, and/or
agent, tenant or other responsible person, all access gates or doors leading
directly to the pool area shall be securely locked.
e. All portable swimming pools shall be completely enclosed as if they were
permanent swimming pools. Fences around raised decks or patios will be
permitted as long as they satisfy the above requirements.
f. The swimming pools shall be kept in full view from inside the dwelling
unit. No shrub, bush, tree, structure, equipment or anything else which
would impair visions except an open fence and gate shall be placed so as
to impair the visibility of the entire area of the pool surface form the
dwelling on the premises.
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 16
g. Comply with all Codes and Ordinances of the Village of Itasca governing
the installation and use of swimming pools.
4. Prohibited Fences and Gates: The following fences are hereby prohibited:
a. Barbed wire, chicken wire (unless used to enclose a rear or side yard
garden), pig wire, rope, cable and electrically charged wire, and other
similar materials except that barbed wire may be used on top of permitted
for exceptional cases when clear hazards are present in a Zoning District
and on fences enclosing property owned by a tax levying body when
recommended by the Plan Commission (See Section 4.04.5) and approved
by the Village Board.
b. Snow fences, except those erected for the sole purpose of controlling
drifting snow between November 1 and March 31, installed only on that
portion of a lot which faces or abuts a road, street or highway.
c. Chain link fences with barbed ends up.
d. No gate or fence is permitted across a driveway in the front yard setback
in any Residence District.
e. Any fence on a corner lot which extends closer to the adjoining street than
the front yard or side yard setback lines (see Illustration Item “B”), except
for open decorative fences and landscaping under three (3) feet high is
allowed.
f. Any fence that would be closer to any street or roadway than the front
setback lines established by the building setbacks as actually located on
the lots (see Illustration Item “B”), except that a required fence or
decorative open fence or landscape fence under three (3) feet high is
allowed.
5. Development Fence
If a development fence is to be provided, a plan shall be provided showing the
location of the fence, type of fence to be used and an estimate of life of the
fence. All of these items shall be reviewed by the Building Department prior
to issuing a permit for said fence.
When a replacement of the development fence is required, the Building
Department shall approve the replacement fence as to its compatibility with
abutting fence located along the public right-of-way prior to the issuance of a
fence permit.
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 17
6. Fence Construction
a. Fence permits: a fence permit is required for the construction of all
fences. Provide the Building Department with a copy of the Plat of
Survey showing the proposed location of the fence. Complete a fence
permit application answering all necessary questions and pay the
appropriate permit fee.
7. Location
a. All fences shall be properly constructed on the fence owner’s property.
b. All fences shall be permanent and not temporary except for garden fences
enclosing a garden in a rear yard or side yard not exceeding three (3) feet
in height.
c. Except as follows, all permitted fences shall be constructed within one (1)
foot of the fence owner’s side or rear lot lines:
(1) Except where the permitted fence returns to the existing building or
structure to enclose a yard;
(2) Except for patio privacy fences (screens) not exceeding six (6) feet in
height within the buildable area of the lot;
(3) Dog enclosures or runs not exceeding five (5) feet in height or
enclosing greater than twenty (20) percent of the rear yard, constructed
in the rear yard or buildable lot area and set back not less then five (5)
feet from all property lines.
8. Fence Installation: All fences shall be installed so that the finished side
faces out. All structural supports, if exposed, shall be located in such a
manner so as to face the principal building on the lot on which the fence is
located.
9. Fence Heights
a. Residence Districts
(1) Solid fences four (4) feet high plus one (1) foot high open fence top for
a five (5) foot high fence.
(2) Solid fences which served to screen or hide business or manufacturing
activities over four (4) feet in height when recommended by the Plan
Commission and approved by the Village Board.
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 18
(3) Shrubs or hedges which do not overhang the property line and which
are kept neat and trimmed may be eight (8) feet high if recommended
by the Plan Commission (See Section 4.04.5) and approved by the
Village Board.
(4) Open fences abutting approved regulation size tennis court ten (10)
feet high.
(5) Open fences – six (6) feet high.
(6) Open fences at public baseball fields.
(7) A solid patio screening fence may be erected to a height measured
from grade not to exceed six (6) feet and a total length not to exceed
thirty-six (36) lineal feet provided that in no case shall any portion of
the screen be placed in a required front or corner side yard so or so to
impair the visibility of the entire area of a swimming pool from the
principal dwelling on the premises.
b. Business Districts: Open fence, maximum eight (8) feet high. A semisolid
or solid fence may be allowed when recommended by the Plan
Commission (See Section 4.04.5) and approved by the Village Board.
(See Section 4.20.2a.)
c. O-R Office Research District: Open, semi-solid, or solid fence, maximum
eight (8) feet high when recommended by the Plan Commission (See
Section 4.04.5) and approved by the Village Board.
d. ROC – Regional Office Center District: Open, semi-solid, or solid fence,
maximum eight (8) feet high when recommended by the Plan Commission
(See Section 4.04.5) and approved by the Village Board.
e. M-Limited Manufacturing District: Open, semi-solid, or solid fence
maximum eight (8) feet high, or open fence up to twelve (12) feet high
may be allowed when recommended by the Plan Commission (See Section
4.04.5) and approved by the Village Board.
10. Non-Conforming Fences: A fence which does not comply with this
ordinance but which is in place on or before the effective date of this
ordinance, and which is destroyed by fire or other casualty or act of God, or
deteriorates to the extent that the cost of restoration to the condition which it
was before the occurrence will exceed fifty (50) percent of the cost of
restoration of the entire row of fence now, shall not be restored unless said
fence shall conform to all regulations of this Ordinance. In the event that such
damage or destruction is less than fifty (50) percent of the cost of restoration
of the fence now, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless such
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 19
restoration is started within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of
partial destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion.
4.21 PUBLIC WATER AND SANITARY SEWERS
All new developments and new construction within the Village shall be served by
public sanitary and water facilities unless otherwise recommended by the Plan
Commission (See Section 4.04.5) and approved by the Village Board.
4.22 BOATS, SNOWMOBILES, ON OR OFF TRAILERS, RECREATIONAL
VEHICLES
1. Applicability: These regulations shall apply to all boats on or off trailers,
snowmobiles, on or off trailers, and recreational vehicles as defined in the
Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
2. Off Season Storage for Boats, Snowmobiles and Recreational Vehicles:
Storage for boats, snowmobiles and recreational vehicles shall be regulated as
follows: Only one (1) boat, on or off trailer, two (2) snowmobiles, on or off a
trailer, and/or one (1) recreational vehicle, may be stored on any lot or parcel
of land by the occupant of the subject lot or parcel of land, provided they are
stored only in a completely enclosed garage, or approved accessory building,
during off seasons as described herein, or shall be stored off-site.
3. Parking for Boats, Snowmobiles and Recreational Vehicles: Recreational
vehicles, boats, and snowmobiles may be parked on a hard surfaced existing
driveway unscreened and only within the required front yard or corner side
yard setback, only during the normal use season from May 1 to October 1 for
boats, from April 1 to October 31 recreational vehicles and only from
November 1 to May 1 for snowmobiles, provided:
a. There shall be only one (1) driveway used for such purpose (see Section
3.02 Definitions) for each dwelling unit in a single family district except
when recommended by the Plan Commission (See Section 4.04.5) and
approved by the Village Board.
b. The recreational vehicle, snowmobile(s), boat and/or transport trailer shall
not be parked in required interior side yards, on lawns or within five (5)
feet of a property line or within ten (10) feet of an adjoining residence
building.
c. The length of the boat, with trailer or without, or recreational vehicle shall
not exceed thirty (30) feet or the depth of the required front yard or corner
side yard setback, whichever is less and shall not extend beyond the
property line or encroach upon a sidewalk, parkway, or public way.
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 20
d. The owner of the boat, snowmobile(s) or recreational vehicle shall obtain
a parking permit from the Village and only when the above conditions
shall be satisfied.
4.23 PUBLIC UTILITY AND/OR SERVICE USES
All equipment and facilities used in supplying gas, sewer, water, electric,
communication or governmental services of any kind shall be permitted in
accordance with the applicable district regulations.
4.24 REQUIRED WATER AND SEWER AND OTHER PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS
Any required water and sewer mains are to be extended across the entire property
frontages and shall be in compliance with the Village Development Standards and
Specifications (Ordinance 771-93) and as subsequently amended.
4.25 REQUIRED RECORDING OF PLAT
All plats and other documentation, including Planned Development Site Plans,
shall be recorded with the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds upon approval by
the Village Board prior to the issuance of any permit.
4.26 CHILD CARE CENTERS
When included as a secondary use in the principal building and licensed by the
State of Illinois under the Illinois Child Care Act of 1969 (IL Compiled Statutes
Chapter 23, Section 2221, et seq.) or other applicable statute. The premises on
which such center is to be located shall include an outdoor play area of seventy
(70) square feet for each child in the play area at any one time and such play area
shall be fenced from adjoining properties. (See Section 3.02, Definitions)
4.27 ADULT USE PROVISIONS
1. Declaration of Policy
In the development and execution of these Sections regulating and limiting the
location of adult business uses, it is recognized that adult business uses, by
virtue of their nature, have serious, objectionable characteristics which can
have a deleterious effect upon areas adjacent to them. Special regulation of
these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute
to the blighting, or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. The
primary purpose of these regulations is to control the concentration or location
of these uses to the fullest extent allowable by law in order to eliminate such
adverse effects. It is not the intent of these Sections to deny adults access to
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 21
sexually oriented materials and services or the providers of such materials and
services they market in a manner that is consistent with the law.
2. Restriction on Location of Adult Business Uses
Adult business uses shall only be allowed in the M-Limited Manufacturing
Zoning District and under the following conditions:
a. No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, an adult business use,
either as a permitted use or as a special use within one thousand (1,000)
feet of the property line of another adult business use; within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any Zoning District which is zoned or has a residential use;
within one thousand (1,000) feet of a church or religious institution,
school, park, cemetery, day operated recreational facility, and within five
hundred (500) feet of any Zoning District other than M (Limited
Manufacturing) or residential.
b. No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the
observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to “specified
anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities” from any public way.
This shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other
opening, and no advertising or display regarding such use shall be located
in other than and M zoned district, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of a
zoning which is zoned for or has a residential use, or within one thousand
(1,000) feet of a church or a religious institution, school, park, cemetery,
or day operated recreational facility.
c. The distances provided for in this Section shall be measured by following
a straight line without regard to intervening structures from a point on the
property or the (zoning) district boundary line from which the proposed
use is to be separated.
3. Exemption from Local Restrictions
Any person desiring to locate an adult business use at a location prohibited
under the aforementioned Paragraph A and B, or any other provision thereof,
shall be required to see a variation of use in accordance with the provisions of
the Itasca Zoning Ordinance. In addition to the general criteria that shall be
established for a variation use, the person seeking the variation shall also
establish the following to be eligible for the variation of use:
a. That the location of the proposed adult business use shall not have a
detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety
or welfare;
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4 - 22
b. That the location of the proposed adult business use will not downgrade
the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas of encourage the
development of urban blight; and
c. That the location of an adult business use in the area will not be contrary
to any program of neighborhood conservation.
SECTION 5 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS
STRUCTURES AND USES
5 - 1
5.00 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
5.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The purpose of this Section is to provide for the regulation of non-conforming
buildings, structures and use and to specify those circumstances and conditions
under which those non-conforming buildings, structures and uses shall be
gradually accordance with the authority granted by Illinois Compiled Statutes,
Chapter 24, Section 11-13.1.
5.02 AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES AND USES
Any non-conforming building, structure or use which existed lawfully at the time
of the adoption of this Ordinance and which remains non-conforming, and any
such building, structure or use which shall become non-conforming upon the
adoption of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereto, may be
continued – some indefinitely, others for specified and respective periods of time
– subject to the regulations which follow.
5.03 EXEMPTED BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
No building, structure or use lawfully established on the effective date of this
Ordinance shall be subject to the amortization provision of this Section solely by
reason of being non-conforming with respect to the standards prescribed in this
Ordinance for any of the following:
1. Floor area ratio
2. Yards – front, side, rear or transitional
3. Lot area per dwelling unit
4. Lot width
5. Ground floor area per dwelling
6. Gross floor area
7. Building height
8. Off-street parking or off-street loading spaces
No building, structure or use lawfully established on the effective date of this
Ordinance and located in the M-Manufacturing District shall be subject to the
amortization provision of this Section. No building, structure or use located in a
SECTION 5 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS
STRUCTURES AND USES
5 - 2
Business District shall be subject to the amortization provisions of this Ordinance
if it is a permitted building, structure or use in any Business District, except as
provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance.
No dwelling lawfully existing on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be
subject to the amortization provisions of this Section.
For the purpose of this section, a building or structure lawfully constructed or
established on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be deemed to include any
building or structure for which a building permit has been lawfully issued prior to
such date, and on which construction is begun within the required period of time
as set forth in this Ordinance, and was in compliance with the provisions of the
Village Zoning Ordinance then in effect.
5.04 RESTRICTIONS OF NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES
AND USES THEREOF
1. Repairs and Alterations: Ordinary repairs and alterations may be made to a
non-conforming building or structure provided that no structural alterations
shall be made in or to such building or structure, all, or substantially all, of
which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it
is located, except those required by law, or except to make the building or
structure and use thereof conform to the regulations of the district in which it
is located. For the purpose of this section, ordinary repairs shall include the
replacement of storage tanks where the safety or operation of the installation
requires such replacement.
2. Additions and Enlargements: A non-conforming building or structure
which is non-conforming as to bulk may be added to or enlarged provided
such addition or enlargement shall not create either an additional
nonconformity or increase the existing nonconformity of all or any part of the
building or structure, except for second-story additions as provided below.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, second-story additions that are nonconforming
as to bulk, that have an interior side yard less than six (6) feet in
width and greater that or equal to three (3) feet in width, and that do not
exceed beyond the existing building footprint, shall be permitted if and only if
the interior side yard of the property adjoining the subject site is a least six (6)
feet in width and the subject’ property’s front yard is a minimum of twentyfive
(25) feet in length, as measured from the front lot line.
3. Moving: No building or structure which does not conform to all of the
regulation of the district in which it is located shall be moved, in whole or in
part, to any other location unless every portion of such building or structure is
moved, and the use thereof is made to conform to all regulations of the district
into which it is moved.
SECTION 5 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS
STRUCTURES AND USES
5 - 3
4. Restoration of Damaged Non-Conforming Building: A building or
structure, all, or substantially all, of which is designed or intended for a use
which is not permitted in the district in which it is located, and which is
destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God to the extent that
the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before the occurrence
will exceed fifty (50) percent restored unless said building or structure new,
shall not be restored unless said building or structure and the use thereof shall
conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located. In the event
that such damage or destruction is less than fifty (50) percent of the cost of
restoration of the entire building or structure new, no repairs or reconstruction
shall be made unless such restoration is started within one (1) year from the
date of the partial destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion.
5. Discontinuance of Use of Non-Conforming Building or Structure: A
building or structure, or portion thereof, all, or substantially all, of which is
designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which it
is located, and which is vacant on the effective date of this Ordinance or
thereafter, becomes vacant and remains unoccupied, or is not used for a
continuous period of six (6) months, shall not thereafter be occupied or used
except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which
it is located.
6. Expansion of Use in Non-Conforming Building or Structure: The nonconforming
use of a part of a building or structure may be expanded within
the building or structure in which said use is presently located, but no changes
or structural alterations shall be made unless such changes or structural
alterations and the use thereof conforms to all the regulations of the district in
which the building or structure is located.
7. Change of Use in Non-Conforming Building or Structure: The nonconforming
use of a building or structure may be changed to a use permitted
in the district in which the building or structure is located, or to a use
permitted in a more restrictive district; but no change shall extend or
otherwise modify any provision made in this Ordinance for elimination of
such non-conforming building or structure and the use thereof. For the
purpose of this subsection only, the R-1 Single-Family Residence District
shall be considered the most restrictive and the Limited Manufacturing district
the least restrictive district.
8. Elimination of Non-Conforming Building or Structure: In Residence
Districts, any building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed
or intended for a use permitted only in a Business or Manufacturing District,
shall be removed, or it shall be altered, remodeled or converted to a building
or structure designed for a use permitted in the district in which it is located
within six (6) months after the expiration of the respective periods of time set
SECTION 5 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS
STRUCTURES AND USES
5 - 4
forth hereafter which are fixed as the normal useful like of said building and
structure.
In B-1 and B-2 Business districts, any building or structure, all or substantially
all of which is designed or intended for use permitted only in a B-3 Service
Business or Manufacturing District, shall be removed, or it shall be altered,
remodeled or converted to a building or structure designed for a use permitted
in the district in which it is located within six (6) months after the
determination of the respective periods of time set forth hereafter which are
fixed as the normal useful life of said building and structure.
a. Assesses Valuation more than $15,000: In accordance with the types of
construction classifications set forth in the Itasca Building Code:
(1) Type 1: Fireproof Construction and Type 2: Non-Combustible
Construction: Forty (40) years from date of building permit or twentyfive
(25) years from effective date of this Ordinance whichever last
occurs.
(2) Type 3: Exterior Masonry Wall Construction: Thirty (30) years from
date of building permit of twenty (20) years from effective date of this
Ordinance, whichever last occurs.
(3) Type 4: Frame Construction: Twenty (20) years from date of building
permit or ten (10) years from effective date of this Ordinance
whichever last occurs.
b. Assessed Valuation at least $7,500, but not more than $15,000: Eight (8)
years from date of building permit or four (4) years from the effective date
of this Ordinance whichever last occurs.
c. Assessed Valuation under $7,500: Four (4) years from date of building
permit or two (2) years from the effective date of this Ordinance
whichever last occurs.
The non-conforming use of a building or structure shall be terminated at the
end of the amortization period for said building our structure, as set forth in
this paragraph 8, and shall not thereafter be operated on the premises.
5.05 CONDEMNATION OF NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS OR
STRUCTURES
1. The Village of Itasca, at any time, and from time to time, by Ordinance duly
enacted and in accordance with the authority vested in it by Illinois Complied
Statutes, Chapter 24, Section 11-13-1:
SECTION 5 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS
STRUCTURES AND USES
5 - 5
a. May acquire, by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, any buildings or
structures which do not conform to the standards fixed by the corporate
authorities of the Village of Itasca pursuant to Illinois Compiled Statutes,
Chapter 24, Section 11-13-1, and all land which is necessary or
appropriate for the rehabilitation or redevelopment of any area blight by
substandard buildings or structures;
b. May remove or demolish in such substandard buildings and structures so
acquired;
c. May hold and use any remaining property for public purposes, and
d. May sell, lease, or exchange such property as is not required for public
purposes, subject to the provision of this Ordinance or any amendment
thereto.
2. No such acquisition by condemnation shall be made until such time as the
Plan Commission, at the request of the President and the Board of Trustees, or
upon its own initiative, shall have made a study of the area within which such
non-conforming building or structure is located and shall have filed a written
report on such study with the President and Board of Trustees.
5.06 NON-CONFORMING USE OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES
The lawfully existing non-conforming use of part or all of a building or structure,
all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for a
use permitted in the district in which it is located, may be continued, subject to the
following provisions:
1. Expansion of Non-Conforming Use: The non-conforming use of a part of a
building or structure, all, or substantially all, of which building or structure is
designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is located,
shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such building or
structure, nor changed to any other non-conforming use.
2. Discontinuance: If a non-conforming use is discontinued for a continuous
period of six (6) months (one hundred eighty (180) days), it shall not be
reestablished; and any subsequent use of the building or structure shall
conform to the use regulations of the district in which the premises are
located.
3. Change of a Non-Conforming Use: No non-conforming use shall be
changed to another non-conforming use when such non-conforming use is
located in a building or structure, all, or substantially all, of which building or
structure is designed or intended for a permitted use.
SECTION 5 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS
STRUCTURES AND USES
5 - 6
4. Elimination of Non-Conforming Uses: In all Residence Districts any use
which lawfully exists on the effective date of this Ordinance, but is permitted
only in a Business or Manufacturing Districts and which is located in a
building, all, or substantially all of which is designed and intended for a
residential purpose, shall be entirely discontinued, and shall thereafter cease
operation within five (5) years from the effective date of this Ordinance.
5.07 NON-CONFORMING USE OF LAND
1. Expansion: A non-conforming use of land shall not be expanded or extended
beyond the area it occupies.
2. Discontinuance: If a non-conforming use of land is discontinued for a period
of thirty (30) consecutive days, it shall not thereafter be renewed, and any
subsequent use of land shall conform to the regulations of the district in which
the land is located.
3. Change of Use: A non-conforming use of land shall not be changed to any
other use except to a use permitted in the district in which the land is located.
4. Elimination of Non-Conforming Use of Land: The non-conforming use of
land shall be discontinued and cease in accordance with the following, except
that in R-1 and R-2 Single-Family Residence Districts, the allowable terms
shall be reduced by fifty (50) percent.
a. Where no buildings or structures are employed in connection with use -
discontinued within one (1) year.
b. Where the only buildings or structures or other physical improvements
employed are accessory or incidental to such use and have an assessed
valuation of not more than $7,500 - discontinued within two (2) years.
c. Where the improvements, underground, or substantially at ground level,
which comprise all, or substantially all, of the improvements employed in
a non-conforming use of land, and which have an assessed valuation of
more than $7,500 - discontinued within five (5) years.
d. Where a non-conforming use of land is accessory to the non-conforming
use of a building or structure - discontinued on the same date on which the
non-conforming use of the building or structure is discontinued.
SECTION 6 ZONING DISTRICTS
6 - 1
6.00 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
6.01 DISTRICTS
For the purpose and provisions of this Ordinance, the Village of Itasca is hereby
divided into the following districts:
Residence Districts
R-1 Single-Family Residence District
R-2 Single-Family Residence District
R-3 General Residence District
Business Districts
B-1 Local Business District
B-2 Community Business District
B-3 Service Business District
B-4 Traditional Downtown North Business District
B-5 Traditional Downtown South Business District
B-6 Irving Park Road Business District
Office-Research District
O-R Office-Research District
Region Office District
ROC Regional Office Center District
Manufacturing District
M Limited Manufacturing District
6.02 MAP
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this Ordinance are set
forth on the “Official Zoning District Map of Itasca” which is incorporated herein
and hereby made a part of this Ordinance. The said map, together with everything
shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this
Ordinance as though fully set forth and described herein. The said map shall be
filed with the office of the Village Clerk and certified copies thereof at the office
of the Building Commissioner and shall be open to the public reference at all
times during which these offices are open.
SECTION 6 ZONING DISTRICTS
6 - 2
6.03 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts, as
shown on the Itasca Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
1. District boundary lines are either the center lines of railroads, highways,
streets, alleys, easements, or tract or lot lines, or such lines extended unless
otherwise indicated.
2. In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is indicated as
a strip adjacent to a paralleling a street, highway or railroad, the depth of such
strips shall be in accordance with the dimensions shown on the maps
measured at right angles from the centerline of a street, highway or railroad,
and the length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on
the map form center lines of streets, highways or railroad rights-of-way,
unless otherwise indicated.
3. Where a lot is held in one (1) ownership and of record on the effective date of
the Ordinance is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot may be
constructed to be within the less restricted district. If it increases the less
restricted frontage of the lot by less than twenty-five (25) feet, it shall be
constructed in the more restrictive zoning district.
6.04 ANNEXED TERRITORY
Whenever any parcel of land is hereafter annexed to the Village, in any manner
whatsoever, such territory, upon annexation, shall be classified or zoned under
this Ordinance as an R-1 Single-Family Residence District, except as may be
provided for by a pre-annexation agreement, or an annexation agreement after
public hearing by the Plan Commission in accordance with the provisions of
Section 14.10 of this Ordnance.
When a lot or parcel of land is being considered for annexation to the Village of
Itasca and currently has a private well and/or private septic system or both, it shall
be understood that the annexed property will follow all procedures and
requirements to tie into the Village of Itasca water and sewer systems unless
otherwise recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Village
Board.
Required Conditions
When a lot or parcel of land including a private well and/or private septic sanitary
facility is being considered for annexation, the following shall be submitted
exclusive of other required documentation:
1. A plot plan drawn to scale on which the location of the closest public facility
shall be shown.
SECTION 6 ZONING DISTRICTS
6 - 3
2. Proposed connection plans for both sewer and water to a public facility shall
be provided.
3. Time sequence as to when these connections can be completed.
6.05 ZONING OF PUBLIC WAYS
All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-way, if not
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the
immediately abutting on such streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad
rights-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the
abutting property up to such centerline.
SECTION 6 ZONING DISTRICTS
6 - 4
SECTION 7 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7 - 1
7.00 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The Residence Districts provide for the development of various types of dwelling
units within the framework of the Amendatory Comprehensive Plan adopted on
February 28, 1995 or as amended, designed to:
1. Provide housing of various types and price levels which will serve different
age and income groups and appropriately located in the Village to
accommodate current and future Itasca residents.
2. Provide areas well suited as to location and topography.
3. Maintain existing residential densities in established residential areas.
4. Provide for new residential land uses only in areas where such a land use is
compatible, does not disrupt established neighborhoods, and where the
necessary community facilities and services exist or can be easily provided.
5. Use higher density housing which has some flexibility in site design as a
buffer-transitional use between lower density residential uses and other more
intensive land uses.
6. Encourage modern trends in residential planning such as the planned
development concept as a means to the conservation of land, the reduction of
development and housing costs, the reduction of the cost of providing public
services and facilities and as a means of providing higher density usage
without serious intrusion or disruption of existing or future single family
dwelling unit or neighborhood character.
7. Provide higher density residential opportunities in or near the central business
area in order to create housing opportunities for the elderly and handicapped
as well as provide a walk-in market to further the Town Center concept.
8. Consider redevelopment and/or conversion of housing units situated on land
areas better suited to other types of land uses.
7.02 RESIDENCE DISTRICT PROVISIONS
Unless otherwise provided in the regulation of this Ordinance, the following
provision shall apply only in the R-3 General Residence District.
Conversion: In all R-3 General Residence Districts, conversion of existing
residential buildings shall be governed by the following:
SECTION 7 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7 - 2
1. The quotient secured by dividing the floor area of all dwelling units on a
zoning lot by the number of dwelling units on such lot shall not be less that
five hundred (500) square feet.
2. No existing residential use shall be so converted as to conflict with, or further
conflict, with the requirements in “1” above.
3. Where applicable, an efficiency dwelling unit or a lodging room may be
considered as 0.75 of a dwelling unit in determining compliance with “1”
above.
7.03 THIS SECTION WAS DELETED PER ORDINANCE 1131-02.
7.04 R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
1. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted:
a. Single-family detached dwellings.
b. Park and forest preserves when publicly owned and operated.
c. Accessory uses in accordance with the provisions of Sections 3.02, 4.06,
and 12.00.
d. Signs (Allowable). (See Section 13.00.)
e. Temporary buildings. (See Section 4.14.)
2. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by Special Use Permit in
accordance with the provisions of the Administrative Section 14.00.
a. Cemeteries.
b. Churches, chapels, temples, and synagogues, rectories, seminaries,
convents, monasteries, and similar religious institutions, including
dormitories and other necessary uses required for operation.
c. Growing of farm crops in the open, including truck gardens and nurseries,
provided that no livestock or poultry are kept, and no offensive odors or
dusts are created, and further provided that no retail sales are conducted
from a store and stand erected or maintained on the premises.
d. Golf courses; but not including commercially-operated driving ranges or
miniature golf courses.
e. Home occupations. (See Section 4.07.)
SECTION 7 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7 - 3
f. Library, public.
g. Municipal recreational buildings and community centers.
h. Non-commercial and television towers and antennas.
(1) All radio and television towers or antennas, including the structure(s)
therefore, shall be permitted under the following conditions
(a) All radio or television towers or antennas, as covered by this
section, or any part thereof, shall comply with applicable Federal
Communications Commission (F.C.C.) height restrictions.
(b) Radio or television towers or antennas shall not be permitted
within the required front or side yard (setback) requirements. (See
Sections 3.02, 4.06.2, and 4.13)
i. Parks, playgrounds, and recreational areas; publicly or privately-owned
and operated, not for profit.
j. Planned developments, under single ownership or control, may include
incidental, business, or recreational facilities for the convenience of the
occupants. For such developments, the Village Board may vary the
regulations herein, provided such variations of the Ordinance and will
result in better site planning and thus, be of greater benefit to both the
occupants of the development and to the communities.
k. Schools, private or parochial – elementary, junior high, or high (nonboarding).
l. Schools, public – elementary, junior high, and high (non-boarding).
m. Public utility and/or service uses.
(1) Essential services including fully automated gas regulating stations
and telephone exchanges. Private or public utility substations or
transmission corridors with a capacity not greater than 34 kilovolts.
(2) Railroad passenger stations when not located on railroad property.
(3) Sewage treatment plants.
(4) Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations, filtration plants and wells.
SECTION 7 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7 - 4
(5) Telephone exchanges, microwave relay towers, and telephone
transmission equipment buildings.
(6) Water filtration plants, pumping stations, reservoirs, and sewage
treatment plants, public.
(7) Other public or private utility service uses.
n. Swimming pool, public.
o. Accessory uses to the above allowable Special uses, including, but not
limited to, off-street parking and off-street loading.
3. Off-Street Parking and Loading: Off-street parking and loading facilities
shall be provided as required or permitted in Section 12.00.
4. Minimum Lot Size:
a. Every single-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located
on a zoning lot having an area of not less than sixteen thousand (16,000)
square feet, and a width of not less than ninety (90) feet. (See Section
3.02, Definition of Buildable Area, and Section 4.06.7, Minimum Distance
between Principal Buildings).
b. The widths of lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall not be less than ninety
(90) feet at the setback line in the R-1 Zoning District. (See Section 3.02,
Definition of Buildable Area, and Section 4.06.7, Minimum Distance).
c. All non-residential permitted and nonresidential special uses shall have a
floor area ratio not to exceed zero point five (0.5).
5. Yard Requirements: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such
building, structure, or enlargement:
a. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than thirty (30) feet in depth.
b. Side Yards: There shall be provided two (2) side yards having a
combined width of twenty (20) feet, and neither side yard shall be less
than eight (8) feet in width, except on corner lots a side yard adjoining a
street shall be not less than thirty (30) feet wide. However, if a corner lot,
subdivided and duly recorded on the effective date of this Ordinance, has
insufficient width to provide such yard of thirty (30) feet width and still
maintain a buildable width of twenty-nine (29) feet, excluding the
opposite side yard, then the side yard adjoining the street may be reduced
in width by the distance necessary to maintain a buildable width of
SECTION 7 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7 - 5
twenty-nine (29) feet, provided the side yard adjoining a street is not
reduced in width to less than thirty (30) percent of the width of the lot.
c. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than forth (40) feet in depth.
6. Yards, General: For permitted uses and special uses, each front, side and
rear yard as heretofore required shall be increased in depth or width by two (2)
feet for each additional one (1) foot of building height over thirty-four (34)
feet.
7. Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling. One (1) story dwellings shall have a
ground floor area of not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square
feet, and dwellings having more than one (1) story shall have not less than one
thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of ground floor area.
8. Building Height. No building shall exceed a height of thirty-four (34) feet or
two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, whichever is lower. (See Definitions –
Section 3.02).
9. Maximum Lot Coverage. No more than forty (40) percent of the lot area
may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings,
or covered by walks, driveways or patios. The balance of the remaining
portion of the zoning lot shall be suitably landscaped.
7.05 R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
1. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted:
a. Any use in the R-1 Single-Family Residence District.
2. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by Special Use Permit in
accordance with the provisions of the Administrative Section 14.00.
a. Any use allowed as a Special Use in the R-1 Single-Family Residence
District, subject to the provisions of Section 14.00.
3. Off-Street Parking and Loading: Off-street parking and loading facilities
shall be provided as required or permitted in Section 12.00.
4. Minimum Lot Size:
a. Every single-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located
on a lot having an area of not less than nine thousand one hundred (9,100)
square feet, and a width of not less than sixty-five (65) feet. (See Section
3.02, Definition of Buildable Area, and Section 4.06.7)
SECTION 7 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7 - 6
The widths of lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall not be less than sixty-five
(65) feet at the setback line in the R-2 Zoning District. (See Section 3.02,
Definition of Buildable Area, and Section 4.06.7).
b. All non-residential permitted and nonresidential special uses shall have a
floor area ratio not to exceed zero point five (0.5).
5. Yard Requirements: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such
building, structure or enlargement:
a. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than thirty (30) feet.
b. Side Yards:
(1) There shall be provided two (2) side yards having a combined width of
sixteen (16) feet and neither side yard shall be less than six (6) feet in
width. However, side yards that adjoin a street on corner lots shall be
not less than thirty (30) feet wide.
(2) Lots of Record. Any single lot or parcel of land which was of record
at the time of adoption of this Ordinance that does not meet the
requirements for minimum lot width or area and which has a detached
garage may have provided two (2) side yards having a combined width
of fourteen (14) feet and neither side yard shall be less than six (6) feet
in width. Additionally, on a corner lot, subdivided and duly recorded
on the effective date of this Ordinance, the minimum width of a corner
side yard abutting a street may be reduced from thirty (30) feet by the
distance necessary to maintain a buildable width of twenty-nine (29)
feet and an interior side yard of no less than six (6) feet. However, in
no instance shall a corner side yard adjoining a street be reduced in
width to measure less than thirty (30) percent of the width of the lot.
c. Rear Yard:
(1) There shall be provided a rear yard of not less than forty (40) feet for
interior lots and thirty-five (35) feet for corner lots.
(2) Lots of Record. Any single lot or parcel of land which was of record
at the time of adoption of this Ordinance that does not meet the
requirements for minimum lot width or area may have a rear yard of
not less than thirty-five (35) feet for interior lots and thirty (30) feet for
corner lots.
SECTION 7 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7 - 7
6. Building Height: No building shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet or
two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, whichever is lower. (See Definitions –
Section 3.02).
7. Maximum Lot Coverage:
a. Maximum Lot Coverage shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the
Lot Area. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the Lot Area of any parcel
may be occupied by impervious surfaces, which include but are not
limited to the primary structure, accessory buildings or structures, walks,
driveways, and patios.
b. Lots of Record. Maximum Lot Coverage on any single lot or parcel of
land which was on record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance that
does not meet the requirements for minimum lot width or area shall not
exceed forty percent (40%) of the Lot Area.
8. Maximum Allowable Floor Area:
a. The maximum allowable floor area for residential parcels of land in the R-
2 Zoning District shall be calculated as follows:
3,658 + [(Lot Area – 6,650) x 0.25] = Maximum Floor Area
b. Lots of Record. On any single lot or parcel of land which was of record at
the time of adoption of this Ordinance that does not meet the requirements
for minimum lot width or area, the maximum allowable floor area shall be
calculated as follows:
For lots of record measuring 6,650 square feet or less in area:
Lot Area x 0.55 = Maximum Floor Area
For lots of record measuring more than 6,650 square feet in area:
3,658 + [(Lot Area – 6,650) x 0.25] = Maximum Floor Area
9. Porch Bonus:
a. The first two hundred (200) square feet of any porch located in the front or
corner side yard that maintains all required minimum setbacks shall not be
counted towards the calculation of maximum Lot Coverage or maximum
allowable floor area under this section.
b. Lots of Record. On any single lot or parcel of land which was of record at
the time of adoption of this Ordinance that does not meet the requirements
SECTION 7 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7 - 8
for minimum lot width or area, the first one hundred seventy-five (175)
square feet of any porch located in the front or corner side yard that
maintains all requirement minimum setbacks shall not be counted towards
the calculation of maximum Lot Coverage or maximum allowable floor
area under this section.
10. Detached Garage Bonus:
a. The first two hundred fifty (250) square feet of any detached garage that
maintains all required minimum setbacks shall not be counted towards the
calculation of maximum Lot Coverage or maximum allowable floor area
under this section.
b. Lots of Record. On any single lot or parcel of land which was of record at
the time of adoption of this Ordinance that does not meet the requirements
for minimum lot width or area, the first two hundred (200) square feet of
any detached garage that maintains all requirement minimum setbacks
shall not be counted towards the calculation of maximum Lot Coverage or
maximum allowable floor area under this section.
11. Dormer Bonus: The floor area under any dormer that is not more than six (6)
feet wide and is set in at least three and one-half (3-1/2) feet from the gable
end walls; provided the total width of all dormers does not exceed twenty-five
percent (25%) of the length of the roof shall not be counted towards the
calculation of the maximum allowable Floor Area under this section.
7.06 R-3 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT
1. Purpose: The R-3 General Residence District is established to provide for a
wider variety of dwelling accommodations with a higher density of dwelling
units; to provide for multiple-family dwellings with open space for family
living; and to provide for a transition between non-residential areas and
single-family area of lower density.
2. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted:
a. Any of the uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Single-Family Residence
Districts.
b. Two-family dwellings.
c. Semi-detached dwellings. (Two-family).
d. Multiple-family dwellings with not more than six (6) dwelling units per
building.
SECTION 7 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7 - 9
e. Single-family attached (row dwellings or townhomes), single-family row
dwellings (party-wall) with not more than five (5) dwellings in a row or a
building, or not more than six (6) dwellings in a building if in combination
with two-family dwellings or multi-family dwellings.
f. Libraries, public.
g. Signs. (Allowable). (See Section 13.00).
h. Accessory uses as permitted and regulated in R-1 Family Residence
District.
3. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by Special Use Permit in
accordance with the provision of Administrative Section 14.00.
a. The Special Uses allowed in R-1 and R-2 Single-Family Resident
Districts, except libraries.
b. Hospitals and clinics.
c. Institutions for the aged and for children.
d. Municipality-operated health centers.
e. Multiple Family Dwellings with more than six (6) dwelling units in a
building, or single family attached with more than five (5) dwellings in a
row or building.
f. Off-street parking areas, provided there is a need for this facility in the
interest of public necessity and convenience and that no appropriate site is
available in nearby business or manufacturing district.
g. Planned developments under single ownership or control may include
incidental business or recreational facilities for the convenience of the
occupants. For such developments, the Village Board may vary the
regulations herein, provided such variations are consistent with the general
purpose and intent of the Ordinance and will result in better site planning
and thus, be of greater benefit to both the occupants of the development
and to the community.
h. Private clubs or lodges, except those the chief activity of which is a
service normally carried on as a business.
i. Sanitariums and nursing homes, but not for the care of feeble-minded or
insane.
SECTION 7 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7 - 10
j. Schools, non-boarding, elementary, junior high and high.
k. Schools, nursery schools, day nurseries and child care centers.
l. Schools, public, denominational, or private, elementary and high,
including playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto.
m. Swimming pools, public.
n. Undertaking establishments, funeral parlors.
o. Public utility and/or service uses.
(1) Essential services including fully automated gas regulating stations
and telephone exchanges. Private or public utility substations or
transmission corridors with a capacity of not greater than 34 kilovolts.
(2) Railroad passenger stations when not located on railroad property.
(3) Sewage treatment plants.
(4) Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations, filtration plants and wells.
(5) Telephone exchanges, microwave relay towers, and telephone
transmission equipment buildings.
(6) Water filtration plants, pumping stations, reservoirs, and sewage
treatment plants – public.
(7) Other public or private utility service uses.
p. Accessory uses to the above allowable Special Uses, including, but not
limited to, off-street parking and off-street loading.
4. Off-Street Parking and Loading: Off-street parking and loading facilities
shall be provided as required or permitted in Section 12.00.
5. Minimum Lot Size:
a. There shall be provided a lot area for each single-family detached
dwelling of not less than eight thousand one hundred (8,100) square feet;
for each two-family semi-detached dwelling, or attached dwelling, the
following minimum lot areas shall be provided:
SECTION 7 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7 - 11
Type of Single-Family
Dwelling
Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling in Square Feet
Semi-Detached or 2 Family Attached
4 bedroom 5,000 3,500
3 bedroom 4,500 3,100
2 & 1 bedroom 4,000 2,700
b. There shall be provided a minimum lot area for multiple-family dwellings
as follows:
Type of Multi-Family
Dwelling
Minimum Lot Area per
Dwelling in Square Feet
4 bedroom 4,060
3 bedroom 3,930
2 bedroom 3,630
1 bedroom & efficiency 3,630
c. The dwelling unit density in the R-3 General Residence District shall not
be greater than twelve (12) dwelling units per gross acre. Existing
residential buildings in the R-3 District may be altered to provide for not
more than four (4) dwelling units, providing that no existing residential
building is altered in such a way as to conflict with or further conflict with
the foregoing requirements.
d. Lot Width: There shall be provided a lot width not less than sixty-five
(65) feet. (See Section 3.02, Definition of Buildable Area and Section
4.06.7 Minimum Distance between Principal Buildings).
e. The widths of lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall not be less than sixty-five
(65) feet at the setback line in the R-3 Zoning District. (See Sections 3.02
and 4.06.7).
6. Yard Requirements: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such
building, structure or enlargement.
a. Front Yard: A front yard of not less thank twenty-five (25) feet in depth,
except for single-family attached, detached, semi-detached, or two (2)
family dwellings a front yard of not less than thirty (30) feet shall be
required.
b. Side Yards: There shall be provided two (2) side yards having a
combined width of sixteen (16) feet and neither side yard shall be less than
six (6) feet in width, except on a corner lot, a side yard adjoining a street
shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet wide. However, if a corner lot,
subdivided and duly recorded prior to the effective date of this Ordinance,
SECTION 7 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7 - 12
has insufficient width to provide such yard of twenty-five (25) feet width
and still maintain a buildable width of twenty-seven (27) feet, provided
such side yard adjoining the street is not reduced to less than thirty percent
(30%) of the width of the lot.
c. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than thirty (30) feet in depth.
d. Coinciding Lot Line: When a front, corner, side and/or rear lot line
coincides with a front, corner, side, and/or rear lot line in an adjacent
single-family residence district, the required size of the front, corner, side
and/or rear yard provided along such lot line shall be equal to the more
restrictive yard requirement under this Ordinance for the applicable
Residence District.
7. Yards, General: For permitted uses and special uses, each front, side and
rear yard as heretofore required shall be increased in depth or width by two (2)
feet for each additional one (1) foot or building height over thirty (30) feet.
8. Floor Area Ratio: Non-residential Permitted and Special Uses shall not
exceed zero point six (0.6).
9. Building Height: Residential: No building shall exceed a height of thirty
(30) feet or two in one half (2-1/2) stories, whichever is lower except as
follows: a building not to exceed thirty-four (34) feet, or three (3) stories in
height may be permitted when recommended by the Plan Commission (See
Section 4.04.5) and approved by the Village Board and only in cases where
the building is compatible with adjacent buildings. (See Definitions, Section
3.02).
10. Maximum Lot Coverage: Not more than sixty-seven percent (67%) of the
lot area may be occupied by buildings and structures including accessory
buildings or covered by walks, driveways, or patios. The balance of the
remaining portion of the zoning lot shall be suitably landscaped.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 1
8.00 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The Business Districts, as they have been historically named in the Zoning
Ordinance, will continue to be so named in this Ordinance. The Business
Districts, as shown of the Zoning Ordinance Map which is part of this Ordinance,
include the various named commercial areas as delineated in the Amendatory
Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
As the Village of Itasca is developed and additional business areas are requested,
the Amendatory Comprehensive Plan shall be considered in the decision-making
process for the location of any additional business areas.
8.02 BUSINESS DISTRICT PROVISIONS – ALL BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Unless otherwise provided in the regulations of the Ordinance, the following
provisions shall apply to all Business Districts.
1. All business, service, storage, merchandise, display and, where permitted,
repair and processing, shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building,
except for off-street automobile parking, off-street loading and open sales lots
in districts where they are permitted.
2. Goods sold shall consist primarily of new merchandise and any goods
produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises unless
otherwise permitted herein for specified uses.
3. Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold shall be
limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of dirt, smoke, cinders,
gas, noise, vibration, or refuse matter of water-carried waste.
8.03 B-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
The B-1 Local Commercial District is intended for small-scale commercial uses,
designed to meet the day-to-day convenience shopping and service needs of
nearby residents. All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail on premises where produced.
1. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted:
a. Barber shops
b. Beauty parlors
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 2
c. Bicycles stores; sales, rental and repair
d. Candy and ice cream stores
e. Clothing store
f. Clothes-pressing establishments
g. Drug stores
h. Dry-cleaning and laundry-receiving establishments, provided that
processing shall be done elsewhere.
i. Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets and delicatessens not
exceeding one thousand (1,000) gross square feet.
j. Health clubs
k. Libraries – branch
l. Offices, Professional and General; uses not to occupy more than one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet (See Definition Section 3.02)
m. Shoe stores
n. Shoe and hat repair stores
o. Signs (Allowable). (Section 13.00)
p. Variety stores.
2. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by Special Use Permit in
accordance with the provisions of the Administrative Section 14.00.
a. Other business uses when found to be similar and compatible with
adjoining property.
b. Planned developments
c. Hardware stores
d. Laundries, automatic self-service type or hand, provided that laundry
machines shall not exceed the commercial coin-operated type and not
more than two (2) employees and one (1) owner or manager are on the
premises at one time.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 3
e. Offices, Professional and General (See Definition, Section 3.02).
f. Public utility and/or service uses
(1) Essential services, including fully automated gas regulating stations
and telephone exchanges; private or public utility substations or
transmission corridors with a capacity no greater than 34 kilovolts.
(2) Railroad passenger stations when not located on railroad property.
(3) Sewage treatment plants.
(4) Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations, filtration plants, public.
(5) Other public or private utility service uses or buildings.
g. Temporary Buildings (See Section 4.14).
3. Required Conditions:
a. The sale of foodstuffs, beverages or articles intended for human
consumption shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building
unless otherwise recommended by the Plan Commission (See Section
4.04.5) and approved by the Village Board.
b. There shall be no manufacture, processing, or treatment of products other
than that which is clearly incidental and essential to the retail business
conducted on the same premises.
c. Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to odor,
dust, smoke, noise, vibration, or other similar causes.
4. Floor Area Ratio: The floor area ratio shall not exceed zero point four (0.4).
5. Yard requirements: Yards shall be provided in accordance with the
following regulations:
a. Front Yard: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth shall be
provided.
b. Side Yards: Not less than five (5) feet in width shall be required except,
if recommended by the Plan Commission (See Section 4.04.5) and
approved by the Village Board, a side yard may not be required. A side
yard adjoining a street shall be provided and such yard shall not be less
than twenty-five (25) feet in width. Where a side lot line coincides with
a side lot line in an adjacent residence district, a side yard shall be
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 4
provided along such lot line. Such side yard shall be equal in dimension
to the side yard required under this ordinance for the applicable
residence district.
c. Rear Yard: Not less than twenty (20) feet in depth shall be provided.
d. Yard Setbacks: Each front, side, and rear setback or required yard shall
be increased by two (2) feet for each additional one (1) foot of building
height over thirty (30) feet.
6. Off-Street Parking and Loading: Off-street parking and loading facilities
shall be provided as required or permitted in Section 12.00.
7. Building Height: The height of any building or structure shall not exceed
two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet whichever is lower. (See Definitions –
Section 3.02)
8.04 B-2 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
The B-2 Community Business District is established to promote a harmonious,
efficient, and convenient retail shopping environment. The B-2 district
encourages: traffic safety through provision for proper traffic routing and auto
parking; freedom from traffic congestion on the public streets through provision
for adequate off-street parking, off-street loading, and off-street circulation; the
protection of the surrounding residential values; and the promotion of the general
welfare of the surrounding residential area.
1. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted:
a. Uses permitted in a B-1 Local Business District.
b. Antique shops.
c. Art and school supply stores.
d. Art galleries, but not including auction rooms.
e. Art shops or galleries including picture framing.
f. Bakeries, retail, where not more than seventy percent (70%) of the floor
area is devoted to processing and not more than seven (7) employees are
on the premises at any one time.
g. Book and stationery stores.
h. Camera and photographic supply stores.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 5
i. Carpet and rug stores.
j. China and glassware stores.
k. Coin and philatelic stores.
l. Computer and software rentals, sales and service.
m. Craft store.
n. Currency exchanges.
o. Custom dressmaking.
p. Dry goods stores.
q. Dry cleaning and laundry, automatic self-service types or hand, and not
more than two (2) employees in addition to one (1) owner or manager on
the premises at any one time.
r. Drug stores.
s. Electrical and household appliance stores, including radio and television
sales.
t. Food stores, delicatessens, fish and seafood stores, grocery stores, meat
markets and package liquor stores.
u. Flower shops and conservatories.
v. Furniture stores, including upholstery, when conducted as part of the
retail operation and secondary to the principal use.
w. Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and conditioning of furs.
x. Garden supply and seed stores.
y. Gift shops.
z. Hardware stores.
aa. Hobby shops, for retailing of items to be assembled or used away from
the premises.
bb. Household appliance stores.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 6
cc. Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and making of draperies,
slip covers and other similar articles when conducted as part of the retail
operation and secondary to the principal use.
dd. Jewelry stores, including watch repair.
ee. Leather goods and luggage stores.
ff. Liquor stores, retail sales.
gg. Loan offices.
hh. Locksmith shops.
ii. Mail order service stores.
jj. Medical, dental, or optical clinics, including accessory laboratories.
kk. Millinery shops.
ll. Musical Instruments, sales and repairs.Newspaper offices, but not
including printing.
mm. Office supply store.
nn. Opticians and optometrists.
oo. Paint, glass and wallpaper stores.
pp. Photography studios, including developing and printing of photographs
when conducted on the premises as a part of the retail business.
qq. Physical culture and health services, reducing salon and masseurs.
rr. Picture framing, when conducted on the premises, for retail trade.
ss. Quick print shops limited to five (5) employees.
tt. Radio and television broadcasting studios.
uu. Record, tape, and disc rentals and sales.
vv. Restaurants, when no entertainment or dancing is provided.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 7
ww. Restricted production and repair limited to the following: art,
needlework, clothing, custom manufacturing, and alterations, for retail
only, of jewelry from precious metals, and watches.
xx. Schools, music, dance or business.
yy. Sewing machine sales and services, household machines only.
zz. Shoe repair shops.
aaa. Shoe stores.
bbb. Signs (Allowable). (See Section 13.00).
ccc. Sporting goods stores.
ddd. Tailor shops.
eee. Telegraph offices.
fff. Tobacco shops.
ggg. Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
hhh. Toy shops.
iii. TV, VCR, and Video rentals, sales and services.
jjj. Wearing apparel shops.
kkk. Accessory uses to the above permitted uses.
2. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by Special Use Permit in
accordance with the provisions of the Administrative Section 14.00.
a. Automobile (car) rental agency.
b. Automobile accessory stores.
c. Banks and financial institutions which include drive-in or drive-through
facilities.
d. Catering establishments limited to five (5) employees.
e. Child care centers (See Section 4.26).
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 8
f. Churches, chapels, temples, and synagogues, including other accessory
uses required for operation.
g. Clubs and lodges, private fraternal or religious.
h. Convents, monasteries, theological schools, rectories and parish houses.
i. Department stores.
j. Dwelling units when above the first (1st) story.
k. Fire stations.
l. Frozen food shops, including locker rental in conjunction therewith.
m. Health centers, including clinics and hospitals.
n. Hotels.
o. Libraries, public.
p. Meeting halls.
q. Motels.
r. Museums, public.
s. Offices and other business uses when found to be similar and compatible
with adjoining property (See Definitions, Section 3.02).
t. Parking lots and storage garages, for motor vehicles under one and onehalf
(1-1/2) ton load capacity.
u. Planned developments.
v. Police stations.
w. Post offices.
x. Public utility and/or service uses.
(1) Essential services including fully automated gas regulating stations
and telephone exchanges; private or public utility substations or
transmission corridors with a capacity no greater than 34 kilovolts.
(2) Railroad passenger stations when not located on railroad property.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 9
(3) Sewage treatment plants.
(4) Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations, filtration plants and wells.
(5) Telephone exchanges, microwave relay towers, and telephone
transmission equipment buildings.
(6) Water filtration plants, pumping stations, reservoirs, and sewage
treatment plants, public.
(7) Other public or private utility service uses.
y. Radio and television towers.
z. Recreational centers and buildings, community centers and public
meeting halls.
aa. Schools, commercial or trade, including those teaching music, dance,
business, commercial or technical subjects, when not thereby involving
increased danger of fire and explosion, nor of noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, odor, glare, heat and other objectionable influences.
bb. Taverns or cocktail lounges, where no dancing or live entertainment is
provided.
cc. Temporary Buildings (See Section 4.14).
dd. Banks and financial institutions which do not include drive-in or drivethrough
facilities.
ee. Offices, Professional and General (See Definition, Section 3.02)
3. Required Conditions:
a. The sale of foodstuffs, beverages or articles intended for human
consumption shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building
unless otherwise recommended by the Plan Commission (See Section
4.04.4) and approved by the Village Board.
b. There shall be no manufacturing, processing, or treatment of products
other than those which are clearly indicated and essential to the retail
business conducted on the same premises.
c. Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to odor,
dust, smoke, noise, vibration, or other similar causes.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 10
d. Dwelling units are not permitted below the second (2nd) story.
4. Floor Area Ratio: The floor area ratio shall not exceed zero point six (0.6).
5. Minimum Lot Size: There shall be provided a lot area not less than one
thousand seven hundred and fifty (1,750) square feet for each dwelling unit,
except there shall be provided for efficiency units not less than one thousand
two hundred and fifty (1,250) square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit,
and for lodging rooms not less than eight hundred (800) square feet of lot area
for each room.
6. Yard Requirements: Yards shall be provided in accordance with the
following regulations:
a. Front yard: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth shall be
provided.
b. Side yards: Not less than five (5) feet in width shall be required, except
if recommended by the Plan Commission (See Section 4.04.5) and
approved by the Village Board, a side yard may not be required. A side
yard adjoining a street shall be provided and such yard shall not be less
than twenty-five (25) feet in width. Where a side lot line coincides with
a side lot line in an adjacent Residence District, a side yard shall be
provided along such lot line. Such side yard shall be equal in dimension
to the side yard required under this Ordinance for the applicable
Residence District.
c. Rear yard: There shall be provided a rear yard of not less than twenty
(20) feet in depth.
d. Yard setbacks: Each front, side, and rear setback or required yard shall
be increased by two (2) feet for each additional one (1) foot of building
height over thirty (30) feet.
7. Off-Street Parking and Loading: Off-street parking and loading facilities
shall be provided as required or permitted in Section 12.00.
8. Building Height: The height of any building or structure shall not exceed
two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet, whichever is lower.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 11
8.05 B-3 SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
This district is designed to provide for automotive, service, and freestanding
commercial activities which require limited comparison shopping. Customers
usually arrive by automobile, making a separate stop for each errand. Uses
permitted in this district usually require larger sites and buildings and often
provide services which are not compatible with other commercial or residential
districts. These commercial areas are usually located along major arterials or
adjacent to limited access highway interchanges.
1. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted:
a. Uses permitted in the B-2 Community Business District.
b. Automobile accessory stores.
c. Bath and kitchen stores, retail, sales, displays and design services.
d. Blueprinting and photo-copying establishments.
e. Caskets and casket suppliers.
f. Catering establishments.
g. Clothing and costume rental shops.
h. Dry-cleaning establishments, retail, where not more than two thousand
five hundred (2,500) square feet of floor area is devoted to processing,
exclusive of office and storage space.
i. Employment agencies.
j. Exterminating shops.
k. Feed stores.
l. Frozen food lockers.
m. Greenhouses, provided operation of heating plants conforms with
applicable performances standards for the Manufacturing District.
n. Job printing using presses having beds of not more than fourteen (14)
inches by twenty (20) inches.
o. Laboratories, small, medical, dental, or optical.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 12
p. Laundries, retail, where not more than two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet of floor space is devoted processing, exclusive of
office and storage spaces.
q. Libraries.
r. Meat markets, including the sale of meat and meat products to
restaurants, hotels, clubs and other similar establishments when
conducted as part of the retail business on the premises.
s. Orthopedic and medical appliance stores, not including the assembly or
manufacture of such articles.
t. Parking lots for passenger motor vehicles only.
u. Pet shops, grooming, but not including animal hospitals or kennels.
v. Radio and television service and repair shops.
w. Recording studios.
x. Restaurants, including live entertainment and dancing.
y. Schools, commercial or trade, provided that operations do not involve
danger of fire, explosion, or objectionable standards of noise, vibration,
dust, odor, glare, heat or other nuisances.
z. Signs (Allowable). (See Section 13.00).
aa. Taxidermists.
bb. Typewriter and adding machine sales and service establishments.
cc. Accessory uses to the above permitted uses.
2. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by Special Use Permit in
accordance with the provisions of the Administrative Section 14.00.
a. Special Uses allowed in the B-2 District.
b. Amusement establishments including bowling alleys, pool halls, dance
halls, game rooms, game arcades, gymnasiums, health clubs, commercial
swimming pools, skating rinks and other similar places of recreation.
c. Animal hospitals.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 13
d. Automotive laundries.
e. Automotive service stations.
f. Building material sales, not including outside storage.
g. Dog kennels.
h. Hotels.
i. Motels.
j. Motor vehicles, snowmobile, watercraft, and accessories and equipment
sales, repairs, and/or storage in an enclosed building.
k. Offices, Professional and General (See Definition, Section 3.02)
l. Open sales lot.
m. Planned development.
n. Public utility and/or service uses.
(1) Essential services including fully automated gas regulating stations
and telephone exchanges; private or public utility substations or
transmission corridors with a capacity no greater than 34 kilovolts.
(2) Railroad passenger stations when not located on railroad property.
(3) Sewage treatment plants.
(4) Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations, filtration plants and wells.
(5) Telephone exchanges, radio, and microwave antenna and relay
towers, and telephone transmission equipment buildings.
(6) Water filtration plants, pumping stations, reservoirs, and sewage
treatment plants, public.
(7) Other public or private utility service uses.
(8) Sign sales and fabrication of pre-finished sign components.
o. Recreation buildings and centers, community centers, and meeting halls.
p. Teen recreation and dance centers.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 14
q. Temporary Buildings (See Section 4.14).
r. Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors.
s. Other business uses when found to be similar and compatible with
adjoining property.
3. Required Conditions:
a. The sale of foodstuffs, beverages or articles intended for human
consumption shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building
unless otherwise recommended by the Plan Commission (See Section
4.04.4) and approved by the Village Board.
b. There shall be no manufacturing, processing, or treatment of products
other than those which are clearly indicated and essential to the retail
business conducted on the same premises.
c. Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to odor,
dust, smoke, noise, vibration, or other similar causes.
d. Dwelling units are not permitted below the second (2nd) story.
4. Floor Area Ratio: The floor area ratio shall not exceed zero point eight (0.8).
5. Minimum Lot Size: There shall be provided lot area in accordance with
minimum lot size regulations in the B-2 Community Business District.
6. Yard Requirements: All yard requirements shall be the same as required in
the B-2 Community Business District.
7. Off-Street Parking and Loading: Off-street parking and loading facilities
shall be provided as required or permitted in Section 12.00.
8. Building Height: The height of any building or structure shall not exceed
three (3) stories, or forty-five (45) feet, whichever is lower.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 15
8.06 B-4 TRADITIONAL DOWNTOWN NORTH BUSINESS DISTRICT
The B-4 Traditional Downtown North Business District is designed for the
traditional downtown core of the Village, north of the railroad tracks, comprising
retail, residential and limited office and government facilities. Within the B-4
Traditional Downtown Business District, the Downtown Design Guidelines shall
apply.
1. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted:
a. Uses permitted in B-1 Local Business District, excluding office uses
b. Antique Shops
c. Book and stationary stores
d. Camera and photographic supply stores
e. Catering establishments limited to five (5) employees
f. Cellular phone stores
g. China and glassware stores
h. Clothing and costume rental shops
i. Coin and philatelic stores
j. Computer and software rentals, sales and service
k. Craft store
l. Custom dressmaking
m. Dry goods stores
n. Flower shops and conservatories
o. Gift shops
p. Hobby shops, for retailing of items to be assembled or used away from
the premises
q. Jewelry stores, including watch repair
r. Locksmith shops
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 16
s. Musical instruments, sales and repair
t. Office supply stores
u. Pet shops; grooming, but not including animal hospitals or kennels
v. Picture framing, when conducted on the premises, for retail trade
w. Record, tape and disc rentals and sales
x. Restaurants, when no entertainment or dancing is provided
y. Shoe repair shops
z. Tailor shops
aa. Tobacco shops
bb. Toy shops
cc. TV, VCR, and video rentals, sales and service establishments.
2. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by Special Use Permit in
accordance with the provisions of the Administration Section 14.00.
a. Special uses allowed in a B-1 Local Business District
b. Banks and financial institutions which do not include drive-in or drivethrough
facilities
c. Bath and kitchen stores, retail, sales, displays and design services
d. Dwelling units when above the first (1st) story
e. Fire stations
f. Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and making of draperies,
slip covers and other similar articles when conducted as part of the retail
operation and secondary to the principal use
g. Meeting halls
h. Parking lots for passenger vehicles only
i. Police Stations
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 17
j. Post Offices
k. Radio and television towers
l. Restaurants, including live entertainment and dancing
m. Taverns or cocktail lounges, where no dancing or live entertainment is
provided.
3. Required Conditions:
a. The sale of foodstuffs, beverages or articles intended for human
consumption shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building
unless otherwise recommended by the Plan Commission and approved
by the Village Board.
b. There shall be no manufacture, processing, or treatment of products other
than which is clearly incidental and essential to the retail business
conducted on the same premises.
c. Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to odor,
dust, smoke, noise, vibration, or other similar causes.
d. Dwelling units are not permitted below the second (2nd) story.
4. Minimum Lot Size: There shall be provided a lot width of not less than
twenty (25) feet.
5. Yard Requirements: Yards shall be provided in accordance with the
following regulations:
a. Front Yard: Zero front yard setbacks are encouraged. Front yard
setbacks shall not exceed 10 feet.
b. Side Yards: Side yard setbacks are not required.
c. Rear Yard: Rear yard setbacks are not required.
6. Off-Street Parking and Loading: Off-street parking, or cash contribution in
lieu of, or a combination of both at the option of the Village, shall be provided
in accordance with the provisions of Section 12.00. Cash contributions in lieu
of residential parking requirements shall not be permitted. Common or shared
parking lots and structures are encouraged. Off-street parking shall be located
behind the principal building or structure on the lot.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 18
7. Building Height: The height of any building or structure shall not exceed
three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet, whichever is lower, except as follows:
a building not to exceed four (4) stories, or fifty-five (55) feet in height may
be permitted when recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by
the Village Board and only in cases where the building conforms to the
Downtown Design Guidelines as determined by the Plan Commission. If a
fourth story is allowed, it shall be set back six (6) feet from the front exterior
wall of the building.
8. Landscaping: A landscaping plan shall be submitted in accordance with
Section 4.19 Landscaping.
9. Signs: Signs shall be permitted in the B-4 Downtown Business District
provided they meet the standards set forth in Section 13.00 Signs.
10. Site Plan Review: Site plans shall be reviewed in accordance with Section
14.13 Site Plan Review.
8.07 B-5 TRADITIONAL DOWNTOWN SOUTH BUSINESS DISTRICT
The B-5 Traditional Downtown South Business District is designed for the
traditional downtown core of the Village, south of the railroad tracks, comprising
retail, residential and limited office and government facilities. It serves the entire
community and provides a transition between more auto-oriented uses along
Irving Park Road and the core, B-4 Downtown Business District. Within the B-5
Traditional Downtown South Business District, the Downtown Design Guidelines
shall apply.
1. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted:
a. Uses permitted in a B-4 Traditional Downtown North Business District.
2. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by Special Use Permit in
accordance with the provisions of the Administration Section 14.00:
a. Special uses allowed in a B-4 Traditional Downtown North Business
District.
3. Required Conditions:
a. The sale of foodstuffs, beverages or articles intended for human
consumption shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building
unless recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the
Village Board.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 19
b. There shall be no manufacture, processing, or treatment of products other
than that which is clearly incidental and essential to the retail business
conducted on the same premises.
c. Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to odor,
dust, smoke, noise, vibration, or other similar causes.
d. Dwelling units are not permitted below the second (2nd) story.
4. Minimum Lot Size: There shall be provided a lot width of not less than
twenty-five (25) feet.
5. Yard Requirements: Yards shall be provided in accordance with the
following regulations:
a. Front Yard: Front yard setbacks shall be not less than 25 feet.
b. Side Yards: Side yard setbacks shall be not less than 3 feet. On a
corner lot, a side yard abutting a street shall be not less than 15 feet.
c. Rear Yard: A rear yard shall be not less than ten (10) feet.
6. Off-Street Parking and Loading: Off-street parking, or cash contribution in
lieu of, or a combination of both at the option of the Village, shall be provided
in accordance with the provisions of Section 12.00. Cash contributions in lieu
of residential parking requirements shall not be permitted. Common or shared
parking lots and structures are encouraged. Off-street parking shall be located
behind the principal building or structure on the lot.
7. Building Height: The height of any building or structure shall not exceed
three (3) stories or forty five (45) feet, whichever is lower, except as follows:
a building not to exceed four (4) stories , or fifty-five (55) feet in height may
be permitted when recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by
the Village Board and only in cases where the building conforms to the
Downtown Design Guidelines as determined by the Plan Commission. If a
fourth story is allowed, it shall be set back six (6) feet from the front exterior
wall of the building.
8. Landscaping: A landscaping plan shall be submitted in accordance with
Section 4.19 Landscaping.
9. Signs: Signs shall be permitted in the B-5 Downtown Business District
provided they meet the standards set forth in Section 13.00 Signs.
10. Site Plan Review: Site plans shall be reviewed in accordance with Section
14.13 Site Plan Review.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 20
8.08 B-6 IRVING PARK ROAD BUSINESS DISTRICT
The B-6 Irving Park Corridor District is designed to accommodate high traffic,
automobile-oriented commercial uses along Irving Park Road, west of the
traditional downtown area. Uses permitted in this district usually require larger
sites and buildings and often provide services which are not compatible with other
commercial or residential districts. Within the B-6 Irving Park Road Business
District, the Downtown Design Guidelines shall apply.
1. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted:
a. Uses permitted in the B-3 Service Business District, excluding currency
exchanges.
2. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by Special Use Permit in
accordance with the provisions of the Administration Section 14.00:
a. Special uses allowed in the B-3 Service Business District;
b. Currency Exchanges.
3. Required Conditions:
a. The sale of foodstuffs, beverages or articles intended for human
consumption shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building
unless otherwise recommended by the Plan Commission and approved
by the Village Board.
b. There shall be no manufacture, processing, or treatment of products other
than that which is clearly incidental and essential to the retail business
conducted on the same premises.
c. Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to odor,
dust, smoke, noise, vibration, or other similar causes.
d. Dwelling units are not permitted below the second (2nd) story.
4. Floor Area Ratio: The floor area ratio shall be the same as required in the B-
3 Service Business District.
5. Minimum Lot Size: There shall be provided lot area in accordance with
minimum lot size regulations in the B-3 Service Business District.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 21
6. Yard Requirements: Yards shall be provided in accordance with the
following regulations:
a. Front Yard: Front yard setbacks shall be not less than twenty-five (25)
feet.
b. Side Yards: Side yard setbacks shall be the same as required in the B-3
Service Business District.
c. Rear Yard: Rear yard setbacks shall be the same as required in the B-3
Service Business District.
7. Off-Street Parking and Loading: Off-street parking shall be provided as
required or permitted in Section 12.00 Off-Street Parking. Common or shared
parking lots and structures are encouraged. Off-street parking shall be located
behind the principal building or structure on the lot, however one (1) row of
short-term parking may be permitted at the front of the lot if recommended by
the Plan Commission.
8. Building Height: The height of any building or structure shall not exceed
five (5) stories, or sixty-five (65) feet, whichever is lower.
9. Landscaping: A landscaping plan shall be submitted in accordance with
Section 4.19 Landscaping.
10. Signs: Signs shall be permitted in the B-6 Irving Park Road Business District
provided they meet the standards set forth in Section 13.00 Signs.
11. Site Plan Review: Site plans shall be reviewed in accordance with Section
14.13 Site Plan Review.
SECTION 8 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8 - 22
SECTION 9 O-R OFFICE RESEARCH DISTRICT
9 - 1
9.00 O-R OFFICE RESEARCH DISTRICT
9.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The O-R Office Research District is intended to provide and maintain a park-like
setting for uses on large lots. The Office Research District shall be restricted to
offices, accessory uses, limited business services and industrial nonmanufacturing
type uses.
9.02 PERMITTED USES: The following uses are permitted:
1. Offices: Business, professional, governmental and medical
2. Service Business:
a. Art work, commercial graphics and drafting services*
b. Automobile rental service. Any major automobile repair service shall
not be permitted.
c. Banks and financial institutions which do not include drive-in or drive
through facilities.*
d. Medical – dental research laboratories and facilities*
e. Restaurants*
*See Section No. 9.04(6)
3. Industrial Type Uses:
a. Laboratories, offices, and other facilities for research testing, data
analysis and development.
b. Low-nuisance industrial activities including but not limited to electronic
and scientific precision instrument assembly and repair, experimental
product development and plastic products and design and assembly.
c. Printing and publishing.
d. Light distribution not including bulk commodities or motor freight
terminals. (See Sections 3.02 and 11.03.2h)
e. Storage as an accessory use when conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building and in conjunction with the principal use. Such
SECTION 9 O-R OFFICE RESEARCH DISTRICT
9 - 2
storage shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the gross floor area of
any building.
4. Accessory Uses
Retail and Service Use. Upon application for issuance of a zoning certificate
and incidental or secondary only to a principal building containing forty
thousand (40,000) or more square feet of gross floor are, one (1) or more uses
hereinafter set forth may be operated as accessory uses if each such use meets
the following conditions: (1) it is provided for the convenience of the owner
and/or tenants; (2) does not have exterior signs of any type; (3) it does not
have a separate outside entrance facing any street; and (4) is not evident from
any street.
a. Banks and financial institutions which do not include drive-in or drivethrough
facilities.
b. Barber shops
c. Beauty shops
d. Blueprint and photostat services
e. Data processing and computer center, including service and maintenance
f. Duplication, letter and secretarial service firms
g. Newspapers, tobacco and/or confectionery stands
h. Office supply stores
i. Restaurants
j. Travel bureau and transportation offices
9.03 SPECIAL USES
1. Service Business
a. Banks and financial institutions which include drive-in or drive-through
facilities.
b. Building trades, show rooms and distribution.
SECTION 9 O-R OFFICE RESEARCH DISTRICT
9 - 3
2. Industrial type uses:
Accessory Uses
a. Warehouse or storage of any goods or material within a building when
such use exceeds forty percent (40%) of the gross floor area of the
building.
b. Other processing, finishing and assembly facilities but not including
manufacturing.
3. Child care center (See Section 4.26)
4. Planned Development (See Section 14.12)
5. Public utility and/or service uses
a. Essential services including fully automated gas regulating stations and
telephone exchanges. Private or public utility substations or
transmission corridors with a capacity not greater than 34 kilovolts.
b. Railroad passenger stations when not located on railroad property.
c. Sewage treatment plants
d. Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations, filtration plants and wells
e. Telephone exchanges, radio and microwave antenna or relay towers, and
telephone transmission equipment buildings
f. Water filtration plants, pumping stations, reservoirs, and sewage
treatment plants, public
g. Other public or private utility service uses
6. Other Uses: Other non-retail office, financial institutional and industrial
uses, not specifically listed above when found to have economic and
performance compatibility with established uses on adjoining properties.
7. Accessory uses other than those listed in Section 9.02(4)
9.04 REQUIRED CONDITIONS
1. Not more than one (1) principal building or structure shall be located on a
zoning lot within this district except as a planned development.
SECTION 9 O-R OFFICE RESEARCH DISTRICT
9 - 4
2. Every use, unless expressly exempted by this Ordinance, shall be operated in
its entirety within a completely enclosed building; the exemption of a use
from the requirement of enclosure will be indicated by phrase “need not be
enclosed” appearing after each use exempted.
3. Outdoor storage of goods, products, materials, supplies, machinery, or
equipment shall not be permitted, commercial vehicles shall be enclosed
within a fence or solid landscape screen, or any combination thereof, at a
height of not less than six (6) feet above grade.
4. Except as otherwise provided by special use herein, establishments of drive-in
or drive-through type are prohibited.
5. Every uses, unless expressly exempted by this Ordinance, shall comply with
Section 11.02.5 “Performance Standards”.
6. All requests for uses or building permits in the O-R Office Research District,
noted by an asterisk (*), shall not be required to be accompanied by a
certificate from a scientific research laboratory or consultant approved by the
Village Board certifying compliance with the “Performance Standards” as
required in the Ordinance.
7. Not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the lot area shall be provided for
landscaping and open space purposes, exclusive of paved parking and hard
surfaced areas.
8. A complete landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect or qualified
landscaped contractor shall be presented to the Plan Commission (See Section
4.04.5) for review and recommendation to the Village Board for their action
before the issuance of a building permit.
9. Outside lighting shall be designed and placed so as not to be disturbing to
adjacent residential areas or traffic or public roadways.
10. Special uses granted to provide for yard variations in the Office Research
District shall comply with the following:
Site Plan Review – each property owner or developer who requests a special
use for yard variations in any Office Research District shall submit a complete
site plan, including traffic controls, signage, and landscaping for the proposed
development. The site plan shall be reviewed by the Plan Commission (See
Section 4.04.5) and approved by the Village Board of Trustees.
9.05 FLOOR AREA RATIO: The floor area ratio shall not exceed zero point four
five (0.45) of the lot area.
SECTION 9 O-R OFFICE RESEARCH DISTRICT
9 - 5
9.06 MINIMUM LOT SIZE: These shall be provided a lot area of not less than two
(2) acres.
9.07 Yard Requirements: Yards shall be provided in accordance with the following
regulations:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than fifty (50) feet in depth.
2. Side Yards: There shall be two (2) side yards neither of which shall be less
than thirty (30) feet in width. On corner lots a side yard adjoining a street
(including public and/or private streets when located in a planned
development) shall be provided and such yard shall be not less than fifty (50)
feet in width.
3. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of not less than forty (40) feet in
depth.
4. Yard Setbacks: No building shall be constructed within one hundred fifty
(150) feet nor shall a building exceeding one (1) story be constructed within
two hundred twenty five (225) feet of residential zoned land, nor shall parking
facilities be provided within fifty (50) feet of a zoned residential district.
These distances shall be measured from the nearest point of the land zoned
residential which shall include the full width of any intervening road right-ofway.
Where additional building height is allowed, the setback or the required
yard shall be increased by two (2) feet of depth for each additional foot of
building height in excess of forty-five (45) feet. Parking shall be permitted in
the additional yard.
9.08 MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: Lot coverage of principal building or
structure and accessory building or uses shall not exceed forty-five percent (45%)
of the lot area.
9.09 BUILDING HEIGHT: The height of any building or structure shall not exceed
three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet, whichever is lower.
Where additional building height is allowed, the setback or the required yard shall
be increased by two (2) feet of depth for each additional foot of building height in
excess of forty-five (45) feet. Parking shall be permitted in the additional yard.
9.10 SIGNS: Allowable – (See Section 13.00)
9.11 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING: Off-street parking and loading
facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in Section 12.00.
SECTION 9 O-R OFFICE RESEARCH DISTRICT
9 - 6
SECTION 10 REGIONAL OFFICE CENTER DISTRICT
10 - 1
10.00 REGIONAL OFFICE CENTER DISTRICT
10.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The Regional Office Center District is intended to provide for the combining of
office, research, hotel and motel uses in an unified development, and to provide
for secondary retail and service uses to serve the development. The District is
also established in order that the public health, safety and general welfare will be
furthered in an era of increasing urbanization and of growing demand for offices
of all types and design and is also provided to encourage innovations and variety
in type, design, and arrangement of such uses. Because of the intensity of the
development permitted in the Regional Office Center District, it shall generally be
used only abutting one (1) or more freeways with access to more than one (1)
arterial street.
Secondary retail business or service establishments as set forth below shall be
permitted subject to the restrictions set forth in Section 4.02. Secondary uses are
established to reduce the need for the occupants of the R.O.C. District to depend
on businesses located outside of the R.O.C. for goods and services and thereby
reduce traffic congestion in and around the R.O.C. District.
Because the diversified land uses in a Regional Office Center District may not be
predetermined in detail, approval of the concept plan and each individual site plan
of a staged development is an absolute necessity to assure a compatible
arrangement of the varied land uses which are permitted to be mixed and to
determine the impact of such uses on surrounding areas. The R.O.C. District shall
remain under one (1) ownership or unified control unless safeguards are provided
that, in the opinion of the Village of Itasca, will provide for the continuation of
the original concept plan as may be modified from time to time. Emphasis will be
based upon the review of pedestrian and vehicular circulation facilities such as
sidewalks, parking areas, interior streets, pavement widths and rights-of-way
because of the anticipated high volume of pedestrian and vehicular traffic which
will be generated.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the R.O.C. District shall not be considered a
Planned Development.
10.02 PERMITTED USES
In a R.O.C. – Regional Office Center District, no building, structure or land shall
be erected or used except for the following specified uses, unless otherwise
provided in this Section and subject further to requirements set forth in Subsection
10.06, Required Conditions.
SECTION 10 REGIONAL OFFICE CENTER DISTRICT
10 - 2
10.03 PRIMARY USES
1. Office Uses.
a. Executive, administrative, personal service and professional offices.
b. Financial institutions, their branches, or automated teller stations.
c. Medical offices, including clinics and laboratories.
d. Data processing and computer centers, including service and maintenance
of electronic data processing equipment.
e. Any uses which are charged with the principal functions of education,
research, design, and technical training and experimental product
development including repair, when conducted wholly within a
completely enclosed building, subject further to applicable performance
standards, as established in Section 11.00, Manufacturing District.
f. Hospitals
g. Hotels, motels, convention and meeting facilities.
h. Private clubs or lodges, including health clubs.
i. Public or private schools or colleges for general or vocational training.
j. Utility, governmental service and transportation uses.
k. Accessory building and uses, including distribution facilities that are
customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses.
l. Uses similar to the above permitted uses.
10.04 SECONDARY USES
1. Personal service establishments which perform personal services on the
premises including beauty shops, barber shops, tailor shops, laundry and dry
cleaning establishments, watch repair and shoe repair, restaurants or other
places serving food or beverages, except those which permit food or
beverages to be consumed on the premises in a motor vehicle.
2. Stores of a generally recognized retail nature which supply commodities on
the premises, such as, but not limited to, groceries, drugs, dry goods, clothing,
flowers, notions.
SECTION 10 REGIONAL OFFICE CENTER DISTRICT
10 - 3
3. Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls, or similar places of assembly.
4. Indoor commercial recreation uses.
5. Child Care Center. When included as a secondary use in the principal
building and licensed by the State of Illinois under the Illinois Child Care Act
of 1969 (IL Compiled Statutes Ch. 23, Sec. 2211 et seq) or other applicable
statue. The premises on which such center is to be located shall include an
outdoor play area of seventy (70) square feet for each child in the play area at
any one time and such play area shall be fenced from adjoining properties.
(See Definitions – Section 3.02 and Section 4.26).
6. Storage, when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building and in
the same building as and in conjunction with a permitted primary use.
7. Temporary buildings (See Section 4.14).
8. Uses similar to the above permitted uses.
10.05 SPECIAL USES
1. Heliports, public and private, subject to applicable Federal Aviation
Administration Standards and regulations.
2. Public Utility and/or service uses.
a. Essential services including fully automated gas regulating stations and
telephone exchanges. Private or public utility substations or transmission
corridors with a capacity not greater than 34 kilovolts.
b. Railroad passenger stations when not located on railroad property.
c. Sewage treatment plants waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations,
filtration plants and wells.
d. Telephone exchanges, microwave relay towers, and telephone
transmission equipment buildings.
e. Wastewater management systems, water filtration plants, pumping
stations, reservoirs, and sewage treatment plants.
f. Other public or private utility service uses.
SECTION 10 REGIONAL OFFICE CENTER DISTRICT
10 - 4
10.06 REQUIRED CONDITIONS
1. All applications for rezoning to the ROC – Regional Office Center District
shall comply with the provision of Section 10.08a, Pre-Application
Conference and Concept Plan Procedures, including a public hearing on the
concept plan, held by the Plan Commission concurrently with the hearing on
the rezoning
2. A ROC – Regional Office Center project may be developed with more than
one (1) land use, at the option of the developer, and in accordance with the
provisions of this Section.
3. Secondary land uses as permitted in Section 10.04, shall not exceed twenty
(20) percent of the gross floor area of any building or structure and shall be
attached or connected to the principal building it is intended to serve. When
physically designed and oriented to serve more than one (1) building in a
complex of buildings, the secondary uses may be permitted in a separate
building, and shall not front on any perimeter road. Access thereto shall be
provided only from interior roadways.
4. Not more than fifty (50) percent out of the area of any required yard abutting a
street shall be used for ground level vehicular parking and driveways.
Adjacent to any lot line abutting a street, there shall be a continuous
landscaped area not less than twenty-five (25) feet wide except at points of
approved vehicular access to the street.
5. In addition to the landscaping required above, not less than ten (10) percent of
the site, in common areas, exclusive of buildings and the required yards
abutting a street, shall be landscaped. No landscaped area having a width of
less than five (5) feet shall be considered in the ten (10) percent minimum
landscaping requirement. Off-street parking requirements shall be provided in
accordance with Section 12.00. In the case of a building and secondary uses,
the space devoted to the predominant primary use in the building is the base
for the purposes of calculating the parking requirements.
6. The outdoor storage or display of goods, vehicles, or materials shall be
prohibited irrespective of whether or not they may be for sale, except for uses
such as: sidewalk cafes, art or flower displays or similar uses intended to be
conducted out-of-doors, subject to the issuance of a temporary permit.
7. Warehousing of goods and materials in quantities greater than normally
incidental to the above permitted uses shall be prohibited.
8. Performance Standards – all uses shall comply with the provision of Section
11.02, M-Limited Manufacturing District.
SECTION 10 REGIONAL OFFICE CENTER DISTRICT
10 - 5
9. Off-street loading requirements shall be provided in accordance with Section
12.00 except that in the case of office uses, no building shall be required to
have more than three (3) loading berths unless it is recommended by the Plan
Commission and approved by the Village Board that more loading berths are
needed.
10.07 AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS
1. Minimum Land Area Required. Not less than one hundred (100) acres
under single control, as approved by the Village.
2. Building Height. All buildings constructed in the R.O.C. – Regional Office
Center District, shall be limited to three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in
height, whichever is lesser, except that in such District having areas greater
than one hundred (100) acres, one (1) additional story, or an additional fifteen
(15) feet in building height shall be permitted for each full three (3) acres in
addition to and in excess of one hundred (100) acres, when recommended by
the Plan Commission and approved by the Village Board; provided and
regardless of the amount of acres in one contiguous area lying within the
District, no building shall be of a height greater than forty (40) stores, or six
hundred (600) feet, whichever is lesser.
This paragraph shall not be construed as limiting the total number of stories in
all buildings in any such District, but rather as limiting the height of any
single building in such a District. All of the above are further subject to the
then current Federal Aviation Administration standards and regulations.
3. Building or Structure Locations Near or Adjacent to Residential Zoned
Lands. No building shall be constructed within one hundred and fifty (150)
feet of a residence district, nor shall any building exceeding one (1) story in
height be constructed within two hundred and twenty-five (225) feet of a
Residence District, nor shall parking facilities be provided within fifty (50)
feet of a Residence District, which distances shall be measured from one (1)
nearest point of the building to the closest point of the lands zoned residential,
and which distance shall include the full width of any intervening road right of
way. For buildings over forty-five (45) feet in height, and additional two (2)
feet of setback is required for each additional one (1) foot of building height.
4. Yard Requirements
a. Perimeter Yards: Along those perimeter property lines which abut an
arterial or a freeway road, a fifty (50) foot perimeter yard, as measured
from the right-of-way line shall be required. For buildings greater than
forty-five (45) feet in height, the required setback or yard shall be
increased by two (2) feet for each additional one (1) foot of building
height.
SECTION 10 REGIONAL OFFICE CENTER DISTRICT
10 - 6
An approved concept plan which indicates specific locations for
construction of buildings greater than forty-five (45) feet in height may
limit the perimeter yard required to not less than fifty (50) feet.
b. Other Yards
(1) Front Yard: A front yard of not less than fifty (50) feet where a
maximum of fifty (50) percent may be used for off-street parking and
access drives, provided that that remaining fifty (50) percent be
landscaped area.
(2) Side Yard: There shall be provided two (2) side yards, each of which
is to be twenty-five (25) feet where a maximum of fifty (50) percent
may be used for off-street parking and access drives.
(3) Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than fifty (50) feet where parking
shall be permitted within the rear yard, provided that the thirty (30)
percent shall be maintained as landscaped area.
5. Other Requirements: Adjacent to any lot line abutting an interior street,
there shall be a yard not less than fifty (50) feet and a continuous landscaped
area not less than twenty-five (25) feet wide except at points of approved
vehicular access to the street.
6. Floor Area Ratio: A cumulative total of zero point six (0.6) for the gross
project area as determined by the concept plan. For the purposes of this
district, the floor area shall not include that floor space devoted to enclosed
off-street parking and loading.
7. Walls and Berms
a. For those uses listed below, there shall be provided and maintained on
those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district an obscuring wall
or landscaped berm as required below. The height of the wall or berm
shall be measured from the surface of the parking area or land on the nonresidential
side of the wall.
Use Height Requirement
(1) Off Street Parking Area 5 ft.
(2) Loading or Unloading Area and
Service Area
6 ft.
(3) Utility Building, Stations and/or
Substations
6 ft.
SECTION 10 REGIONAL OFFICE CENTER DISTRICT
10 - 7
b. The location and design of required walls and berms shall be subject to the
review and recommendation of the Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5)
and approval by the Village Board.
c. Berms shall be landscaped earth mounds, the same heights as required for
a wall, with a maximum slope of 3:1 (three [3] foot horizontal to one [1]
foot vertical). All berms shall have a nearly flat, horizontal area at their
highest point of at least two (2) feet in width. Such requirements may be
modified by the Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5).
Berm slopes shall be protected from erosion. The berm shall be kept free
from refuse and debris and shall be planted with shrubs, trees or sod (or
seeded) and shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition.
d. Masonry walls may be constructed with openings which do not, in any
square section (height and width), exceed twenty (20) percent of surface.
Where walls are so pierced, the openings shall be so spaced as to maintain
the obscuring character required and shall not reduce the minimum height
requirement. The arrangement of the openings shall be reviewed and
recommended by the Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5.) and approved
by the Village Board.
e. In those instances where no useful purpose would be served, the Plan
Commission may waive or modify the forgoing requirements of sub-
Section (g) relating to walls and berms.
10.08 CONCEPT AND SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES
No building, structure or land shall be erected or used in the ROC – Regional
Office Center District unless the Concept Plan and any stage of the site plan have
been approved by the Board of Trustees. The approval of the Concept Plan by the
Board of Trustees shall constitute an acceptance of the specific content of the
Concept Plan and shall indicate the general acceptances of the Plan Commission
(see Section 4.04.5) and the Board of Trustees to approve specific site plans
prepared and which are in conformance with the provisions required for this
District. The Board of Trustees shall not act on the Concept Plan, or any stage of
the site plan, until it receives a recommendation regarding either the concept plan
or the site plan from the Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5). The Board shall
act on any portion of the Concept Plan or site plan if a recommendation is not
received from the Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5) within sixty (60) days
after such recommendation has been requested from the Plan Commission (see
Section 4.04.5) by the Board of Trustees. The Plan Commission (see Section
4.04.5) shall not recommend approval of any successive portion of the site plan
unless it finds that the following conditions and procedures have been complied
with:
SECTION 10 REGIONAL OFFICE CENTER DISTRICT
10 - 8
1. Pre-Application Conference. Prior to filing a formal application approval of
a planned development, the developer shall request an informal preapplication
conference with the Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5) in order
to discuss:
a. The relationship of the proposed development with reference to the
proposals of the Comprehensive Plan, zoning and use restrictions of the
area, and proximity to existing residential uses and effect of the proposed
development thereon the compliance of the proposed development with
other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Regulations,
Engineering Specifications, and similar ordinances or controls.
b. The standards for sewage disposal, water supply, storm water runoff
storage, aquifer recharge, erosion control, and plans for the widening of
adjacent thoroughfares shall be investigated by the developer.
2. Concept Plan. A concept plan for the project area shall be filed with the
Village Clerk for submittal to the Plan Commission for its review and
recommendations, and consideration for approval by the Village Board. Upon
approval by the Village Board, the site plan and any amendments thereto shall
be recorded with the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds. The concept plan
will be a generalized plan for the entire development and will consist of the
following:
a. Generalized Land Uses – the approximate location, size, configuration of
all proposed land uses within the entire development; to include areas to
be designated as open space recreation, and service activity areas.
b. Distribution of Density – the approximate amount of square footage
proposed for each land use area, including the approximate number of
vehicles to be accommodated.
c. Overall Circulation System – to include the principal points of access to
the site from the surrounding roadways, the major elements of internal
circulation proposed, the location of major parking areas and any special
requirements for service or emergency access.
d. Phases of Development – to indicate the phases or stages by which the
entire development is to be accomplished, if applicable, including the
approximate size, density and timing of sub-elements of the building
program and all improvements.
e. Special Features – to include elements such as pedestrian environments,
public facilities, energy conservation measures and similar features.
SECTION 10 REGIONAL OFFICE CENTER DISTRICT
10 - 9
f. Development Features – all the development features, including principal
building and any accessory buildings, open spaces, service road,
driveways and parking areas, are located so as to minimize the possibility
of any adverse effects upon adjacent properties and so as to relate properly
to traffic safety.
g. Access – the concept plan indicates the access is provided only to an
arterial or freeway service drive and that a prior relationship exists
between the arterial and any proposed service roads, driveways, and
parking areas in order to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety.
h. Signs – (Allowable) (see Section 13.00).
i. As-Built Concept Plan – when the development included on the approved
Concept Plan has been completed and before the last Certificate of
Occupancy is issued, a final as-built Concept Plan to scale shall be
prepared using mylar reproducible material, reviewed and recommended
by the Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5) and approved by the Village
Board.
The final approved as-built Concept Plan shall be recorded with the
DuPage County Recorder of Deeds.
3. Submittal of Site Plans. An application shall be filed with the Village Clerk
for the review and recommendations by the Plan Commission (see Section
4.04.5) of the site plan for any proposed development, or any stage thereof,
and shall contain the following:
a. All site plans, or plate (where applicable) shall be in substantial
conformity with the approved concept plan.
b. A boundary survey of the exact acreage prepared by a Registered Land
Surveyor in the State of Illinois.
c. A site location map on a smaller scale showing major circulation routes
and other landmarks shall be provided with the site plan.
d. A topographic map of the entire area at a contour interval of not more than
one (1) foot to U.S.G.S. Datum. This map shall indicate all major stands
of trees, flood plains, wetlands, bodies of water, significant natural
features, existing structures and unbuildable areas.
e. A recent aerial photograph of the area shall be provided at a scale of at
least 1” = 200’.
SECTION 10 REGIONAL OFFICE CENTER DISTRICT
10 - 10
f. One (1) copy of the site plan, superimposed on a recent aerial photograph
of at least 1”= 200’ scale, shall be submitted for review to show the
relationship of the site plan to existing natural features and to adjacent
development.
g. An indication of the contemplated storm and sanitary sewer plan, water
distribution plan and a preliminary topographic map indicating how the
land area is proposed to be shaped including elevations and proposed
grade contours.
h. A written statement explaining in detail the full intent of the sponsor,
indicating the type of structures and facilities contemplated, and providing
supporting documentation, such as soil survey, studies supporting land use
requests, and the intended scheduling of the development, or any stage
thereof.
i. Unless otherwise indicated, all site plans shall be prepared at a consistent
scale of not more than 1” – 100’.
j. Floor plans and elevations typical of all buildings shall be submitted and
the site plan shall indicate which floor plan and elevation is applicable to
each such building.
k. A landscape plan shall be prepared which shall be reviewed by the Plan
Commission (see Section 4.04.5) in accordance with general design
principles developed by the Commission. The landscape plan shall
include all of the following.
(1) list of plant materials by name (botanical and common);
(2) number (quantity) of each plant material to be installed;
(3) key number on the plan to identify where each type of plant material is
to be installed.
(4) size of material to be installed; and
(5) each plat and/or site plan submitted within the proposed development
shall, either individually or in combination with previously approved
project areas, meet all applicable density standards of the total project
area.
l. Signs. (Allowable) (see Section 13.00).
SECTION 10 REGIONAL OFFICE CENTER DISTRICT
10 - 11
4. Review of Site Plans by Plan Commission. Upon filing of an application
with the Village Clerk, the Clerk shall refer such request to the Plan
Commission (see Section 4.04.5) for its review, report and recommendation.
Following the Plan Commission’s report and recommendation, the Village
Board shall approve said application plan upon finding that:
a. Review and approval of the site plans shall comply with all applicable
district requirements except as otherwise modified in the approved plan.
Review and approval of any plats shall comply with Chapter 109 Plats Act
of the Illinois Compiled Statues, as amended, the Subdivision Regulations,
Building Codes, Zoning Ordinance, Engineering Specifications, and
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Standards, and other applicable
Village codes and ordinance then in effect.
b. Adequate areas have been provided for all utilities, use areas, parking
areas and other open spaces.
c. There is, or will be, at the time of development, an adequate means of
disposing of sanitary sewage and of supplying the development with water
and that the road and storm water drainage systems are adequate.
d. That provisions have been made for the installation of all streets and the
necessary utilities.
5. Approval of Site Plans. The Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5) shall
have authority to recommend approval of, and the Board of Trustees shall
have authority to approve, portions of a site plan which do not conform to the
requirements of this Section in the following instances and no others:
a. To permit a yard less than the yard required by applicable regulations.
b. To reduce the applicable off-street parking or load required to the extent of
not more than two (2) parking spaces or two (2) loading berths, or thirty
(30) percent of the spaces or berths required by applicable regulations,
whichever number of reductions is greater;
c. To increase by not more than fifty (50) percent the maximum gross floor
area in any building or structure devoted to secondary uses;
d. To approve minor modifications in the maximum allowable height of
buildings;
e. To approve minor modifications to sign provisions.
The Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5) shall be required to make specific
findings or recommendations regarding such modifications shown on the site
SECTION 10 REGIONAL OFFICE CENTER DISTRICT
10 - 12
plan. Recommendation of approval to the site plan by the Plan Commission
(see Section 4.04.5) shall be deemed to include recommendation of approval
of any or all such modifications which shall be specifically listed therein
unless specifically disapproved or modified.
The Board of Trustees shall be required to make specific approvals regarding
such modifications shown on the site plan. Approval of the site plan by the
Board of Trustees may be deemed to include approval of any or all such
modifications which shall be specifically listed therein unless specifically
disapproved or modified.
6. Termination of Concept Plan and Site Plans. Once an area has been
included within a concept plan or site plan, and such plans have been
approved by the Board of Trustees, no other development may take place in
such area nor may any other use thereof be made except in accordance with a
Village Board approved amendment thereto and as follows:
a. No approved concept plan or site plan shall be terminated except with the
recommendation of the Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5) and
approval of the Village Board and of all parties with an interest in the
ROC District.
b. If development of the approved concept plan, final plats or site plans for
respective stages is not substantially completed within three (3) years after
approval, further final submittals shall cease until the part in question is
completed, or cause can be shown for not completing the same.
Provisions shall be made for the dedication of public roads so as to cause
continuity of public access between the adjacent thorough fares and
ingress and egress to all private development within the project area plan.
7. Amendments, Modifications or Variations. Any amendments,
modifications or variations requested to the concept plan or any other
provision of the ROC District shall be reviewed and recommended by the Plan
Commission (see Section 4.04.5) after a public hearing conforming to
applicable statutory requirements. The Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5)
shall make its recommendation to the Village Board for their decision. Such
amendment, modification or variation shall require approval of the Village
Board and of all parties with an interest in the ROC District.
In instances where modifications are necessary to site plans, the Plan
Commission (see Section 4.04.5) may request that said plans again be
submitted for review, if in its judgment, a substantial change is being made in
said plans then a public hearing shall be recommended conforming to
applicable statutory requirements. Following the public hearing, the Plan
Commission (see Section 4.04.5) shall make a recommendation to the Village
Board for their review and decision.
SECTION 11 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11 - 1
11.00 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The manufacturing District provides for the development of various types of
warehousing and manufacturing uses within a framework of standards designed
to:
1. Provide jobs for the people of Itasca and its environment.
2. Provide the fruits of industry to the people of Itasca, et al.
3. Provide separation and compatibility with other land uses and activities within
Itasca.
4. Encourage modern improved means of industrial production.
5. Enhance the tax base of Itasca and other governmental agencies.
11.02 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT PROVISIONS
Unless otherwise provided in the regulations of this Ordinance, the following
provisions shall apply to all Manufacturing Districts:
1. No lot, parcel, or tract of land shall be used, and no building or structure shall
be erected, altered, or remodeled for any of the following uses: abattoirs; acid
manufacture, arsenals; crematories, creosote treatment or manufacture; fat
rendering; fertilizer manufacture, fireworks or explosive manufacture or
storage; dumping or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal or refuse; ore
reduction, petroleum processing or refining; pryoxylin manufacture; synthetic
polymers; manufacture; gutta percha manufacture or treatment; salt works;
sauerkraut manufacture; soap manufacture smelters; stock yard or slaughter of
animals or fowls; tallow, grease or lard manufacture or treatment; tanning,
curing, or storage of rawhides or skins; tar distillation or manufacture; or
cement, concrete or asphaltic concrete batch mixing plants, or any other
facility which in the judgment of the Village Board of Trustees create
excessive noise, smoke, odors or any other nuisance or hazards or would
cause undue traffic congestion or excessive deterioration of Village streets due
to high frequency of heavy loads.
2. No activities involving the storage, utilization, or manufacture or materials or
products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted, except such as
are specifically licensed by the Village of Itasca. Such materials shall include
but shall not be confined to all primary explosives such as lead oxide, lead
styphnate, fulminates and tetrocene; and all high explosives such as TNT,
RDX, HMX, PETN and picric acid; propellants and components thereof, such
SECTION 11 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11 - 2
as nitrocellulose, black powder, baron hydrides, hdrazide and its derivatives;
pyrotechnics and fireworks, such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate
and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerin;
unstable organic compounds such as acetylides, petrozoles, perchloric acid,
perchlorattes, chlorates, hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than
thirty-five (35) percent and nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products
and reactor elements such as but not limited to Uranium two hundred thirtyfive
(235) and Plutonium two hundred thirty-nine (239).
3. All activities and operations, including material and equipment storage, shall
be within completely enclosed buildings. The outside storage of materials and
equipment may be allowed only by Special Use Permit obtained in accordance
with the provisions of Section 14.11 of the Itasca Zoning Ordinance.
Semi-trailers, storage containers and similar enclosed storage devices shall not
be used for storage of materials or products for longer than three (3) days
unless a Special Use Permit for such storage has been obtained in accordance
with the provisions of Section 14.11 of the Itasca Zoning Ordinance.
4. No building or structure shall be constructed with one hundred fifty (150) feet
of any lot line of a lot located in a Residence District nor shall an existing
building, structure or land be used in connection with the operations of any
establishment in the one hundred fifty (150) foot area except off-street parking
spaces may be located within this area in accordance with regulations
hereinafter set forth in Section 12.00.
5. Any use established or on-going in a Manufacturing District shall be operated
in such a manner as to comply with applicable performance standards as
hereinafter set forth and as set forth by other governmental and regulatory
agencies, governing noise, smoke particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter,
odors, fire and explosive hazards, vibration, glare or heat; and no use already
established on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be so altered or
modified as to conflict with such applicable performance standards.
a. Performance Standards – Noise. Sound levels shall be measured, kept
and be in compliance with applicable rules and regulations of the State of
Illinois Title 35: Environmental Protection, Subtitle H: Noise, Chapter 1,
Pollution Control Board, as amended.
b. Performance Standards – Smoke Particulate Matter. The emission of
smoke or particulate matter in such manner or quantity as to endanger or
to be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and shall henceforth be unlawful.
For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart,
published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, shall be
SECTION 11 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11 - 3
employed. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density
greater than No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart is prohibited at all times
except as otherwise provided hereinafter.
The emission from all sources within any lot area of particulate matter
containing more than ten (10) percent by weight of particles having a
particle diameter larger than forty-four (44) microns is prohibited.
Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from such sources
as storage areas, yards, roads, and the like, within lot boundaries, shall be
kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing, or
other acceptable means. Emission of particulate matter from such sources
in excess of the weight limitation hereinafter specified is prohibited.
Smoke. The emission of more than eight (8) smoke units per hour per
stack is prohibited, including smoke of a density in excess of Ringlemann
No. 3. However, during a 1-hour period in each 24 hour day, each stack
may emit up to sixteen (16) smoke units when blowing soot or cleaning
fires. Only during fire-cleaning periods, however, shall smoke of
Ringlemann No. 3 be permitted and then for not more than three (3)
minutes.
c. Performance Standards – Toxic or Noxious Matter. No use shall, for
any period of time, discharge across the boundaries of the lot wherein it is
located, toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental
to or endanger the public health, safety comfort, welfare, or cause injury
or damage to property business.
d. Performance Standards – Odors. The emission of odorous matter in
such a quality as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines or as
to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines is prohibited.
e. Performance Standards – Fire and Explosion Hazard.
(1) The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products
ranging from incombustible to moderate burning as determined for
liquids by a closed-cup flash point of not less than one hundred
eighty-seven degrees Fahrenheit (187 º F) is permitted subject to
compliance with all other performance standards for Manufacturing
District.
(2) The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products
ranging from free or active burning to intense burning -- as
determined for liquids by a closed-cup flash point of less than one
hundred eighty-seven degrees Fahrenheit (187 º F) but not than one
hundred and five degrees Fahrenheit (105º F) is permitted subject to
SECTION 11 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11 - 4
compliance with all other performance standards for the
Manufacturing District and provided the following conditions are
met:
(a) Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized, or produced
within completely enclosed buildings or
structures having incombustible exterior walls.
(b) All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least forty (40)
feet from lot lines, in lieu thereof, all such buildings or structures
shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system (or
a carbon dioxide system of equal protection) complying with
installation standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection
Association, or if the materials, goods, or products are liquids, the
protection thereof shall be in conformity with standards prescribed
by the National Fire Protection Association.
(3) The utilization in the manufacturing processes of materials which
produce flammable or explosive vapors or gasses – as determined
for liquids by closed cup flash point of less that one hundred five
degrees (105º F) shall be permitted in this district provided:
(a) That the final manufactured product does not itself have a closed
cup flash point of less than one hundred eighty-seven degrees
Fahrenheit (187ºF).
(b) That the use an storage of such materials shall be in conformity
with standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection
Association and the requirements of other ordinances in the
Village Code of Itasca.
(c) That the storage of more than fifteen hundred (1,500) gallons of
materials or products having a closed-cup flash point of less than
one hundred and five degrees Fahrenheit (105ºF) (exclusive of
storage in underground tanks), or two (2) hour fire-rated above
ground tanks, and exclusive of storage of finished products in
original sealed containers) is prohibited, and
(d) That the storage of more than two thousand five hundred (2,500)
gallons of materials or products having a closed-cup flash point of
less than one hundred eighty-seven degrees Fahrenheit (187ºF)
(exclusive of storage in underground tanks, or two (2) hour firerated
above ground tanks, and exclusive of storage of finished
products in original sealed containers) is prohibited.
SECTION 11 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11 - 5
f. Performance Standards – Glare or Heat: Any operation producing
intense glare or heat shall be performed within completely enclosed
buildings in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard
along lot lines.
g. Performance Standards – Vibration: No industrial operation or activity
(except those not under direct control of the manufacturer) shall cause at
any time, ground transmitted vibrations in excess of the limits set forth
herein. Vibration (the periodic displacement, measured in inches of each)
shall be measured at any point along a Residence District boundary line
with a three (3) component measuring instrument approved by the Village
Board, and shall be expressed as displacement in inches.
Frequency
(Cycles per Second)
Maximum Permitted Displacement Along
Residence District Boundaries (in inches)
0 to 10 0.0008
10 to 20 0.0005
20 to 30 0.0002
30 to 40 0.0002
40 and over 0.0001
h. Performance Standards – Electromagnetic Fields and Interference:
No operation or activity under the control of the property user shall cause
or create electromagnetic interference that adversely affects at any point
the operation of any equipment other than that belonging to the creator of
such interference, or that violates any regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission.
With respect to the construction, operation, and maintenance of any public
or private electrical utility substation, all reasonable steps shall be taken to
reduce and minimize the measurable average annual milligaus1 level at
any property line. For the purpose of this provision, the property owner
shall submit to the Village a study identifying all available scientific or
technical measures used to achieve such a measurable average annual
milligaus levels but which were not deemed reasonable. In addition, such
study shall include a documented projection of the anticipated measurable
average milligaus level at any property line.
1. Definition of milligaus is one thousandth of a gaus where gaus is defined as cgs
unit used in measuring magnetic induction or magnetic flux density.
SECTION 11 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11 - 6
11.03 M – LIMITED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT USES
1. Permitted Use: The following uses are permitted:
a. Adult uses, only when in compliance with all applicable provisions of
Section 4.27.
b. Bakeries, commercial or wholesale.
c. Building material sales, not including open sales lots or outside storage of
materials (except as provided in Section 11.02.3).
d. Cameras and other photographic equipment and supplies.
e. Carpet and rug cleaning
f. Contractors’ offices and shops.
g. Currency exchanges
h. Greenhouses, wholesale, without restriction as to gross floor area provided
heating plant operations conform with applicable performance standards
set for in Section 11.02(a).
i. Laundries.
j. Machinery sales.
k. Motor vehicles and equipment sales and repair (when in a completely
enclosed building).
l. Musical instruments.
m. Offices.
n. Orthopedic and medical appliances, such as artificial limbs, braces,
supports and stretchers.
o. Pharmaceutical products, compounding only.
p. Printing and publishing facilities.
q. Public utility and/or service uses.
SECTION 11 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11 - 7
(1) Essential services, including fully automated gas regulating stations
and telephone exchanges. Private or public utility substations or
transmission corridors with a capacity not greater than 34 kilovolts.
(2) Railroad passenger stations when not located on railroad property.
(3) Sewage treatment plants.
(4) Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations, filtration plants and
wells.
(5) Telephone exchanges, microwave relay towers, and telephone
transmission equipment buildings.
(6) Water filtration plans, pumping stations, reservoirs, and sewage
treatment plants, public.
(7) Other public or private utility service uses and public works
facilities.
r. Repair of household or office machinery or equipment.
s. Retail sales of manufactured products when: compatible with adjoining
uses; adequate parking is provided; said retail use does not occupy more
than twenty (20%) of the floor area of the primary building or structure
located on the lot or parcel involved; and a zoning certificate specifically
stating the type of product sold is approved by the Board of Trustees..
t. Signs (Allowable). (See Section 13.00).
u. Technical Schools.
v. Temporary buildings. (See Section 4.14).
w. Vehicle detailing and hand cleaning. When conducted in completely
enclosed building. Does not include automobile laundries.
x. Warehouse, distribution and storage (not including motor freight
terminals) where the number of loading berths may not exceed one (1) per
five thousand (5,000) square feet of the gross floor area.
y. Wholesale business, the principal use of which is for storage warehouse.
z. Accessory uses to the above permitted uses. (See Sections 3.02, 4.06, and
12.00).
SECTION 11 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11 - 8
aa. Establishment for the manufacturing, fabricating, storing cleaning or
testing of materials, goods or products, and assembly, disassembly,
repairing or servicing if customarily accessory to manufacturing,
fabricating, storing, cleaning or testing establishment are permitted,
provided operation of such establishment and accessory operations
conform with applicable regulations and performance standards set forth
in this Ordinance; and issuance of the zoning permit is authorized by the
Village Board.
2. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by Special Use Permit in
accordance with the provisions of Administrative Section 14.00.
a. Automobile laundries when conducted in a completely enclosed building.
b. Automobile service stations, where the retail sale of gasoline and oil for
motor vehicles, including minor services customarily incidental thereto,
may be conducted out-of-doors. Lubricating, repair, and working
facilities, including auto laundries, are permitted only if in a completely
enclosed building.
c. Bank and financial institutions.
d. Child Care Center. (See Section 4.26)
e. Garage, public. (See Section 3.02)
f. Heliports and helipads.
g. Any other manufacturing establishment that can be operated in
compliance with the performance standards listed below without creating
objectionable noise, odor, dust, smoke, gas fumes and vapor; and any use
compatible with the use and occupancy of adjoining properties.
h. Motor Freight Terminals, if the following conditions are complied with:
(1) Shall be under unified ownership and control;
(2) The zoning lot on which the Motor Freight Terminal is located shall
be located not closer than two hundred (200) feet to any Residential
or Business zoned district;
(3) No dormitories, lodging or sleeping quarter facilities; no sleeping on
the premises or in vehicles on the premises;
SECTION 11 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11 - 9
(4) The operation of a Motor Freight Terminal shall only be between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. – Monday through Friday, and
Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 (noon);
(5) Scales, if provided, for weighing trucks shall be located on the same
zoning lot;
(6) Parking of vehicles and trucks shall be in compliance with Section
12.00, Off-Street Loading and Off-Street Parking of this Ordinance;
Concrete dolly pads shall be provided in accordance with Village
Ordinances and engineering specifications and shall be designed for
the parking or storage of trailers.
(7) The number of vehicles with engines operating at one (1) time shall
not exceed four (4). Engines for the purpose of this clause shall
mean a vehicle or auxiliary engine (vehicle with main engine and
refrigerator unit) running equals two (2) running engines.
(8) The number of vehicles with engines operating at one (1) time shall
be restricted reasonably, so as not to emit a concentration of noxious
fumes to endanger public health and welfare. Reference to Section
11.02.5.d of this Ordinance and the American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM) Method DI 391-57 standard.
(9) Exterior lighting shall be controlled, so as to shine away from
adjacent properties.
(10) Landscaping, including but not limited to fencing and berming, shall
be provided to create a buffer to adjacent properties of not less than
eighty percent (80%) opacity.
(11) The number of vehicles, including trucks and trailers, shall be in
compliance with Section 12.05 of this Ordinance.
(12) There shall be no major motor vehicle maintenance or major engine
overhauling on the zoning lot.
(13) No parking or standing of trucks shall be permitted on public streets;
the weight of trucks using public streets shall be within the weight
limits of all public streets on which the trucks would traverse.
(14) Reasonable restrictions shall be established and provided to avoid
undue traffic congestion, including regulating the frequency of
trucks entering and leaving the premises with the maximum number
of trucks not to exceed ten (10) between the hours of 7:00 to 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 to 6:00 p.m.; regulating the route to be taken by
SECTION 11 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11 - 10
trucks, to avoid congestion and danger to other motor vehicles and
pedestrians.
(15) Semi-trailers shall be limited to the Design Vehicle Dimensions
established by the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) and
no tanker trailers shall be permitted other than for delivery of fuel to
the premises only.
(16) The number of truck loading berths located on the zoning lost shall
be in compliance with Section 12.07 of this Ordinance.
(17) The number of locations and width of entrances to, and exits from,
the zoning lot shall be determined by Village codes and ordinance
and/or Village engineering standards.
i. Mini-Warehouse: Mini-warehouse, if the following conditions are
complied with:
(1) The zoning lot on which the warehouse is located shall be located
not closer than one hundred and fifty (150) feet to any Residence or
Business zoned district;
(2) The number of locations and width of entrances to, and exits from
the zoning lot shall be determined by Village codes and ordinances
and/or Village engineering standards.
(3) Parking of vehicles and trucks shall be in compliance with Section
12.00, Off-Street Loading and Off-Street Parking of this Ordinance.
(4) The number of vehicles with engines operating at one (1) time shall
be restricted reasonably, so as not to emit a concentration of noxious
fumes to endanger public health and welfare. Reference to Section
11.02.5.d of this Ordinance and the American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM) Method DI 391-57 Standard.
(5) Exterior lighting shall be controlled, so as to shine away from
adjacent properties.
(6) There shall be no motor vehicle maintenance or major engine
overhauling on the zoning lot.
(7) No parking or standing of trucks shall be permitted on public streets;
the weight of trucks using public streets shall be within the weight
limits of all public streets on which the trucks would traverse.
SECTION 11 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11 - 11
(8) Reasonable restrictions shall be established and provided to avoid
undue traffic congestions, including regulating the frequency of any
vehicles entering and leaving the premises with the maximum
number of vehicles not to exceed ten (10) between the house of 7:00
to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 to 6:00 p.m.; regulating the route to be taken
by vehicles, to avoid congestion and danger to other motor vehicle
and pedestrians.
j. Planned developments, manufacturing, providing a planned development
is on tract of land not less than two (2) acres in area and under unified
ownership or control.
k. Recycling centers, plants or other related facilities.
l. Warehouse, distribution, and storage when the number of loading berths
exceeds one (1) per five thousand (5,000) square feet of the gross floor
area.
3. Required Conditions: All Permitted and Approved Special Uses are subject
to the following conditions:
a. Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, treating and repair or
storage of goods, materials, or products shall conform with the
performance standards set forth below and elsewhere in the Ordinance.
(1) No dormitories, lodging or sleeping quarter facilities; no sleeping on
the premises or in vehicles on the premises;
(2) Scales, if provided, for weighing trucks, shall be located on the same
zoning lot.
(3) Parking of vehicles and trucks shall be in compliance with Section
12.00, Off-Street Loading and Off-Street Parking of this Ordinance.
Concrete dolly pads shall be provided in accordance with Village
Ordinance and engineering specifications and shall be designed for
the parking or storage of trailers.
(4) The number of vehicles with engines operating at one (1) time shall
not exceed four (4). Engines for the purpose of this clause shall
mean a vehicle or auxiliary engine (vehicle with main engine and
refrigerator unit) running equals two (2) running engines.
(5) The number of vehicles with engines operating at one (1) time shall
be restricted reasonably, so as not to emit a concentration of noxious
fumes to endanger public health and welfare. Reference to Section
SECTION 11 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11 - 12
11.02.5.d of this Ordinance and the American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM) Method DI 391-57 Standard.
(6) Exterior lighting shall be controlled, as so to shine away from
adjacent properties.
(7) There shall be no major motor vehicle maintenance or major engine
overhauling on the zoning lot.
(8) No parking or standing of trucks shall be permitted on public streets;
the weight of trucks using public streets shall be within the weight
limits of all public streets on which the trucks would traverse.
(9) Reasonable restrictions shall be established and provided to avoid
undue traffic congestion, including regulating the frequency of
trucks entering and leaving the premises with the maximum number
of trucks not to exceed ten (10), between the hours of 7:00 to 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 to 6:00 p.m.; regulating the route to be taken by trucks
to avoid congestion and danger to other motor vehicles and
pedestrians.
(10) Semi-trailers shall be limited to the Design Vehicle Dimensions
established by the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) and
no tanker trailers shall be permitted other than for delivery of fuel to
the premises only.
(11) The number of locations and width of entrances to and exits from
the zoning lot shall be determined by Village codes and ordinances
and/or Village engineering standards.
b. Boulders in the Parkway: Boulders may be permitted in the public
parkway in this district to prevent the maneuvering of a vehicle onto
landscaped (grassed) areas adjacent to driveways. Prior to installing any
boulders, a landscape plan shall be submitted to the Building
Commissioner indicating how the boulders are to be located, size, (vertical
and horizontal), and type of boulder to be used. A legal document shall be
executed in which the Village of Itasca will be held harmless in case of
accidents caused by the boulder.
c. Uses established on the effective date of this Ordinance and by its
provisions rendered non-conforming shall be permitted to continue,
subject to the regulations of Section 5.00.
d. Uses established after the effective date of this Ordinance shall conform
fully to the standards hereinbefore set forth for the district.
SECTION 11 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11 - 13
e. Not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the lot area shall be provided for
landscaping and open space purposes, exclusive of paved parking or hard
surfaced areas.
11.04 YARD REQUIREMENTS
1. Front Yard: There shall be provided a front yard of not less than forty (40)
feet in depth on streets which are at the perimeter of the M-Limited
Manufacturing District and a front yard not less than thirty (30) feet in depth
on streets in the interior of the Manufacturing District. The existing perimeter
streets within the M-Limited Manufacturing Districts are:
a. Rohlwing Road
b. Crest Avenue
c. Medinah Road/Meacham Road
d. Norwood Avenue between Meacham and Hilltop Drive
e. Hilltop between Ardmore Avenue and Norwood Avenue
f. Prospect Avenue
The measurement shall be made from the property line; no parking shall be
permitted in the required front yards; no storage or operation associated with
the permitted uses of the site shall be permitted in the front yard and the front
yard shall be planted, except for drives and walkways, with lawn, trees or
other decorative plantings.
2. Side Yard: There shall be provided total side yards of not less than fifty (50)
feet in width, which shall be measured at any point along the lot depth. The
side yards need not be of equal width; provided that the minimum of any side
yard shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet. No building or structure shall be
erected within fifty (50) feet of another existing building or structure on an
adjacent lot. A side yard abutting a street shall further comply with the
requirements of Section 11.04(a) above. Front Yard for each corner side yard.
3. Rear Yard: There shall be provided a rear yard (which may include parking)
of not less thank forty (40) feet in depth except that a rear yard abutting a
railroad right-of-way may be reduced to twenty (20) feet in depth.
4. Exception to Side Yard and Rear Yard Limits: In the event that a lot is
adjacent to and served by a railroad track switch track to the interior of a
building or structure on said lot, then said building or structure may be erected
either on one (1) of the side lot lines or on the rear lot line, but not both. In
SECTION 11 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11 - 14
such case, no structure or building shall be erected closer than forty (40) feet
to another existing building or structure on an adjacent lot, or within thirty
(30) feet of an interior street right-of-way or within forty (40) feet of a
perimeter street right-of-way.
5. Yards Abutting Major Street: Notwithstanding any of the foregoing,
whenever any lots abuts any of the street or highways, as follows: Irving Park
Road, Rohlwing Road, I-290, Devon Avenue, Thorndale Avenue (excluding
“Old Thorndale Avenue”), Prospect Road, and the proposed Elgin O’Hare
Freeway, there shall be provided a yard of not less than forty (40) feet in depth
from the rights-of-way of said streets or highways.
11.05 MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: Lot coverage of the principal building or
structure and accessory building or use shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of
the lot area.
11.06 BUILDING HEIGHT: Building height shall not exceed thirty (30) feet above
the curb level or two (2) stories, whichever is lower, except when recommended
by the Plan Commission and approved by the Village Board, the building height
may exceed thirty (30) feet above curb level, but not higher than forty (40) feet or
more than two (2) stories.
11.07 FLOOR AREA RATIO: Subject to requirements set forth under 4. Yard
Requirements, the floor area ratio shall not exceed zero point seven (0.7).
11.08 SIGNS: (Allowable). (See Section 13.00).
11.09 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING: Off-street parking and loading
facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in Section 12.00.
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 1
12.00 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The propose of this Section is to alleviate or prevent the congestion of the public
street and so promote the safety and welfare of the public by establishing
minimum requirements for the off-street parking and loading an unloading of
motor vehicles in accordance with the use to which property is put.
12.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS – PARKING AND LOADING (Also see Section
4.22)
1. Scope of Regulations. The off-street parking and loading provisions of this
Ordinance shall apply as follows:
a. Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities. For all buildings and
structures erected and all uses of buildings and land established after the
effective date of this Ordinance, accessory parking and loading facilities
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
However, where a building permit has been issued prior to the effective
date of this Ordinance, and provided that construction is begun within one
(1) year of such effective date, and diligently prosecuted to completion,
parking and loading facilities as required hereinafter need not be provided
except as required by Ordinance when the permit was issued.
b. Increased Parking and Loading Facilities. When the intensity of use of
any buildings, structures or premises shall be increased through addition
of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other unit of
measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities,
parking and loading facilities, as required herein, shall be provided for
such increase in intensity of use.
c. New Off-Site Parking and Loading Facilities. Whenever the existing
use of a building or structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use,
parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new
use.
However, if said building or structure was erected prior to the effective
date of this Ordinance, additional parking or loading facilities are
mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the new use
would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were in compliance
with the parking and loading provisions of the Zoning Ordinance then in
effect.
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 2
2. Existing Parking and Loading Facilities. Accessory off-street parking and
loading facilities which are located on the same zoning lot as the building or
use served which were in existence on the same zoning lot as the building or
were provided voluntarily after such effective date, shall not hereafter be
reduced below, or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below the
requirements of this Ordinance for a similar new building or use.
3. Permissive Parking and Loading Facilities. Nothing in this Ordinance shall
be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking or
loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings, provided that
all regulations herein governing the location, design, improvement and
operation of such facilities are adhered to.
4. Handicapped Parking. All uses except single family detached dwellings
shall be required to provide off-street parking spaces for handicapped persons
in accordance with the standards established by the State of Illinois and other
regulatory agencies.
5. Damage or Destruction. For any conforming or legally non-conforming
building or use which is in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance,
which subsequent thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion
or other cause, not to exceed fifty (50) percent of the cost of the existing
building or structure, and which is reconstructed, re-established or repaired,
off street parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time
of such damage or destruction, shall be restored or continued in operation.
However, in no case shall it be necessary to increase or maintain parking or
loading facilities in excess of those required by this Ordinance for equivalent
new uses or construction.
6. Control of Off-Site Parking Facilities. When required parking facilities are
provided on land other than the zoning lot on which the building or use served
by such facilities is located, they shall be and remain in the same possession
or ownership as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use to which the
parking facilities are accessory.
No such off-site parking facilities shall be authorized and no occupancy
permit shall be issued where the plans call for parking facilities other than on
the same zoning lot until and unless the Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5)
has reviewed the plans and heard the applicant and made findings that the
common ownership or possession of the zoning lot and the site of the parking
facilities are reasonably certain to continue and that the off-site parking
facilities will be maintained for such exclusive use at all times during the life
of the proposed use or building.
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 3
7. Submission of Plot Plan. Any application for a building permit, or for a
certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required shall include
therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any
parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this Ordinance.
8. Special Parking Provisions in the Itasca Historic District. When any retail
property located within the Itasca Historic Preservation District has
insufficient space to allow for full compliance of the parking requirements of
the Itasca Zoning Ordinance, and the owner of the property and/or operator of
the business on said property has demonstrated that it is not feasible to
provide adequate parking on site and has further demonstrated that sufficient
on-street parking or approved public parking is available near the location of
the business which could be utilized by employees and patrons of that
business, then the owner of the property and/or operator of the business may
request permission from the Board of Trustees upon application to the
Director of Community Development to utilize on-street parking spaces or
approved public parking spaces from 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. only to satisfy
up to 50% of the parking requirements herein for off-street parking spaces for
the specific use or uses existing or proposed. Notwithstanding such
permission, the property owner and business operator must comply with all
other provisions of this Section.
12.03 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS – PARKING
1. Use of Parking Facilities.
a. General Limitations
(1) Off-street parking facilities accessory to a residential building or use
in accordance with the requirements of this Section shall be used for
the parking of regularly used passenger vehicles legally licensed and
registered to, or in the lawful possession of, the occupants of the
dwellings to which such facilities are accessory or by guests of said
occupants.
(2) Under no circumstances shall required parking facilities accessory to
residential buildings be used by persons other than the dwelling
occupants for the parking of vehicles belonging to the employees,
owners, tenants, visitors or customers of any business or
manufacturing establishment.
(3) No new parking or access driveways shall be developed or
established within five (5) feet of any property line, or in front yard,
or corner side yard, except as specified in Section 12.03.8.
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 4
b. Certain Commercial Vehicles Prohibited. The following subsections
b(1) and b(2) shall apply to all commercial motor vehicles except for pickup
trucks, four-wheel cargo vans, and four-wheel passenger vans.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any operator or owner of any commercial
motor vehicle with a license plate registration in excess of a B plate,
or weighing in excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds gross
weight, including vehicle weight and maximum load (Gross
Vehicular Weight Rating), to park or store such vehicle on any offstreet
parking facilities accessory to any residential building or use
within the Village. Prohibited commercial vehicles shall also
include, without limitation, tractors, step vans, semi-tractors, tow
trucks, farm implements, dump trucks, construction equipment,
semi-trailers, buses, taxis, and limousines designed to carry more
than six (6) passengers. This subsection shall not prohibit the
parking of such vehicles within a completely enclosed garage or
other structure.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any operator or owner of any commercial
motor vehicle with a license plate registration in excess of a B plate,
or weighing in excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds gross
weight, including vehicle weight and maximum load (Gross
Vehicular Weight Rating), to park or store such vehicle on any street
or public right-of way in any residential area. Prohibited
commercial vehicles shall include, without limitation, tractors, step
vans, semi-tractors, tow trucks, farm implements, dump trucks,
construction equipment, semi-trailers, buses, taxis, and limousines
designed to carry more than six (6) passengers.
c. Limitation on Commercial Vehicles. No more than two (2) of the
following vehicles shall be permitted to be parked on any off-street
parking facilities accessory to any residential building or use within the
Village:
(1) Any motor vehicle of the Second Division not otherwise prohibited
under Section 12.03.b., which shall include all pick-up trucks, fourwheel
cargo vans, and four-wheel passenger vans, operated for the
transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any
commercial or industrial enterprise, for hire or not for hire, or a
recreational vehicle being used commercially;
(2) Any motor vehicle of the First or Second Division not otherwise
prohibited under Section 12.03.b. with lettered signage designating a
commercial business posted on the vehicle.
(3) Any limousine not otherwise prohibited under Section 12.03.b.
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 5
Additional commercial vehicles are prohibited unless such additional
vehicles are parked within a completely enclosed garage or structure.
d. The requirements of this section shall not apply to those commercial
vehicles that are parked for the purpose of delivering or collecting persons,
materials or merchandise and/or performing some service to residents on
whose property or adjacent to whose property the vehicle is being parked.
2. Collective Provisions. Off-street parking facilities for different buildings,
structures, or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively in any
zoning district in which separate parking facilities for each constituent use
would be permitted, provided that the total number of spaces so located
together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each
use.
3. Computation. When determination of the number of off-street parking
spaces required by this Ordinance results in a requirement of a fractional
space, any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be disregarded, while a
fraction in excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one (1) parking space.
4. Repair Service and Storage. No motor vehicle repair work or service,
storage or extended parking of unused or inoperable vehicles or selling of
gasoline or motor oil of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with offstreet
parking facilities located in any District, unless recommended by the
Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5) and approved by the Board of Trustees.
5. Size. A required off-street parking space shall not be less than nine (9) feet in
width and not less than eighteen (18) feet in length, exclusive of access drives
or aisles, ramps, columns or office or work area. Such space shall have a
vertical clearance of not less than seven (7) feet. For parallel parking spaces,
the length of the space shall be increased to twenty-two (22) feet.
Required off-street handicap parking spaces shall meet all applicable
requirements of the current State of Illinois Accessibility Code and of other
regulatory agencies.
6. Off-Street Parking Chart (see Section 12.06). All other requirements as to
parking stall and aisle width shall be as set forth or interpolated from the “Off
Street Parking Chart”.
7. Access. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an
aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to such parking space. All off-street parking
facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a
street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements.
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 6
Residential lots shall be a minimum driveway width of nine (9) feet for one
car garages and a minimum width of eighteen (18) feet for two car garages.
All driveways shall extend to the curb or edge of street. The maximum width
of driveways when measured at the property line in residential areas shall not
exceed twenty-four (24) feet except in cases of houses with three (3) car
garages facing the street, the driveway width at the property line may be
increased to thirty-two (32) feet in an R-1 zoning district only. A
recommendation from the Plan Commission and approval from the Village
Board are required for more than one (1) driveway per single family dwelling.
No driveway widening or bump outs shall be made into corner side yards for
driveways located in front yards or into front yards for driveways located in
corner side yards or to within five (5) feet of interior property lines.
8. In Yards. Off-street parking spaces and access driveways may be located in
any yard except required front yards, and required corner side yards, but shall
in no case be closer than five (5) feet to the lot line other than at the point
where such access driveway crosses over a lot line except that for a dwelling
unit, if two (2) of the required parking spaces are provided within a garage,
the other required parking spaces may be located in the garage access
driveway and may intrude into a required front yard, or required corner side
yard, provided further, that if none of the required spaces are provided within
a garage, the required spaces shall not be located in a required front yard or
corner side yard, nor shall parking be allowed on any unpaved surface on a
zoning lot.
9. In Parkways. No person, firm or corporation shall, deposit, leave or store any
motor vehicle, or tangible personal property of any type or description at any
time between the property line, curb and/or edge of pavement line or across
any sidewalk, nor shall any vehicle be parked or encroached upon any
sidewalk, parkway or other public way. (Also see Section 4.06.10 and Section
4.19.5(m)).
10. Design and Maintenance.
a. Open and Enclosed Parking Spaces. Accessory parking spaces located
on the same lot as occupied by the use served may be open to the sky or
enclosed in a building. Accessory parking spaces located in a Residence
District elsewhere than on the same lot occupied by the use served shall be
open to the sky except when otherwise allowed as a Special Use.
b. Surfacing. All open off-street vehicular parking areas, driveways and
access aisles excluding truck loading berths (see Section 12.07.4) shall be
improved with an all weather dustless material consisting of the following
as approved.
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 7
(1) For apartments and other residential uses, surfacing shall consist of
the following:
(a) Eight (8) inch compacted aggregate base with a two (2) inch
bituminous wearing surface; or
(b) Four (4) inch compacted aggregate base with a five (5) inch air
entrained six (6) Portland Cement concrete and 6X6 #10
welded wire reinforcing.
(2) For non-residential, light vehicle (under 8500 gvw) uses, surfacing
shall consist of one of the following:
(a) Eight (8) inch compacted aggregate base with a one and one
half (1½) inch bituminous binder course and a one (1) inch
bituminous surface course; or
(b) Six (6) inch compacted aggregate base with five (5) inch air
entrained six (6) bag Portland Cement concrete and 6X6 #10
welded wire reinforcing.
(3) For heavy vehicular and other uses including business, commercial,
industrial, or when in the opinion of the Building Commissioner, the
driveway will be required to carry heavy loads, it shall then consist
of one of the following:
(a) Ten (10) inch compacted aggregate base with a one and onehalf
(1-1/2) inch bituminous binder course and a one and onehalf
(1-1/2) inch bituminous surface course; or
(b) Eight (8) inch compacted aggregate base with a six (6) inch air
entrained six (6) bag Portland Cement concrete and 6X6 #6
welded wire reinforcing.
(c) Loading berths and dolly pads, see Section 12.07.4.
c. Screening and Landscaping. All open automobile parking areas
containing more than four (4) parking spaces shall be effectively screened
on each side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a Residence
District or any institutional premises by a wall, fence or densely planted
compact hedge. Such required screening shall conform with the front and
side yard setback requirements of the district in which the parking is
located. Landscaped areas, including plant material, shall not be planted
so there is interference with the overhang of parked vehicles.
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 8
d. Lighting and Other Equipment. All lighting used to illuminate off-street
parking areas shall be directed away from residential properties in such a
way as not to create a nuisance. All lighting shall be extinguished no later
the thirty (30) minutes after close of business of the use being served,
except as may be otherwise authorized by the Village Board. All lighting
shall comply with the performance standards relative to glare. Unless
otherwise approved by the Village Board, the minimum lighting level for
commercial occupancy shall be 0.5 F.C.
e. Signs. Allowable. (see Section 13.00)
f. Curbs. In all cases where off-street parking areas are used for stormwater
management purposes, such areas shall be improved with permanent
Portland Cement concrete curb(s) and shall be so located that no part of
any parking vehicle shall extend beyond the minimum setback.
g. Wheel Guards. All off-street parking spaces within parking lots for four
(4) or more vehicles shall be provided with concrete wheel guards, bumper
guards or continuous curbs permanently secured to the finished surface
along the perimeter line and abutting the buildings. Wheel guards,
bumper guards or continuous curbs shall be located so that no part of any
parked vehicle will extend beyond the property line or encroach upon any
adjacent sidewalk and/or landscape areas.
h. Striping. All off-street parking spaces, within parking lots, for four (4) or
more vehicles shall be properly marked by a four (4) inch wide painted
stripe. All such striping shall be maintained and kept clearly visible at all
times.
11. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any commercial vehicles,
recreational vehicles or boats in any commuter parking lot or in any parking
lot owned or controlled by the Village. Further, no commercial vehicles,
recreational vehicles or boats shall be issued permits by any person or entity
to park in any commuter parking lot owned or controlled by the Village.
12. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store any trailer on any
residential lot within the Village or in any residential area in the Village
unless within a completely enclosed garage or structure, provided, however,
that such trailer shall be permitted only when utilized in conjunction with the
storage of a boat, personal watercraft or snowmobile that is properly permitted
pursuant to Section 4.22 of this Ordinance, and only during such times when
the parking or storage of a boat, personal watercraft or snowmobile is
permitted by Section 4.22.
13. A resident may request relief from the provisions of Section 12.03.1 by the
filing of a petition requesting such relief. No relief from the provisions of
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 9
Section 12.03.1 shall be permitted unless such relief is recommended by the
Plan Commission and approved by the Village Board. Any person requesting
such relief shall comply with the notice requirements for special use permit set
forth in Section 14.11.6. In considering any such petition for relief, the Plan
Commission shall seek evidence from the Petitioner with respect to the
following factors:
a. The specific nature of the relief requested by the petitioner;
b. The availability of alternative means for parking or storing any such
vehicles;
c. The availability of methods for screening such vehicles;
d. The effect of the relief required on the public health, safety and welfare;
e. Whether the relief requested will impair or injure the value or enjoyment
of surrounding property;
f. The difficulty or hardship of the petitioner in complying with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
The Plan Commission may recommend, and the President and Board of Trustees
may approve, conditions and restrictions upon the grant of any relief under this
subsection.
12.04 LOCATION OF ACCESSORY OFF-STREET PARKING
The location of off-street parking spaces in relation to the use served shall be as
prescribed hereinafter. All distances specified shall be walking distances between
such parking spaces and a main entrance to the use served.
1. For Uses in a Residence District. Parking spaces accessory to dwellings shall
be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. Spaces accessory to uses
other than dwellings may be located on a lot adjacent to, or directly across a
street or alley from the lot occupied by the use served, but in no case at a
distance in excess of three hundred (300) feet from such use.
2. For Uses in Business, Office Research, ROC, and Manufacturing
Districts. All required parking spaces shall be within one thousand (1,000)
feet of the use served, except for spaces accessory to dwelling units, which
shall be within three hundred (300) feet of the use served. However, no
parking spaces accessory to a use in a Business or Manufacturing District
shall be located in a Residence District, except that private, free, off-street
parking accessory to such uses and municipal parking lots may be allowed by
Special Use permit in accordance with the administrative section within two
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 10
hundred (200) feet of, and adjacent to, any Business or Manufacturing
District.
12.05 SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS
For the following uses, accessory off-street parking spaces shall be provided as
required hereinafter. Parking spaces required on an employee basis on the
maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both on the premises at
any one time.
1. Residential Uses. As follows:
a. Single-Family Dwellings. Attached or detached and semi-detached
dwellings; three (3) parking spaces shall be provided per each dwelling
unit with a minimum of two (2) spaces provided in a totally enclosed
garage for all new construction.
b. Two-Family Dwellings. Two and one half (2.5) parking spaces shall be
provided for each dwelling unit.
c. Multiple-Family Dwellings (including Apartment Hotels). Two and
one-half (2.5) parking spaces shall be provided for every dwelling unit
plus one (1) parking space for each employee. Multiple-Family Dwellings
in the Traditional Downtown (B-4 and B-5 zoning districts) shall provide
one and three-quarters (1.75) spaces for every dwelling unit plus one (1)
space for each employee. For lodging rooms located in an apartment
hotel, one and one-half (1.5) parking spaces shall be provided for each
room, plus one (1) parking space for each employee.
d. Motels, Inns and Auto Courts. One (1) parking space shall be provided
for each guest or sleeping room or suite, plus one (1) additional space for
each employee.
e. Hotels. One (1) parking space for each guest room or bedroom suite shall
be provided, plus one (1) additional space per employee.
f. Lodging, Rooming and Boarding Houses. One (1) parking space shall
be provided for each lodging room, plus one (1) space for the owner or
manager.
g. Housing for the Elderly. One (1) parking space for each four (4)
dwelling units, plus one (1) space for each employee or staff member on a
shift, or such greater number as recommended by the Plan Commission.
(see Section 4.04.5)
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 11
h. Private Clubs and Lodges (with sleeping facilities for guests). One (1)
parking space shall be provided for each lodging room plus parking spaces
equal in number to ten (10) percent of the capacity in persons (exclusive
of lodging room capacity) of such club or lodge.
2. Retail and Service Use. As follows:
a. Retail Stores and Banks. One (1) parking space shall be provided for
each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area. Drive-in
banks or other similar drive-in establishments shall provide five (5)
stacking spaces per teller or customer service window.
b. Automobile Service Stations. Two (2) parking spaces per service bay
plus one (1) space per employee.
c. Automobile Laundries. Four (4) parking spaces per bay/stall plus one (1)
space for each four (4) employees for a self-service establishment, or one
(1) space for each four (4) employees plus sufficient area for twelve (12)
stacking spaces per bay/stall for an automated establishment.
d. Bowling Alleys. Three (3) parking spaces per alley, plus one (1) space
per employee, plus such additional spaces as may be required herein for
affiliated uses – bars, restaurants and the like.
e. Eating Establishments
(1) Standard Eating Establishments. Ten (10) parking spaces per each
one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
(2) Drive-In or Drive-Through Eating Establishments. Twelve (12)
parking spaces per each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross
floor area PLUS twenty (20) reserve/stacking parking spaces.
(3) Stand-Up Eating Establishments. Five and one-half (5 ½) parking
spaces per each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
f. Furniture and Appliance Stores, Household Equipment or Furniture
Repair Shops. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each six
hundred (600) square feet of floor area.
g. Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental and Service Establishments. One (1)
space per five hundred (500) square feet of enclosed sale/rental floor area,
plus one (1) space per thousand (1,000) square feet of gross open
sales/rental display lot area, plus two (2) spaces per service bay, plus one
(1) space for each employee.
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 12
h. Theaters (indoor). One (1) parking space shall be provided for each three
(3) seats, plus one (1) space per employee.
i. Undertaking Establishments, Funeral Homes, Parlors and Chapels.
Four (4) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of chapel
area, or four (4) parking spaces per each seventy-two (72) lineal inches of
parking space. In addition, there shall be not less than one (1) parking
space per each vehicle used in conducting business and one (1) parking
space per each employee. There shall also be off-street reserved spaces
equal to thirty (30) percent of the number of parking spaces required
which may include the use of parking lot access aisles and driveways.
j. Offices, Business, Professional and Governmental, excluding
Medical/Dental. Three (3) parking spaces per each one thousand (1,000)
square feet of gross floor area.
k. Medical or Dental Offices and Clinics. Six (6) parking spaces per each
one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
l. Recreational Facilities Other than Theaters, Bowling Alleys, or
Swimming Pools. One (1) parking space per one hundred (100) square
feet of gross floor area plus one (1) space per two (2) employees.
m. Swimming Pools. One (1) parking space per four (4) persons in the pool
facility at one time, plus one (1) space per employee.
n. Open Sales/Display Areas Other than Vehicle Sales, Rental and
Service Establishments. One (1) parking space per five hundred (500)
square feet of open sales/display area plus one (1) space per employee.
o. Wholesale Establishments but not Including Warehouse and Store
Buildings Other than Accessory. One (1) parking space shall be
provided for each six hundred (600) square feet of floor area.
p. Mixed Retail Shopping Center. One (1) parking space shall be provided
for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area (subject to the
requirements of Section 12.05.7).
3. Industrial and Related Uses
a. Manufacturing Uses or Any Establishments Engaged in Production,
Processing, Cleaning, Servicing, Testing, or Repair of Materials,
Goods or Products. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each
employee, plus one (1) parking space for each vehicle used in the
enterprise, or one (1) parking space per two thousand (2,000) square feet
of gross area, whichever is greater.
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 13
b. Warehouse and Storage Buildings. One (1) parking space shall be
provided based on the shift having the maximum number of employees,
for each employee, plus one (1) space for each vehicle used in the conduct
of the enterprise or one (1) parking space per two thousand (2,000) square
feet of gross area, whichever is greater.
c. Health Centers, Government Generated. Six (6) parking spaces shall be
provided for each staff and visiting doctor, plus one (1) space for each
employee.
d. Hospital. A parking study shall be required which analyzes parking
demand and supply on the basis of number of beds, employees, ratio of inpatient
usage, and other pertinent factors.
e. Child Care Center, Day Nurseries and Nursery Schools. One (1)
parking space shall be provided for each teacher and employee, plus one
(1) parking space for each ten (10) students for guest parking. Stacking
spaces shall be provided off the public right-of-way for not less than ten
(10) vehicles for pick-up and /or drop-off of students.
f. Libraries, Art Galleries and Museums – Public. Four (4) parking
spaces shall be provided for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of
gross floor area.
g. Municipal or Privately Owned Recreation Buildings or Community
Centers. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each two (2)
employees, plus spaces adequate in number as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, to serve the visiting public.
h. Public Utility and Public Service Uses. One (1) parking space shall be
provided for each two (2) employees, plus spaces adequate in number, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, to serve the visiting public.
i. School, Elementary or Intermediate. One (1) parking space per each,
faculty staff member, or other full-time employee, plus four (4) parking
spaces for visitor parking.
j. School, Secondary. One (1) parking space per each faculty member, or
full time employee, plus one (1) parking space per six (6) students based
on rated design capacity.
4. Places of Assembly. As follows:
a. Stadiums, Arenas, Auditoriums, other than Churches, Colleges, or
Institutional Schools, Convention Halls, Dance Halls, Exhibition
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 14
Halls, Skating Rinks and other Similar Places of Assembly. Parking
spaces equal in number to twenty-five (25) percent of the capacity in
persons shall be provided or the Plan Commission shall recommend the
parking spaces needed.
5. Miscellaneous Uses: As follows:
a. Fraternities, Sororities and Dormitories. Five (5) parking spaces per
each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
b. Institutions for the Care of the Insane or Feeble-Minded. One (1)
parking space shall be provided for each staff doctor, plus spaces adequate
in number, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, to serve the
visiting public.
c. Private Clubs and Lodges (without sleeping facilities for guests). Five
(5) parking spaces per each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor
area.
d. Rest Homes and Nursing Homes. One (1) parking space shall be
provided for each four (4) beds, plus one (1) parking space for each two
(2) employees (other than staff doctors), plus one (1) parking space for
each doctor assigned to the staff.
e. Sanitariums, Convalescent Homes or Institutions for the Aged or for
Children. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each four (4) beds,
plus one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees (other than staff
doctors), plus one (1) parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
f. For the following areas, parking spaces shall be provided in adequate
number, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, to serve persons
employed or residing on the premises, as well as the visiting public:
Heliports or Helipads
Convents or Monasteries
Crematories or Mausoleums
Fraternal or Religious Institutions
Rectories and Parish Houses
6. Mixed Uses. When two (2) or more uses are located on the same zoning lot
within the same building, parking spaces equal in number to the sum of the
separate requirements for each such use shall be provided. No parking spaces
or portion thereof shall serve as required space for more than one (1) use
unless otherwise recommended by the Plan Commission (see Section 4.04.5)
and approved by the Village Board.
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 15
7. Other Uses. For uses not listed heretofore in this schedule of parking
requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required
for the most similar listed used, or as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
12.06 OFF-STREET PARKING CHART INSERT
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 16
12.07 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS – OFF-STREET LOADING
1. Location. All required off-street loading berths shall be located on the same
lot as the use to be served, and no portion of the vehicle shall project into a
public right-of-way, street or alley. No permitted or required off-street
loading berth in any district shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the
nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets, nor shall it be located in a
required front or side yard. In Manufacturing Districts, off-street loading
berths for vehicles of more than two (2) ton capacity shall not be located:
a. within a side yard abutting a Residence District or abutting a street which
at the place of abutment fronts on a Residence District;
b. within forty (40) feet of the lot line of any side yard abutting street which
at the place of abutment does not front a Residence District, nor
c. Within that part of a rear yard abutting a Residence District which part
would be a side yard if the main building on the premises.
2. Size. Unless otherwise specified in the Schedule of Loading Requirements, a
required loading berth shall be not less than twelve (12) feet in width by not
less than sixty (60) feet in length exclusive of aisles and maneuvering space,
and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet.
3. Access. Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movements and shall meet the applicable
surfacing requirement of Section 12.03.10b and shall be subject to approval of
the Building Commissioner.
4. Surfacing. Any open off-street loading berths, loading area or areas intended
to be used for dumpster over two (2) cubic yards capacity, the parking of
semi-trailers, without tractor attached, or other heavy concentrated loads, shall
be improved with a minimum ten (10) inches thick compacted stone base and
shall be surfaced with not less than eight (8) inches of unreinforced six (6) bag
air entrained concrete, or six (6) inch thick, six bag mix, air entrained concrete
with 6+6 #6 welded wire reinforcing, or an equivalent improvement, as
approved by the Village Board.
5. Repair and Service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind
shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any
Residence or Business District.
6. Screening and Landscaping. All open trailer and truck parking areas shall be
effectively screened on each side adjoining or fronting on any property
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 17
located in or adjacent to a Residence District by a wall, fence not to exceed
twelve (12) feet in height, with metal or plastic inserts in chain link or densely
planted compact hedge. Such required screening shall conform with the front
and side yard setback requirements of the District in which the parking is
located.
7. Space. Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not, which so
allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking
facilities or portions thereof.
8. Special Uses. For Special Uses other than prescribed for hereinafter, loading
berths adequate in number and size to serve such uses, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator, shall be provided.
9. Off-Street Loading. Uses for which off-street loading facilities are required
herein but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the minimum
prescribed for such required facilities, shall be provided with adequate
receiving facilities, off an adjacent alley, service, drive, or open space, on the
same lot, which is accessible by motor vehicle.
12.08 SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS
For the uses listed in the following Table, off-street loading berths shall be
provided on the basis of gross floor area of buildings, or portions thereof, devoted
to such uses in the amounts shown herein.
SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Uses Gross Floor Area in
Square Feet
Requited Number
& Minimum
Horizontal
Dimensions of
Berths
a) Hospitals, Sanitariums and other
Institutional Uses
10,000 to 200,000 1 – (12’ x 30’)
for each additional
200,000 or fraction
thereof
1 additional (12’ x 30’)
b) Hotels, Clubs and Lodges, Except as Set
Forth in Item (c) Below
10,000 to 20,000 1 – (12’ x 30’)
20,000 to 150,000 1 – (12’ x 30’)
for each additional
150,000 or fraction
thereof
1 additional (12’ x 30’)
c) Retail Stores, Furniture & Appliance Stores,
Household Equipment & Furniture Stores,
Repair Shops, Wholesale Stores &
Establishments Handling the Sale &
Consumption of Food on the Premise. (The
above uses individually will comply with gross
floor area and require number of berth loading
requirements.
50,000 to 10,000 1 – (12’ x 30’)
10,000 to 25,000 2 – (12’ x 30’)
25,000 to 40, 000 3 – (12’ x 30’)
40,000 to 100,000 4 – (12’ x 30’)
for each additional
100,000 or fraction
thereof
1 additional (12’ x 30’)
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 18
d) Motor Vehicle & Machinery Sales 40,000 to 100,000 3 – (12’ x 60’)
e) Auditorium, Convention Halls, Exhibition
Halls, Sports Arenas, Stadiums, Bowling
Alleys
10,000 to 20,000 1 – (12’ x 30’)
20,000 to 100,000 2 – (12’ x 30’)
for each additional
100,000 or fraction
thereof
1 additional (12’ x 60’)
f) Banks and Office – Business, Professional
and Governmental
10,000 to 100,000 1 – (12’ x 30’)
for each additional
100,000 or fraction
thereof
1 additional (12’ x 30’)
for each additional
500,000 or fraction
thereof
1 additional (12’ x 60’)
g) Manufacturing Uses or Any Establishments
Engaged in Production Processing Cleaning,
Servicing, Testing or Warehousing and
Storage of Goods, Materials or Products
5,000 to 20,000 1 – (12’ x 60’)
20,000 to 50,000 2 – (12’ x 60’)
for each additional
500,000 or fraction
thereof
1 – (12’ x 60’)
h) Theaters 8,000 to 50,000 1 – (12’ x 30’)
for each additional
50,000 or fraction thereof
1 additional (12’ x 30’)
i) Undertaking Establishments & Funeral
Parlors
8,000 to 100,000 1 – (12’ x 30’)
for each additional
100,000 or fraction
thereof
1 addition (12’ x 30’)
12.09 BICYCLE PARKING
1. Required Number of Spaces
Bicycle parking shall be required under the following circumstances, but in no
instance shall a zoning lot be required to provide more than twenty (20) bicycle
parking spaces:
a. New Development. Equal to five (5) percent of the off-street motor vehicle
parking requirements with a minimum of two (2) bicycle parking spaces.
b. Additions or Enlargements of a Building or Structure. Equal to five (5)
percent of the off-street motor vehicle parking requirements for the building
expansion or structure expansion with a minimum of two (2) bicycle parking
spaces. The minimum of two (2) bicycle parking spaces may be waived by the
Zoning Administrator if at least two (2) bicycle parking spaces, conforming to
the requirements of this section, are provided on the zoning lot.
c. Restoration or Remodeling of a Building or Structure. Restoration or
remodeling of a building or structure that exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value
of the building or structure prior to the restoration or remodeling, shall provide
bicycle parking equal to five (5) percent of the off-street motor vehicle parking
requirements with a minimum of two (2) bicycle parking spaces.
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 19
d. Expansion of Off-Street Motor Vehicle Parking. Equal to five (5) percent of
the new off-street motor vehicle parking spaces with a minimum of two (2)
bicycle parking spaces. The minimum of two (2) bicycle parking spaces may be
waived by the Zoning Administrator if at least two (2) bicycle parking spaces,
conforming to the requirements of this section, are provided on the zoning lot.
2. Exempt Uses
a. The following residential uses are exempt from providing bicycle parking:
(1) Single-family detached
(2) Single-family attached
(3) Semi-detached
(4) Two-family dwelling units.
b. Zoning lots requiring less than ten (10) off-street motor vehicle parking spaces
are recommended, but shall not be required, to provide bicycle parking.
3. Reduction in Off-Street Motor Vehicle Parking
For uses required to provide ten (10) or more off-street motor vehicle parking spaces,
the number of required off-street motor vehicle parking spaces may be reduced by
one (1) parking space for every two (2) bicycle parking spaces provided as required
by this ordinance.
In no instance shall the number of provided bicycle parking spaces used for a
reduction in the required number of off-street motor vehicle parking spaces be greater
than that required under Section 12.09(1), Required Number of Spaces.
4. Location of Bicycle Parking Spaces
Bicycle parking shall be located such that it is highly visible, with adequate lighting,
from the street and/or building entrance(s) from where bicyclists approach.
For residential, office, and industrial uses, if bicycle parking is intended for the sole
use of the employees or residents of the property, the bicycle parking may be located
inside of a building or near an employee entrance.
Bicycle parking shall be located in designated areas which minimize pedestrian and
vehicle conflicts.
If bicycle parking is located within a vehicle parking area, the bicycle parking should
be clearly designated and located as close to a building entrance as possible.
Bicycle parking provided adjacent to a pedestrian walkway shall allow sufficient
passage (6 feet minimum) for pedestrians.
For non-residential uses in the R-1, R-2, R-3, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-6, M, OR, and ROC
districts, bicycle parking may encroach into the required yard setbacks, but shall not
be closer than five feet to the property line.
For non-residential uses in the B-4 and B-5 districts, bicycle parking may encroach
into the required yard setbacks and/or be permitted in the right-of-way subject to
approval of the Zoning Administrator.
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 20
5. Design Criteria and Dimensions
Bicycle parking shall be located on a hard surface area.
Recommended design dimensions for bicycle parking areas are included in the below
figure. The dimensions and layout of the bicycle parking area shall be subject to the
approval of the Zoning Administrator as part of the building permit and/or site plan
review process.
Recommended Minimum Bicycle Parking Area Dimensions
Bicycle parking rack types shall be designed so as to accommodate standard bicycle
models and lock types and shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning
Administrator as part of the building permit and/or site plan review process.
Examples of recommended and non-recommended bicycle parking rack types are
provided in the below figures.
Examples of Recommended Bicycle Parking Rack Types
SECTION 12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12 - 21
Examples of Non-Recommended Bicycle Parking Rack Types
Alternate bicycle parking accommodations may be considered during the building
permit and/or site plan review process, but shall be subject to the approval of the
Zoning Administrator.
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 1
13.00 SIGNS
13.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. All signs shall be in compliance with this Ordinance.
2. Permits Required. No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter erect,
construct, move, alter or maintain any sign, or other advertising device, upon
any parkway, street or alley owned or installed by the Village, or upon any
public or private property in the Village, without first having obtained a
permit and an inspection certificate therefore from the Building Department as
hereinafter provided.
The permits required by this ordinance shall be obtained from the Building
Department, by written application by the person, firm or corporation
erecting, constructing, or maintaining the sign, and such application shall be
accompanied by the plans and specifications showing the size and character of
such proposed signs and locations of same. Plans and specifications being in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, said Building Department
shall thereupon issue a permit for the erection of such sign upon the payment
of applicable fees.
Fees to be charged for sign permits shall be established by the Village Board
of Trustees and published in a “Schedule of Fees”.
The Building Department shall not be obligated to issue a permit for the
erection or construction or maintenance of any sign in any location where said
sign will or might constitute a dangerous obstruction of the view or a menace
to the welfare of persons on any highway, sidewalk, path or street abutting
thereon.
3. Bond Requirements. Every applicant for a permit to erect any ground, wall,
projecting, electric and non-electric signs and all awnings, canopies, and
marquees projecting over public right-of-way shall file with the Building
Department a bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) executed by
the applicant, and with sureties approved by the Village Board, conditioned
upon the faithful observance and performance of every condition and
provision of said permit and conditioned further to indemnify, keep, and save
harmless the Village against all liabilities, judgments, costs, damages, and
expenses which may in any way come against the Village as a consequence of
granting the permit, or which may accrue against, be charged to, or recovered
from the Village by reason of the authority given in such permit. This bond
shall be filed with the plans in the Building Department. The bond and the
liability of the sureties thereto shall be kept in force throughout the life of the
permit and, if at any time it shall not be in full force, then the authority and the
privileges thereby granted shall be terminated by the Building Commissioner.
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 2
A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the State of Illinois conforming to the requirements of this section
may be permitted, in lieu of a bond, provided the limits of liability shall not be
less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) for property damage and one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000) for public liability. A certificate of insurance
under an existing liability policy which meets the above requirements will be
sufficient, provided the policy will have the Village as an additional insured
and a certificate from the insurance company with a ten (10) day cancellation
clause notice to that effect, is filed with the Building Department.
4. Temporary Permits. Permits may be issued for temporary signs identified in
this section upon payment of the fee established by the Village Board of
Trustees and published in a “Schedule of Fees.” “For sale,” for rent,
construction signs and real estate “open house” signs in residential districts
that are in accordance with Section 13.03(1) do not require a temporary permit
pursuant to this subsection.
5. Permit Duration. Permits required by this section are valid for a period of
one (1) year.
6. Inspection. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to inspect or cause
to inspect any sign or canopy. If any sign or canopy is found to be insecurely
fastened, the inspector shall report this fact to the owner of the sign or to the
owner or occupant of the premises on which it is fastened. If the sign or
canopy is not made secure within ten (10) days after such notice, it shall be
removed.
7. Unsafe or Unlawful Signs. If the Building Inspector shall find that any sign
or other advertising structure regulated herein is unsafe, unsightly, or insecure,
or is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected, or is being
maintained in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, the Department
shall give written notice to the permittee, or property owner thereof. If the
permittee or property owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to
comply with the standards herein set forth within ten (10) days after such
notice, such sign or other advertising structure may be removed or altered to
comply when so directed by the Building Department at the expense of the
permittee or owner of the property on which it is located. The Building
Commissioner shall recommend to the Village Board that the permit covering
said sign or other advertising structure which is an immediate peril to persons
or property be revoked.
8. Non-Conforming Existing Signs. Every sign or other advertising lawfully in
existence on the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be altered or moved
unless it be made to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 3
Poles or pylon signs prohibited under Section 13.03.8.c of this Ordinance shall
be eliminated and removed within two (2) years of the effective date of said
Section 13.03.8.c.
9. Sign Locations. Every projecting sign erected or maintained over a public
sidewalk shall be placed not less than ten (10) feet above the level of the
sidewalk and at a distance not greater than eighteen (18) inches from the face
of the wall to which it is attached, measured from the point of the sign nearest
thereto. The projecting sign or portion thereof shall not extend more than
eight (8) feet from the structure to which it is attached or be nearer the curb
line than two (2) feet, whichever is lesser.
10. Ground Signs. May be erected parallel to or at any angle with the adjacent
public street or streets so long as they do not project over the street, sidewalks
or other public places adjoining the lot or parcel on which it is installed.
These signs shall be subject to the specific area restrictions for the applicable
zoning district.
11. Pole Signs (Pylon). Are not allowed unless specifically provided for in the
applicable zoning district.
12. Additional Sign. No additional sign or advertisement of any nature shall be
attached to or suspended from any sign or other advertising devices.
13. Sign Erection. No sign shall be erected or maintained on any parcel of land
other than that upon which the business advertised is located.
14. No Dynamic Display Signs. No dynamic display signs, flashing signs, or
revolving beacons shall be permitted.
15. Advertising Signs. Advertising signs are not prohibited in the Village of
Itasca if they are in compliance with the official Zoning Ordinance.
16. No Advertising Sign. No sign or other advertising structure shall be erected
or maintained in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or as to
distract the attention of the driver of any vehicle by reasons of the position,
shape, or color thereof. No sign or advertising structure shall be erected or
maintained in such a manner as to be likely to interfere with, obstruct the view
of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
17. No Portable Sign. Portable signs require approval by the Village Board.
18. Sign Illumination. Signs may have constant illumination provided that any
sign located in direct line of vision of any traffic control signal shall not have
illumination of red, green, or amber color.
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 4
19. Non-Allowed Signage. Signs consisting of neon or series lighting for
window or building outlining borders is specifically prohibited unless
recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Village Board.
20. Sign – Square Foot Area. Both faces of a double sided, or all faces of a
multiple sided sign shall be counted for calculation of total sign area. Where
reference is made to size allowed in square feet in this Ordinance, it shall
apply to the square footage of all faces.
Ground signs, pole signs, and pylon signs may be double faced.
21. Political Sign. Political signs shall not be classified as signs for the purpose
of this Ordinance, except that they shall be limited in size to six (6) square feet
and may be double-sided and can be located only on private property, not in a
public right-of-way, or blocking vision clearance.
22. Address Numerals. All properties and buildings shall have address numerals
that are legible from the street which shall be in addition to all other approved
signage.
23. Temporary Sign. A temporary sign shall include any sign, banner, pennant,
valance or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric,
cardboard, wall board or other light materials, with or without frames,
intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. Temporary signs require
a permit issued by the Building Department in accordance with Subsection 4
of this section. Issuance of a temporary permit shall mean that the permittee
understands that representatives of the Building Department have the
authority to enter his/her property to remove any temporary sign in violation
of this section. Temporary signs must meet the applicable zoning district
requirements with respect to size, height, location, and allowable time period.
Temporary signs that require the approval of the Village Board prior to
issuance of a permit are as follows:
a. Inflatable advertising devices, as defined by Section 3.02.
b. Portable signs, including, but not limited to, “A” frame or sandwich board
signs and wheeled changeable copy signs (whether or not permanently
mounted on wheels).
c. “For sale” or “for lease” real estate signs that are larger than the maximum
sign area permitted within the applicable zoning district, pursuant with this
section.
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 5
24. Placement of Signs on Lots. Only signs erected by the Village of Itasca or
the State of Illinois shall be permitted within a public right-of-way. All other
signs shall be placed no closer than five (5) feet from any lot line.
No signs having a height of more than thirty (30) inches above the crown of
the adjacent streets shall be constructed or placed within the part of the yard or
open area of a corner lot which is included within a triangular area of twentyfive
(25) feet from the point of intersection of the two (2) street right-of-way
lines forming such corner lot. No signs shall be located within a triangular
area of fifteen (15) feet from the point of intersection of a public street rightof-
way and driveway or private street.
25. No Off-Premises Advertising Sign. No off-premises advertising signs are
permitted in any zoning district.
26. Master Sign Plan. Multi-business buildings shall submit a Master Sign Plan
prior to receiving any and all permits pertaining to a sign. The Master Sign
Plan shall be in a format determined by the Zoning Administrator and, at a
minimum, shall state what percentage of the gross surface area of all signs on
each frontage and on the lot shall be allocated to each business. The Master
Sign Plan shall be kept on file at the Community Development Department.
No permit shall be issued for a sign unless a Master Sign Plan for the
property, approved by the Zoning Administrator, is on file with the
Community Development Department and the proposed sign conforms to the
Master Sign Plan and this ordinance.
13.02 DEFINITIONS
See Section 3.02.
13.03 SIGN PROVISIONS
1. Residence District Provisions
a. Signs. Non-illuminated nameplates are permitted subject to the following
regulations:
(1) In R-1, R-2 Single Family and R-3 General Residence Districts, for
all residence categories, except multi-family, a nameplate shall not
exceed one hundred and forty-four (144) square inches in area, and
shall indicate only the name and address of the occupant; there shall
be not more than one (1) such nameplate for each dwelling; it shall
be affixed to the dwelling flat against the door, or on the wall
adjacent thereto, or within the boundaries of the zoning lot as
provided herein.
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 6
(2) In an R-3 General Residence District, for a multiple-family
dwelling, a nameplate may not be more than three (3) square feet in
area, provided it indicates only the name or names and address of
the dwelling, such a nameplate may be affixed against the building,
but not located higher than one (1) story or twenty (20) feet above
curb level, whichever is lower. Such a nameplate may also be
located in a yard adjoining a street, provided it is not closer to the
street line than one-half (1/2) the depth of the yard or fifteen (15)
feet, whichever is less, and does not exceed four (4) feet in height.
(3) An exception to these location limitations shall be made for lantern
post signs which may be placed as close as three (3) feet from the
street right-of-way line and have a height not exceeding seven (7)
feet from grade, or for name and/or address plates affixed to mail
box posts. Signs so mounted shall have no sharp or protruding
edges that might be designated as hazardous.
(4) An approved Village of Itasca Historical District plaque is allowed
and is not to exceed one hundred forty-four (144) square inches in
area and shall be affixed flat against the building or structure. The
plaque is allowed in addition to all other approved signage.
(5) Readable and visible address numerals are required in addition to all
other approved signage.
(6) Temporary signs, not exceeding six (6) square feet, are allowed for a
period of time not to exceed four (4) weeks per year when approved
by the Village Board of Trustees, excluding political and real estate
signs.
b. Non-illuminated “For Sale” and “For Rent” Signs. Non-illuminated
“For Sale” and “For Rent” signs are permitted subject to the following:
There shall be not more than one (1) sign per zoning lot except that on a
corner lot, two (2) signs, one (1) facing each street, shall be permitted. No
sign shall exceed six (6) square feet in area for a single sign face and not
more than twelve (12) square feet for a double faced sign, and be closer
than eight (8) feet to any side and rear lot line, nor closer to the front lot
line than one-half (1/2) the depth of the front yard or fifteen (15) feet,
whichever is less. Such a sign when affixed flat against the building, shall
not project higher than one (1) story, or twenty (20) feet above curb level,
whichever is lower; and a ground sign shall not project higher than eight
(8) feet above ground grade (see Section 3.02).
c. ”For Sale,” “For Rent,” and “Construction” Signs for Vacant
Property (Exceeding One (1) Acre). “For Sale”, “For Rent”, and
“Construction” signs for vacant property only, not less than one (1) acre:
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 7
One (1) sign containing not more than twelve (12) square feet of total
copy area for a single sign face and not more than twenty-four (24) square
feet of total copy area for a double faced sign shall be permitted. No sign
shall exceed eight (8) feet in height above grade. All such signs shall be
temporary and shall be permitted for a period of time not to exceed eight
(8) months, except construction signs may be maintained for the duration
of construction.
d. Real Estate “Open House” Signs. One site and no more than two (2)
offsite, standard size real estate “open house” signs are permitted during
weekends only, from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Any real estate “open house”
sign installed on days other than weekends, or not removed by 6:00 p.m.
on Saturday or Sunday, shall be confiscated and held by the Village for
twenty-four (24) hours. The fee to have the confiscated sign returned shall
be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). After twenty-four (24) hours, any sign
not recovered shall be disposed of.
e. Illuminated Signs. Illuminated, non-flashing church or school
identification and/or bulletin board signs are permitted subject to the
following regulations:
(1) There shall be not more than (1) sign per zoning lot, except that on a
corner lot, two (2) signs, one (1) facing each street, shall be
permitted, provided that such a sign or signs shall be located on the
same lot as the principal church or school use.
(2) No sign shall exceed forty-eight (48) square feet in area and be
closer than eight (8) feet to any side and rear lot line, nor closer to
the front lot line that one-half (1/2) the depth of the front yard or
fifteen (15) feet, whichever is less.
(3) Such a sign, when affixed against the building, shall not project
higher than one (1) story, or twenty (20) feet above curb level,
whichever is lower; and a ground sign shall not project higher than
eight (8) feet above ground grade (see Section 3.02).
2. Business District Provisions. In Business Districts, the following signs are
permitted subject to the requirements set forth herein.
a. B-1 Limited Business District. No off-premises advertising signs will be
permitted. Non-flashing illuminated business signs with no moving parts,
awnings or marquees are permitted when accessory to the principle use of
the property upon which it is located, subject to applicable regulations set
forth in the ordinance of the Village of Itasca and the following:
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 8
(1) The illumination of any exterior sign shall be only during business
hours and no later than 11:00 p.m. Where a sign is illuminated,
direct rays of light shall not beam upon any part of any existing
residential building, or into a Residence District, or into a street
right-of-way.
(2) The total gross surface area in square feet of all signs on a zoning lot
shall not exceed the number of lineal feet of the frontage of the
building nor exceed ninety-six (96) square feet, whichever is less
and may be double faced. Each side of a building which abuts upon
a street shall be considered as a separate frontage. The gross area of
all signs located on each side of a lot or building butting a street
shall not exceed the number of lineal feet in such separate building
frontage nor ninety-six (96) square feet whichever is smaller and the
types of signs allowed shall be limited to one ground sign as
specified in paragraph (6) and wall signs.
(3) Wall signs shall be affixed flush against building walls and shall not
project therefrom more than eighteen (18) inches; and no sign shall
be painted, pasted, or similarly posted directly on the surface of any
building, wall or fence.
(4) No wall sign shall project higher than then building height or twenty
(20) feet above the curb level, whichever is lower.
(5) The lowest part of any canopy, wall sign, or marquee, or any support
thereof which extends over any public way shall be not less than
eight (8) feet above the level of the walk or public way over which it
extends; but no such sign shall be maintained over any sidewalk
crossed by vehicles if any part of its support or portion of the sign is
less than twelve (12) feet above the level of such public way.
(6) One (1) ground mounted sign shall be permitted for each zoning lot.
Such sign shall be limited to only one of the following: an
individual business sign, a tenant directory, an advertising sign, or a
multiple use facility sign. Such sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet
high, minimum front yard setback of fifteen (15) feet or one-half
(1/2) of the required front yard setback, whichever is less, shall be
maintained, may be illuminated, may be double faced and the total
gross surface area of a single face shall not exceed twelve (12)
square feet and the total gross area shall not exceed twenty-four (24)
square feet if double faced. Any additional gross surface area may
be allowed when recommended by the Plan Commission and
approved by the Village Board but not to exceed the total gross
surface area on a zoning lot.
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 9
(7) Temporary signs pertaining to the sale or lease of the property or
new construction shall not be more than forty-eight (48) square feet
in area, and shall be shielded from view from residential zoned
property. The maximum height shall not exceed ten (10) feet. Such
signs shall be removed upon sale or lease of the building or space or
completion of construction. Temporary “for sale,” “for lease,” and
“construction” signs require issuance of a temporary permit by the
Building Department in accordance with Subsection 13.01 General
Requirements, with the exception that signs that exceed the size or
height limit requirements of this subsection require approval by the
Village Board.
(8) Temporary signs announcing business grand openings, special sales,
or other special events shall be shielded from view from residential
zoned property. Such signs require issuance of a temporary permit
by the Building Department in accordance with Subsection 13.01
General Requirements and may be utilized for a period of time not
to exceed four (4) weeks, no more than three (3) times per calendar
year. Issuance of a new temporary permit is required for each four
(4) week time period.
b. B-2 Community Business and B-3 Service Business Districts. No offpremises
advertising signs will be permitted. Non-flashing but illuminated
business signs with no moving parts, awnings, and marquees are permitted
when accessory to the principle use of the property upon which it is
located, subject to regulations set forth elsewhere in the ordinances of the
Village of Itasca and the following:
(1) Where a sign is illuminated, direct rays of light shall not beam upon
any part of any existing residential buildings, nor into a Residence
District, or into a street right-of-way.
(2) The gross surface area in square feet of all non-ground signs on a lot
shall not exceed one and one-half (1-1/2) times the lineal feet of
frontage of the building, nor three-hundred (300) square feet,
whichever is smaller, and may be double faced. Each side of a
building which abuts upon a street shall be considered as separate
frontage. The gross surface area of all non-ground signs located on
each side of a lot, or building abutting a street shall not exceed one
and one-half (1-1/2) times the lineal feet of the separate building
frontage or three-hundred (300) square feet, whichever is smaller,
and the types of signs allowed shall be limited to wall signs, ground
signs as specified in Paragraph (7), and pole signs as specified in
Paragraphs (4) and (8). Projecting signs are prohibited. Each
business shall be limited to a maximum of one non-ground sign per
frontage not to exceed an area of eighty (80) square feet.
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 10
(3) No sign shall project more than eighteen (18) inches into a street
right-of-way.
(4) Any allowed pole (pylon) sign located within three (3) feet of a
driveway, parking area or within fifty (50) feet of the intersection of
two (2) or more streets shall have the lowest elevation, not less than
twelve (12) feet above the curb level.
(5) Wall signs shall be affixed flat against building walls and shall not
project more than eighteen (18) inches and shall not be painted,
pasted or similarly posted directly on the surface of any building,
wall or fence.
(6) No sign shall project higher than the building height, or thirty (30)
feet above the curb level, whichever is lower.
(7) One (1) ground mounted sign shall be permitted for each zoning lot
unless such lot is a through lot or has double frontage in which case
two (2) ground signs may be allowed when recommended by the
Plan Commission and approved by the Village Board. Such signs
shall be limited to only one of the following: an individual business
sign, a tenant directory, an advertising sign, or multiple use facility
sign. Such signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height, a
minimum front yard setback of fifteen (15) feet, or one half (1/2) the
required front yard setback, whichever is less, shall be maintained,
may be illuminated, may be double faced and the total gross for a
single face surface area shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet
in the B-2 Community Business District and forty-eight (48) square
feet for a single face in the B-3 Service Business District. Any
additional gross surface area may be allowed when recommended by
the Plan Commission and approved by the Village Board, subject to
the limitations as set forth in Paragraph (2).
(8) For service stations and retail or service uses in the B-3 District
only: One (1) pole (pylon) sign per street frontage not to exceed
twenty (20) feet in height nor forty-eight (48) feet in area, for a
single face will be allowed when recommended by the Plan
Commission and approved by the Village Board, subject to the
limitations set forth in Paragraph (2).
(9) Directional signs within the zoning lot and behind the minimum
front yard setback shall be permitted in addition to other allowed
signs when said sign is placed so as to have its highest point below
five (5) feet above grade. Said directional sign shall not be used for
advertising purposes; it shall direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic to
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 11
parking areas, loading areas, or to portions of a building.
Directional signs shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in area.
Directional signs at entrance points shall be set back fifteen (15) feet
from all public right-of-way lines.
(10) Temporary signs pertaining to the sale or lease of the property or
new construction shall not be more than forty-eight (48) square feet
in area, and shall be shielded from view from residential zoned
property. The maximum height shall not exceed ten (10) feet. Such
signs shall be removed upon sale or lease of the building or space or
completion of construction. Temporary “for sale,” “for lease,” and
“construction” signs require issuance of a temporary permit by the
Building Department in accordance with Subsection 13.01 General
Requirements, with the exception that signs that exceed the size or
height limit requirements of this subsection require approval by the
Village Board.
(11) Temporary signs announcing business grand openings, special sales,
or other special events shall be shielded from view from residential
zoned property. Such signs require issuance of a temporary permit
by the Building Department in accordance with Subsection 13.01
General Requirements and may be utilized for a period of time not
to exceed four (4) weeks, no more than three (3) times per calendar
year. Issuance of a new temporary permit is required for each four
(4) week time period.
c. Downtown Business Districts (B-4, B-5 & B-6). No off-premises
advertising signs will be permitted. Non-flashing illuminated business
signs with no moving parts, awnings or marquees are permitted when
accessory to the principle use of the property upon which it is located,
subject to applicable regulations set forth in the ordinances of the Village
of Itasca and the following:
(1) All signs shall comply to the standards set forth in the Downtown
Design Guidelines.
(2) One (1) ground-mounted (monument) sign shall be permitted for
each zoning lot. Such sign shall be limited to only one of the
following: an individual business sign, a tenant directory, an
advertising sign, or a multiple use facility sign. Such sign shall not
be greater than five (5) feet in height; may be double-sided; and
shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet per face in the B-4 district
and twenty-four (24) square feet per face in the B-5 and B-6
districts.
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 12
(3) Freestanding (pole) signs shall be prohibited in the Traditional
Downtown (B-4, B-5 and B-6 zoning districts). Monument signs
shall be permitted provided they are not greater than five (5) feet in
height. Pylon signs shall be prohibited. (See Section 13.01.8 –
Non-Conforming Existing Signs).
(4) No wall sign shall project higher than the building height, or twenty
(20) feet above the curb level, whichever is lower. Wall signs shall
be mounted parallel to building facades. Projecting signs shall be
mounted perpendicular to building facades; may be double-sided;
and shall not exceed fourteen (14) square feet per face.
(5) A minimum front yard setback of fifteen (15) feet or one-half (1/2)
of the required front yard setback, whichever is less, shall be
maintained. Where no front yard setback is required (B-4 District),
regulations governing Placement of Signs on Lots shall still apply
(Section 13.01.24).
(6) The illumination of any exterior sign shall be only during business
hours and no later than 11:00 p.m., when abutting any residentially
zoned property. Where a sign is illuminated, direct rays of light
shall not beam upon any part of any existing residential building, or
into a Residence District, or into a street right-of-way.
(7) Neon signs shall be prohibited. Internally lit signs shall be
prohibited in the B-4 and B-5 zoning districts.
(8) The lowest part of any canopy, projecting, wall or marquee sign, or
any support thereof which extends over any public way shall be not
less than eight (8) feet above the level of the walk or public way
over which it extends; but no such sign shall be maintained over any
sidewalk crossed by vehicles if any part of its support or portion of
the sign is less than twelve (12) feet above the level of such public
way.
(9) Maximum letter height on signs in the Traditional Downtown area
shall be 18 inches in the B-4 and B-5 districts, and 24 inches in the
B-6 District.
(10) In the B-4 and B-5 districts, the total gross surface area in square
feet of all non-ground signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed one and
one-quarter (1-1/4) times the number of lineal feet of the frontage
of the building or one-hundred twenty (120), whichever is less, and
may be double faced. Each side of a building that abuts on a street
shall be considered as a separate frontage. The gross area of all nonground
signs located on each side of a lot or building abutting a
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 13
street shall not exceed one and one-quarter (1-1/4) times the number
of lineal feet in such separate building frontage or one-hundred
twenty (120) square feet, whichever is less. Each business shall be
limited to a maximum of one projecting sign per frontage and one
other non-ground sign per frontage not to exceed a total area of
forty-eight (48) square feet for both signs per frontage.
(11) In the B-6 district, the total gross surface area in square feet of all
non-ground signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed one and one-half
(1-1/2) times the lineal feet of the frontage of the building or onehundred
twenty (120) square feet, whichever is less, and may be
double faced. Each side of a building that abuts a street shall be
considered as a separate frontage. The gross surface area of all nonground
signs located on each side of a lot or building abutting a
street shall not exceed one and one-half (1-1/2) times the lineal feet
in such separate building frontage or one-hundred twenty (120)
square feet, whichever is less. Each business shall be limited to one
projecting sign per frontage and one other non-ground sign per
frontage not to exceed a total area of forty-eight (48) square feet for
both signs per frontage.
3. Office-Research District Provisions
In the Office-Research District, the following signs are permitted, subject to
the review by the Plan Commission with the recommendations to the Village
Board of their approval for all signs in excess of forty-eight (48) square feet in
size and compliance with the requirements set forth herein.
a. All signs shall be accessory to the principal use of the property upon
which it is located and shall be subject to the provisions for this Section
except as herein provided. All signs shall indicate only the name, insignia
and address of the principal use or user. For the purpose of this district,
sign area shall be considered as the entire area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign. The gross surface area
and square footage of all signs on a lot shall not exceed two times the
lineal feet of frontage of the building nor two hundred forty (240) square
feet, whichever is less.
b. For each building, not more than one (1) wall sign attached to the building
and one (1) free standing ground sign shall be permitted.
c. Entrance signs may be permitted at each entrance when located on the
same street providing the entrances shall not be closer than three hundred
(300) feet from any other entrance (see Section 3.02).
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 14
d. On corner or through lots, one (1) additional wall and ground sign may be
constructed on a second street (public and/or private) in this district and
the total gross surface area shall be subject to the limitations set forth in
Paragraph a. above.
e. For each building, not more than one (1) wall sign may be attached to a
building except when the building has multiple uses having separate
entrances, then any additional entrance signs may be allowed if
recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Village
Board.
Wall signs shall not extend above the roof line nor project beyond or
overhang the wall or any permanent architectural feature by more than one
(1) foot. Signs shall not be permitted to be painted, pasted or similarly
posted directly on the wall of the building or structure. Wall signs shall
not exceed ten (10) percent of the total area of the front facade and in no
instance shall the wall sign exceed one hundred sixty (160) square feet in
area.
In a multiple use building with more than a single front facade, each
exterior building wall when including a main entrance may be considered
a front facade. The total area requirement may apply.
Where two (2) exterior building walls involve the same business, only the
wall with the main entrance shall be considered the front façade.
f. Temporary signs pertaining to the sale or lease of the property or new
construction shall not be made more than one hundred sixty (160) square
feet in area, and shall be shielded from view from residential zoned
property. The maximum height shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet. Such
signs shall be removed upon sale or lease of the building or space or
completion of construction. Temporary “for sale,” “for lease,” and
“construction” signs require issuance of a temporary permit by the
Building Department in accordance with Subsection 13.01 General
Requirements, with the exception that signs that exceed the size or height
limit requirements of this subsection require approval by the Village
Board.
g. Except to depict time and temperature, no moving or flashing parts, lights,
or devices shall be permitted. All incandescent and other light sources
shall be shielded from view from residential zoned property. No lighting
fixture shall be so located and directed as to be a hazard to traffic safety.
h. For all free-standing accessory signs, a minimum front yard setback of
fifteen (15) feet shall be maintained.
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 15
i. Directional signs within the zoning lot and behind the minimum front yard
setback shall be permitted in addition to other allowed signs when said
sign is placed so as to have its highest point below five (5) feet above
grade. Said directional sign shall not be used for advertising purposes; it
shall direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic to parking areas, loading areas,
or to portions of a building. Directional signs shall not exceed twelve (12)
square feet in area. Directional signs at entrance points shall be set back
fifteen (15) feet from all public right-of-way lines.
j. Each unified development composed of office, business, governmental
and medical uses shall be permitted one (1) pole (pylon) sign or one (1)
ground sign (see Definitions, Section 3.02) for each entrance from and/or
along arterial freeway abutting frontage to such use. Such signs shall not
exceed thirty (30) feet in height, for a pole sign, or eight (8) feet in height
for a ground sign nor exceed a total of one hundred twenty (120) square
feet in area for each sign surface, may be double-faced and shall not be
placed nearer than fifteen (15) feet to the right-of-way line; and shall
indicate only the name, insignia, and address of the entire development.
k. Temporary signs announcing business grand openings, special sales, or
other special events shall be shielded from view from residential zoned
property. Such signs require issuance of a temporary permit by the
Building Department in accordance with Subsection 13.01 General
Requirements and may be utilized for a period of time not to exceed four
(4) weeks, no more than three (3) times per calendar year. Issuance of a
new temporary permit is required for each four (4) week time period.
4. Regional Office Center District
In the Regional Office Center District, the following signs are permitted,
subject to review by the Plan Commission with recommendation to the
Village Board for their approval for all signs in excess of forty-eight (48)
square feet in size in compliance with the requirements set forth herein.
a. All signs shall be accessory to the principal use of the property upon
which it is located and shall be subject to the provisions as herein
provided. All signs shall indicate only the name, insignia and address of
the principal use or user. For the purpose of this district, sign area shall be
considered as the entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of a sign.
b. For each building, not more than one (1) wall sign attached to the building
and one (1) free standing sign shall be permitted, except in the case of
buildings on through lots or corners, one (1) additional wall or ground sign
may be constructed on the second street in the District.
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 16
c. Wall Signs: for each building, not more than one (1) wall sign may be
attached to a building except as provided in Paragraph b., and when the
building has multiple uses having separate entrances, then any additional
entrance signs may be allowed, if recommended by the Plan Commission
and approved by the Village Board where such entrance is intended for the
exclusive use of the identified user and is further subject to the limitations
as provided in the definition of Entrance Signs.
Wall signs shall not extend above the roof line nor project beyond or
overhang the wall or any permanent architectural feature by more than one
(1) foot. Wall Signs shall not be permitted to be painted, pasted or
similarly posted directly on the wall of a building or structure. All signs
shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total area of the front façade and in
no instance shall the wall sign exceed two hundred forty (240) square feet
in area.
In a multiple use building with more than a single front facade, each
exterior building wall when including a main entrance may be considered
a front facade. The total area requirement shall apply.
Where two (2) exterior building walls involve the same business, only the
wall with the main entrance shall be considered the front façade.
d. On corner and/or through lots, one (1) additional wall and ground sign
may be constructed on a second street (public and/or private) in this
district and the total gross surface area shall comply with this Section.
e. Temporary signs pertaining to the sale or lease of the property or new
construction shall not be more than one hundred sixty (160) square feet in
area, and shall be shielded from view from residential zoned property.
The maximum height shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet. Such signs shall
be removed upon sale or lease of the building or space or completion of
construction. Temporary “for sale,” “for lease,” and “construction” signs
require issuance of a temporary sign permit by the Building Department in
accordance with Subsection 13.01 General Requirements, with the
exception that signs that exceed the size or height limit requirements of
this subsection require approval by the Village Board.
f. Except to depict time and temperature, no moving or flashing parts, lights,
or devices shall be permitted. All incandescent and other light sources
shall be shielded from view from residentially zoned property. No
lighting fixture shall be so located and directed as to be a hazard to traffic
safety.
g. Directional signs will be allowed, in addition to other allowed signage
within the lot area and behind the minimum front yard setback, when said
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 17
sign is placed so as to have its highest point below five (5) feet above
grade. Said directional signs direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic to
parking areas, loading areas, addresses, streets, portions of a building, or
to building sites and shall not be used for advertising purposes unless
recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Village Board
of Trustees. Directional signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in
area unless recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the
Village Board of Trustees, and in no event shall any individual directional
sign exceed twenty-six (26) square feet in area. Directional signs at an
entrance point shall be set back fifteen (15) feet from a public right-of-way
line.
h. Each unified development composed of a complex of office and retail
outlets shall be permitted one (1) pole (pylon) sign or ground sign (see
Definitions, Section 3.02) for each arterial or freeway providing frontage
to such use when recommended by the Plan Commission (see Section
4.04.5) and approved by the Village Board. Such pole (pylon) sign shall
not exceed thirty (30) feet in height, and each grounds sign shall not
exceed eight (8) feet in height, nor exceed a total of one hundred twenty
(120) square feet in area, for each sign surface, may be double-faced, and
shall not be placed nearer than fifteen (15) feet from a right-of-way line;
and shall indicate only the name insignia and address of the entire
development.
i. Temporary signs announcing business grand openings, special sales, or
other special events shall be shielded from view from residential zoned
property. Such signs require issuance of a temporary permit by the
Building Department in accordance with Subsection 13.01 General
Requirements and may be utilized for a period of time not to exceed four
(4) weeks, no more than three (3) times per calendar year. Issuance of a
new temporary permit is required for each four (4) week time period.
5. Manufacturing District Provisions
In the Manufacturing District, no off-premises advertising signs will be
permitted. Other signs are permitted, subject to the requirements set forth
herein.
a. Where a sign is illuminated, direct rays of light shall not beam upon any
part of an existing residential building, into a Residence District, or onto a
street. A sign shall not have moving parts or flashing illumination.
b. The gross surface area in square feet of all signs on a lot shall not exceed
three (3) times the number of lineal feet of the building frontage on a lot;
and each side of a building adjoining a street shall be considered as
separate building frontage.
SECTION 13 SIGNS
13 - 18
c. Wall signs shall be affixed flat against the building and shall not project
therefrom more than eighteen (18) inches.
d. Signs affixed to a building wall shall not project higher than thirty (30)
feet above curb level, nor higher than the building height, whichever is
lower, and may not be located upon a chimney spire, tower, elevator
penthouse, tanks or similar projections.
e. Signs affixed to a building shall not exceed two hundred forty (240)
square feet per building frontage wherein each side of a building which
abuts upon a street shall be considered as a separate frontage.
f. One ground sign, not more than forty-eight (48) square feet in gross area
and not more than eight (8) feet in height may be erected in a front yard
not less than fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way line at each
entrance of the zoning lot which is not closer than three hundred (300) feet
from any other entrance on that lot.
g. One (1) pole (pylon) sign (see Definitions, Section 3.02) shall be
permitted for any building on a zoning lot which abuts a freeway for retail
and service uses within the zoning district when recommended by the Plan
Commission (see Section 4.04.5) and approved by the Village Board.
Such pylon sign shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height, nor exceed a
total of one hundred twenty (120) square feet in total area of sign surface,
may be double-faced, and shall not be placed nearer than fifteen (15) feet
from a right-of-way line.
h. Temporary signs pertaining to the sale or lease of the property shall not be
more than forty-eight (48) square feet in area and shall be shielded from
view from residential zoned property. The maximum height shall not
exceed ten (10) feet. Such signs shall be removed upon sale or lease of the
building or space or completion of construction. Temporary “for sale,”
“for lease,” and construction signs require issuance of a temporary sign
permit by the Building Department in accordance with Subsection 13.01
General Requirements, with the exception that signs that exceed the size
or height limit requirements of this subsection require approval by the
Village Board.
i. Temporary signs announcing business grand openings, special sales, or
other special events shall be shielded from view from residential zoned
property. Such signs require issuance of a temporary permit by the
Building Department in accordance with Subsection 13.01 General
Requirements and may be utilized for a period of time not to exceed four
(4) weeks, no more than three (3) times per calendar year. Issuance of a
new temporary permit is required for each four (4) week time period.
j. Directional Signs (see Section 3.02).
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 1
14.00 ADMINISTRATION
14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. Administration. The administration of this Ordinance is hereby vested in the
following:
a. The Village Board of Trustees
b. The Zoning Administrator
c. The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
14.02 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
The Building Commissioner, as Zoning Administrator, shall be in charge of the
administration and enforcement of this Ordinance.
1. Duties. The Building Commissioner shall direct the Building Department to:
a. Receive required applications, issue permits, and furnish zoning
certificates and certificates of occupancy.
b. Examine premises for which permits have been issued and make necessary
inspections to determine compliance.
c. When requested by the President of the Board of Trustees, or when the
interest of the Village so requires, make investigations and render written
reports.
d. Issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
e. Adopt rules and procedures consistent with this Ordinance.
f. Keep permanent and comprehensive current records of applications,
permits, certificates, inspections, reports, notices, orders and all localized
actions of the Board of Trustees and shall file the same permanently by
street address.
g. Keep an up-to-date Zoning District Map in accordance with Chapter 24,
Division 13, of the Illinois Compiled Statutes as amended, and an up-todate
map of existing land uses.
h. Keep all records open for public inspections, at reasonable hours with
reasonable notice, but not for removal from the Zoning Administrator’s
office.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 2
i. Provide a report to the President of the Board of Trustees, not less than
once each month to summarize permits issued.
j. Request and receive the assistance and cooperation of the Police
Department, the Village attorney and other Village officials.
k. Be entitled to rely upon any opinion of the Village Attorney as to the
interpretation of this Ordinance, or the legal application of this Ordinance
to any factual situation.
l. Discharge such other duties as may be placed upon the Zoning
Administrator by this Ordinance.
m. With exercise of its duties, provide such clerical and technical assistance
as may be required by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals.
14.03 ZONING CERTIFICATES
No permit pertaining to any land or buildings shall be issued unless the Zoning
Administration has certified, after examination, that it complies with all
provisions of this Ordinance and a Zoning Certificate has been issued and
approved by the Village Board. In the O-R Office Research District and the ROC
– Regional Office Center District, when the use is strictly office in nature and is
so certified by an affidavit with occupancy information from the tenant or
landlord, a Zoning Certificate is not required. Zoning Certificates are not required
for the remodeling, renovation of, or expansion of any existing and approved use
of a building when the existing occupant has an approved Zoning Certificate.
A zoning certificate may be issued for a temporary use for a predetermined period
of time in any Zoning District when the Zoning Administrator determines that the
temporary use is compatible with the primary use of the property and in the public
interest and when the temporary use is approved by the Board of Trustees.
14.04 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
1. No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected or altered
shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any purpose whatsoever
until a Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued by the Zoning
Administrator, stating that the building complies with all the building and
health laws and ordinances and with the provisions of these regulations. No
change of use shall be made in any building, or part thereof, now or hereafter
erected or altered, without a permit having been issued to make such change
unless it is in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and
amendments thereto.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 3
Nothing in this Section shall prevent the continuance of the present legal
occupancy or use of any existing building, except as may be necessary for the
safety of life and property.
2. Every application for a building permit shall be deemed to be an application
for an occupancy certificate. Every application for an occupancy certificate
for a new use of land where no building permit is required shall be made
directly to the Zoning Administrator.
A Certificate of Occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincident
with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within twentyone
(21) days after the erection or alteration of such building has been
completed when a final inspection has been requested by Contractor and the
building space is found to be in compliance with applicable codes and
ordinances. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the
Zoning Administrator, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person
having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. A cash bond in
the amount set forth in the Building Code of the Village of Itasca shall be
posted with the Building Commissioner at the time of application for
certificate of occupancy and compliance.
14.05 CERTIFICATE FOR CONTINUED OCCUPANCY OF NONCONFORMING
USES
Certificates for the continued occupancy of non-conforming uses existing at the
time of passage of this Ordinance or made non-conforming by this Ordinance
shall state that the use is a non-conforming one and does not conform with the
provisions of this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the owners
of the property being used as a non-conforming use and shall furnish said owner
with a Certificate of Occupancy for such non-conforming use, subject to the
provisions of this Ordinance.
14.06 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
1. Creation and Membership.
a. The Village of Itasca Plan Commission shall act as the Zoning Board of
Appeals and is hereby authorized to be established. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall consist of seven (7) members, appointed by the President of
the Village and confirmed by the Board of Trustees. The members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve respectively for the following terms:
one for one (1) year; one for two (2) years; one for three (3) years; one for
four (4) years; one for five (5) years; one for six (6) years; one for seven
(7) years; the successor to each member so appointed shall serve for a
term of five (5) years. One of the members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be, by the President of the Village, designated as
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 4
Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals and shall hold said office as
Chairperson for a period of one year, or until a successor is appointed.
Such Chairperson may administer oaths and compel attendance of
witnesses. In the absence of the Chairperson, the Acting Chairperson may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The President of
the Village shall have the power to remove any member of the Zoning
Board of Appeals for cause and after a public hearing. Vacancies upon the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filled for the unexpired term of the
member whose place has become vacant, in the manner herein provided
for appointment of such member.
b. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of
the Chairperson and at such time as the Zoning Board of Appeals may
determine.
All hearings conducted by the Zoning Board of Appeals under this
Ordinance shall be in accordance with Illinois statutes. In all proceedings
of the Zoning Board of Appeals provided for in this Ordinance, the
Chairperson, and in his/her absence the Vice Chairperson, shall have the
power to administer oaths. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing
provided for in this Ordinance shall be given under oath. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings and shall also keep
records of its hearings and other official actions.
A copy of every rule or regulation, every variation thereof, and every
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Board of
Appeals under this Ordinance shall be filed in the office of the Village
Clerk and shall be a public record. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
adopt its own rules and procedures not in conflict with this Ordinance or
with applicable Illinois Compiled Statutes.
2. Jurisdiction and Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby
invested with the following jurisdiction and authority:
a. to hear appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Zoning Administrator under this Ordinance;
b. to hear variations from the terms provided in this Ordinance in the manner
and subject to the standards set forth in this Section;
c. to hear all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under
this Ordinance.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 5
3. Decisions. All recommendations, after hearing of the Zoning Board of
Appeals, on appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Zoning Administrator shall be submitted to the Village
Board of Trustees for final action.
The Village Board, upon report of the Zoning Board of Appeals, and without
further public hearing, may grant or deny proposed amendment in accordance
with applicable compiled statutes of the State of Illinois, or may refer it back
to the Plan Commission for further consideration.
14.07 PLAN COMMISSION
1. Creation and Membership
a. A Plan Commission is hereby created. The Plan Commission shall consist
of seven (7) members appointed by the President and confirmed by the
Board of Trustees of the Village. The members of the Plan Commission
shall serve respectively for the following terms: One for one (1) year; one
for two (2) years; one for three (3) years; one for four (4) years; one for
five (5) years; one for six (6) years; and one for seven (7) years, the
successor to each member so appointed to serve for a term of four (4)
years. One of the members of the Plan Commission so appointed shall be
named as Chairperson by the President of the Village Board and shall hold
said office until a successor shall be appointed.
The President of the Village shall have the power to remove any member
of said Commission for cause and after a public hearing. Vacancies upon
said Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member
whose place has become vacant in the manner herein provided for the
appointment of such member.
b. All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson, and at such times as the Plan Commission may determine.
All hearings conducted by the Plan Commission under this Ordinance
shall be in accordance with applicable Illinois Compiled Statutes. In all
proceedings of the Plan Commission provided for in this Ordinance, the
Chairman, and in his/her absence, the Vice Chairperson, shall have the
power to administer oaths. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing
provided for in this Ordinance shall be given under oath. The Plan
Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, and shall also keep
records of its hearings and other official actions.
A copy of every rule or order, requirement, decision or determination of
the Plan Commission under this Ordinance shall be filed in the office of
the Village Clerk and shall be a public record. The Plan Commission shall
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 6
adopt its own rules and procedures, not in conflict with this Ordinance or
with applicable Illinois Compiled Statutes.
2. Jurisdiction. The Plan Commission shall have the following duties under this
Ordinance:
a. To receive from the Village Clerk copies of all applications for
amendments or Special uses which have been introduced to the Village
Board;
b. To hold public hearings on matters pertaining to application for Special
Uses and Amendments and submit reports to the Village Board setting
forth its findings of fact and recommendations in the manner prescribed in
this Section for Special Uses and Amendments;
c. To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the provisions
of this Ordinance and to make reports of its recommendations to the
Village Board not less frequently than once each year; and
d. To hear all matters upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance.
3. Decisions. The Village Board, upon report of the Plan Commission, and
without further public hearing, may grant or deny proposed amendment in
accordance with applicable compiled statutes of the State of Illinois, or may
refer it back to the Plan Commission for further consideration.
4. Combined Zoning Board of Appeals and Plan Commission. Refer to
Section 4.04.5 and Ordinance 868-96 in the Appendix.
14.08 APPEALS (See Section 4.04.5)
1. Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from
an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Zoning Administrator or other authorized officials of the Village of Itasca
relating to regulations of this Ordinance.
2. Initiation. An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by any
person, firm or corporation or by any office, department, board, bureau, or
commission aggrieved by an administrative order, requirement, decision or
determination under this Ordinance by the Zoning Administrator or the
authorized official of the Village of Itasca.
3. Processing. An appeal in triplicate with the required fee shall be filed with
the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall forward such appeal to the Zoning
Board of Appeals, for processing in accordance with the Illinois Compiled
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 7
Statutes, as amended, forward one (1) copy to the Zoning Administrator, and
retain one (1) copy for the Village Clerk’s files.
4. Decisions. All recommendations, after hearing of the Zoning Board of
Appeals, on appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Zoning Administrator shall be submitted to the Village
Board of Trustees for final action.
14.09 VARIATIONS (See Section 4.04.5)
1. Purpose. The president and Board of Trustees, by Ordinance, upon the report
of the Zoning Board of Appeals, and only after a public hearing before the
Zoning Board of Appeals, shall decide variations of the provisions of this
Ordinance in harmony with its general purpose and intent, and shall vary them
only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth where the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall have made a finding of fact based upon the standards hereinafter
prescribed that there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of this Ordinance.
2. Notice of Hearing.
a. Contents of Notice. Each Notice of Hearing required by this section shall
contain the following:
(1) the time and place of the hearing;
(2) the particular location for which the variation is requested;
(3) a brief statement of what the proposed variation consists of;
(4) the name of the legal and beneficial owner of the property for which
the variation is requested;
(5) the name of the applicant if different from that of the owner of the
property; and,
(6) any other information prescribed by the Zoning Administrator.
b. Notice Published in the Local Newspaper. Notice of the hearing shall
be published at least once in a local newspaper, not more than thirty (30)
days nor less than fifteen (15) days before such hearing.
c. Notice to Nearby Property Owners. The applicant shall give written
notice to the owners of record, as determined by the records of the local
real estate tax collector, of all property within 250 feet of the boundaries
of the subject property, exclusive of public right of ways not more than
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 8
thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled
public hearing.
(1) For owner-occupied residential properties in the R-1, R-2, or R-3
zoning districts, such written notices shall be property addressed and
either (a) delivered in person by the applicant to the respective
owner(s) of record or (b) sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the respective owners of record. If the written notice is
served in person to the owner(s) of record, the applicant shall have
the owner(s) of record sign a form, as provided by the Zoning
Administrator, listing, at a minimum, the owner(s) of record’s name
and address.
(2) For all other properties, such written notice shall be properly
addressed and sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
respective owners of record.
(3) Every applicant shall file a sworn affidavit with the Village Clerk
prior to the public hearing certifying he or she have given proper
notice as required by the Itasca Zoning Ordinance. The affidavit
shall include: (1)copies of the notices and (2) certified mail receipts
and/or the form with the owner(s) or record’s signatures.
d. If the foregoing requirements providing for the notice publication and
notice to owners of record are not completed within the time frame set
forth, the public hearing shall be canceled and the applicant shall be
required to pay an additional filing fee if the hearing is to be rescheduled.
3. Standards.
a. The President and Board of Trustees shall not vary the provisions of this
Ordinance as authorized in this Section unless the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall have made findings based upon the evidence presented to it
in the following specific cases:
(1) that the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the
regulations governing the district in which it is located;
(2) that the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances, and
(3) that the variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of
the locality.
b. For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall also, in making this determination whether there are
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 9
particular difficulties or particular hardships, take into consideration the
extent to the following facts favorable to the applicant, have been
established by the evidence:
(1) that the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved would bring a particular
hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried
out;
(2) that the conditions upon which the petition for variation is based
would not be applicable generally to other property within the same
zoning classification;
(3) that the purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money from the property, or merely for the
convenience of the owner;
(4) that the alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any
person presently having an interest in the property;
(5) that the granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located; or
(6) that the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light on adjacent property or substantially increase the danger of fire
or otherwise endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or
impair property values within the neighborhood.
c. The Zoning Board of Appeals may require such conditions and restrictions
upon the premises benefited by a variation or as may be necessary to
comply with the standards set forth in this Section to reduce or minimize
the injurious effect to such variation upon other property in the
neighborhood and to implement the general purpose and intent of this
Ordinance.
4. Authorized Variations.
a. Variations from the regulations of this Ordinance may be decided by the
president and the Board of Trustees only in accordance with the standards
set forth in this Section, and only in the following instances and no others:
(1) to permit side or rear yards less than the yard required by the
applicable regulations; front and corner side yards shall be reviewed
by the Plan Commission;
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 10
(2) to permit the use of a lot for a use otherwise prohibited solely
because of the insufficient area of the lot, but in no event shall the
area of a lot, not of record on the effective date of this Ordinance, be
less than ninety (90) percent of the required lot area;
(3) to permit parking lots to be illuminated more than thirty (30)
minutes after the close of the business;
(4) to permit the same off-street parking spaces to qualify as required
spaces for two (2) or more uses, provided that the maximum use of
such facility by each user does not take place during the same hours
or on the same days of the week;
(5) to reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading required to the
extent of not more than one (1) parking space or loading berth, or
twenty (20) percent of the spaces required by applicable regulations,
whichever number is greater;
(6) to increase by not more than twenty-five (25) percent the maximum
distance that required parking spaces are permitted to be located
from the use served; and
(7) to consider any changes to the sign requirements for all districts
other than the Office-Research and/or the Regional Office Center
Districts. In these cases, the Plan Commission shall review and may
recommend and the Board of Trustees may approve any such
variations.
5. Unauthorized Variations. The requests for variations not specifically
required for in Section 14.09.4 under authorized variations shall in no case be
used to accomplish a result which could otherwise be achieved by a rezoning
of the property involved, such as, but not limited to, establishment or
expansion of a use not permitted in a residence district; authorizing the
construction of residences in other than residence district; nor authorizing
other than single family detached residences in the R-1 and R-2 Districts.
6. Re-applications. Any person, firm or corporation having been denied a
variation to the Zoning Ordinance respecting a specific parcel of property may
not reapply for a like variation on said real property until the period of one (1)
year has elapsed since the denial of the application for variation by the
President and Board of Trustees.
7. Decisions. The President and the Board of Trustees, by separate Ordinance
and without further public hearing, may adopt any proposed authorized
variation or may refer it back to the Zoning Board of Appeals for further
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 11
consideration, and any proposed variation which fails to receive the approval
of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be passed except by the favorable
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Itasca.
14.10 AMENDMENTS (see Section 4.04.5)
1. Authority. For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, and
general welfare, conserving the value of property throughout the community,
and lessening or avoiding congestion in the public streets and highways, the
Village Board of Trustees may, from time to time, in the manner hereinafter
set forth, amend the regulations imposed in the districts created by this
Ordinance or amend district boundary lines provided that in all amendatory
Ordinances adopted under the authority of this Section; due allowance shall be
made for existing conditions; the conservation of property values, the Official
Comprehensive Plan, adopted on October 18, 1977 and as amended; the
direction of building development to the best advantage of the entire
community, and the uses of which property is devoted at the same time of the
adoption of such amendatory ordinance.
An amendment shall be granted or denied by the Village Board of Trustees
only after a public hearing before the Plan Commission and a report of its
findings and recommendations has been submitted to the Village Board of
Trustees.
2. Initiation of Amendment. Amendments may be proposed by the Village
Board, by the Plan Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, other
governmental bodies, or by any owner of the property to be redistricted within
the jurisdictional limits of this Ordinance.
3. Application and Processing. An application for an amendment, in
quadruplicate, with the required fee, shall be filed with the Village Clerk and
thereafter introduced into the Village Board by the Village Clerk to the Plan
Commission with a request for a Public Hearing.
Within thirty (30) days after final adjournment of the hearing, the Plan
Commission shall submit a report and recommendations of their finding to the
President and Board of Trustees. The Village Clerk shall transmit the
recommendations of the Plan Commission to the Zoning Board of Appeals,
the Village Board, and the Zoning Administrator. The application shall
include at a minimum:
a. legal description and common address of subject property;
b. current plat of survey locating lot lines and all existing structures;
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 12
c. existing zoning of subject property and all property within one hundred
(100) feet;
d. proposed zoning and land use;
e. ownership or disclosure of beneficial interest; and
f. other information as may be required by the Plan Commission to make a
recommendation on the request.
4. Hearing. Within sixty (60) days of receipt by the Village Clerk of all
required application information and payment of any required fees, the Plan
Commission shall hold a public hearing on such application at a time and
place as shall be established by legal notice of hearing by the Chairperson.
The hearing shall be conducted and a transcript of the proceedings shall be
preserved in accordance with rules prescribed by the Plan Commission.
5. Notice of Hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
published at least once in a local newspaper not more than thirty (30) days,
nor less than fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing. The applicant shall mail
notice to all owners of property located within two hundred fifty (250) feet,
exclusive of public right-of-way from the boundaries of the subject property,
by certified mail, return receipt requested; evidence of mailing such notices
shall be made by the petitioner submitting a certificate listing the names and
addresses of all owners of property within said two hundred fifty (250) feet
hereof to said owners. Such notices shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the public hearing date. Proof of mailing shall be submitted to the
Village Clerk not less than seven (7) days prior to the scheduled hearing date.
If the foregoing requirements providing for mailed notice of hearing and
publication are not complied within the time frame set forth, the public
hearing shall be canceled and the applicant shall be required to pay an
additional filing fee if the hearing is to be rescheduled.
Additionally, any area for which an individual application for a change in
zoning classification is being considered shall be posted for at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the public hearing. The posted notice shall be a minimum
of eight (8) square feet in area, prominently situated on the property so as to
be visible from the nearest street or public way, or as otherwise prescribed by
the Zoning Administrator and shall indicate the present zoning classification,
the proposed zoning classification, the time and place of public hearing, and
any other information prescribed by the Zoning Administrator. Posted notices
shall be removed from the subject area within fifteen (15) days after the public
hearing has been held.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 13
6. Findings of Fact and Recommendation. The Plan Commission shall make
written findings of fact and shall submit same together with its
recommendation to the Village Board within sixty (60) days following the
date of concluding the public hearing on each application, unless said
application is withdrawn or tabled by the petitioner. Where the purpose and
effect of the proposed amendment is to change the zoning classification of a
particular property, the Plan Commission shall make findings based upon the
evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect to the following:
a. compatibility with surrounding land uses and the general area;
b. the zoning classification of property within the general area of the
property in question;
c. the suitability of the subject property to the uses permitted under the
existing zoning classification;
d. the trend of development, if any, in the general area of the subject property
including recent changes, if any, which have taken place in its zoning
classification; and
e. the relationship of the existing zoning classification to the Official
Comprehensive Plan of Itasca, adopted October 18, 1977 and as amended.
The Plan Commission shall not recommend the adoption of a proposed
amendment unless it finds that the adoption of such amendment is in the
public interest and is not solely for the interest of the applicant; and that
either the proposed amendment will correct an existing error or that
changing conditions make the proposed amendment necessary.
7. Action by the Village Board.
a. The Village Board shall not act upon a proposed amendment to this
Ordinance until it shall have received a written report and
recommendation from the Plan Commission on the proposed amendment.
b. The Village Board may grant or deny any application for an amendment,
provided, however, that, in case of a written protest against any proposed
amendment of the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the
owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by
the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage immediately adjoining
or across an alley therefrom; or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of
the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed
with the Clerk of the Village, or if the Plan Commission has recommended
against such amendment, the amendment shall not be passed, except by a
favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the Board of Trustees
of the Village of Itasca, then holding office. In such cases, a copy of the
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 14
written protest shall be served by the protestor or protestors on the
applicant for the proposed amendment and a copy upon the applicant’s
attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of such applicant and
attorney shown in the application for the proposed amendment.
c. If an application or a proposed amendment is not acted upon finally by the
Village Board within (90) days of the date the Board receives the Plan
Commission’s recommendations, and such time is not extended by mutual
consent of the Village Board and petitioner, it shall be deemed to have
been denied.
8. Conditions of Amendments. The Plan Commission may recommend and the
President and Board of Trustees may approve variations of provisions of this
Ordinance, but not limited to, provisions for off-street parking and loading,
landscaping, screening and yard requirements, as may be deemed necessary to
promote the general objectives of this Ordinance and to minimize any
potential injury to the value or use of property in the neighborhood.
9. Effect of Denial of Amendment. No application for a map amendment
which has been denied by the Village Board shall be resubmitted for a period
of one (1) year from the date of the order of denial except on the grounds of
new evidence or proof of change of condition(s) found to be valid by the Plan
Commission and the Village Board.
10. Repeal of Amendment. In any case where a change of boundary lines of the
zoning district map has been granted, and where no development has taken
place within two (2) years, the Plan Commission may recommend to the
Village Board that such zoning be affirmed or repealed and rezoned to its
most appropriate district classification in accordance with the procedures
under this Ordinance for amendments.
14.11 SPECIAL USES (See Section 4.04.5)
1. Purpose. The development and execution of the Zoning Ordinance is based
upon the division of the Village into districts, within any one (1) of which the
use of land and buildings and structures, as related to the land, are essentially
uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are Special Uses which,
because of their unique character, cannot be properly classified in any
particular district or districts without consideration, in each case, of the impact
of those uses upon neighboring lands and upon the public need for the
particular use at the particular locations. Such Special Uses fall into two (2)
categories:
a. Uses operated by a public agency or publicly regulated utilities or uses
traditionally affected with a public interest.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 15
b. Uses entirely private in character, but of such a nature that the operation
may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
neighboring property or public facilities.
2. Authority. Special Uses shall be authorized or denied by the President and
Board of Trustees in accordance with the Illinois Compiled Statues as
amended and the regulations and conditions set forth in this Ordinance for
Special Uses.
No application for a Special Use shall be acted upon by the President and
Board of Trustees until after a public hearing before the Plan Commission and
a written report of its findings of fact and recommendations have been
submitted to the Village Board of Trustees.
3. Initiation of Special Use. Special Uses may be proposed in the manner
prescribed for applications for amendments by any person, firm, or
corporation, with a proprietary interest in the subject property requesting, or
intending to request a zoning certificate.
4. Standards. No Special Use shall be granted by the President and Board of
Trustees unless the Special Use:
a. is deemed necessary for the public convenience at the location;
b. is so designated, located and proposed to be operated such that the public
health, safety and welfare will be protected;
c. will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the
neighborhood in which it is located; and has been recommended by the
Plan Commission and approved by the President and the Board of
Trustees, and conforms, except in the case of a planned development, to
the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located.
5. Hearing. Within thirty (30) days of receipt by the Village Clerk of all
required application information and payment of any required fees, the Plan
Commission shall hold a public hearing on such application at a time and
place as shall be established by legal notice of hearing by the Chairperson.
The hearing shall be conducted and a transcript of the proceedings shall be
preserved in accordance with the rules prescribed by the Plan Commission.
6. Notice of Hearing. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be published
at least once in a local newspaper not more than thirty (30) days, nor less than
fifteen (15) days before such hearing. The applicant shall mail notice to all
owners of property located within two hundred fifty (250) feet exclusive of
public right-of-way from the boundaries of subject property, by certified mail,
return receipt requested; evidence of mailing of such notices shall be by the
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 16
petitioner submitting a certificate listing the names and addresses of all
owners of property within said two hundred fifty (250) feet and affidavit that
the notice was mailed in compliance with the provisions hereof to said
owners. Such notices shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
public hearing date. Proof of mailing shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator not less than seven (7) days prior to the scheduled hearing date.
If the foregoing requirements providing for mailed notice of hearing and
publication are not complied with in the time frame set forth, the public
hearing shall be canceled and the applicant shall be required to pay an
additional filing fee if the hearing is rescheduled.
7. Findings of Fact and Recommendation. The Plan Commission shall make
written findings of fact and shall submit same together with its
recommendations to the Village Board within sixty (60) days following the
date of concluding the public hearing on each application, unless said
application is withdrawn or tabled by the petitioner.
a. The Plan Commission shall make findings based upon the evidence
presented to it in each specific case with respect to the following:
(1) the approval of such Special Use is in the public interest and is not
solely for the interest of the applicant; and
(2) that the proposed use at that particular location requested is
necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility which is in
the interest of public convenience and will contribute to the general
welfare of the neighborhood or community; and
(3) that such use will not under the circumstances of the particular case
be detrimental to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of
person residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property
values or improvements in the vicinity.
(4) that the proposed use will comply with the regulations and
conditions specified in this Ordinance for such use, and with the
stipulations and conditions made a part of the authorization granted
by the Village Board of Trustees.
8. Conditions of Special Uses. The Plan Commission may recommend and the
President and Board of Trustees may approve variations of provisions of this
Ordinance and/or such conditions and restrictions upon the construction,
location, and operation of a Special Use, including, but not limited to,
provisions for off-street parking and loading, landscaping, screening and yard
requirements, as may be deemed necessary to promote the general objectives
of this Ordinance and to minimize any potential injury to the value or use of
property in the neighborhood.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 17
9. Action by the Village Board.
a. The Village Board shall not act upon proposed Special Use until it shall
have received a written report and recommendations from the Plan
Commission on the proposed Special Use.
b. The Village Board may grant or deny any application for Special Use,
provided, however, that in case of a written protest against any proposed
Special Use signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20)
percent of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty
(20) percent of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley there
from; or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage directly
opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the Clerk of the
Village, or if the Plan Commission has recommended against such Special
Use, the Special Use shall not be passed, except by a favorable vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of the Trustees then holding office on the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Itasca.
c. If an application for a proposed Special Use is not acted upon finally by
the Village Board within ninety (90) days of the time the Board received
the Plan Commission’s recommendations, and such time is not extended
by mutual consent of the Village Board and petitioner, it shall be deemed
to have been denied.
10. Effect of Denial of Special Use. No application for Special Use which has
been denied by the Village Board shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1)
year from the date of the order of denial, except on the grounds of new
evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the Plan
Commission and the Village Board.
11. In any case where a Special Use has been granted and where no development
has taken place within two (2) years, the Plan Commission may recommend to
the Village Board that such zoning be affirmed or repealed to the most
appropriate zoned district classification in accordance with the procedures
under this Ordinance.
14.12 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
1. Purpose. To encourage the most orderly development of the properties
through advance planning and thus, assure adequate standards for the
development of residential neighborhoods; provide regulations to encourage a
variety of dwelling types; insure adequate open space; provide for improved
development design; protect residential areas from undue traffic congestion,
protect residential areas from the intrusion of business, industrial and other
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 18
land uses that may create an adverse effect upon the living environment; and
thus, promote the general welfare of the community.
2. Provisions. The basic provisions and requirements concerning planned
development are as follows: the subdivision, development and use of land
containing three (3) or more acres as an integral unit, combining one (1) or
more primary land uses, and which may provide for, but are not limited to
single-family residential, multiple-family residential, education, business,
commercial, industrial, recreational, park and public use areas may be
described as a Planned Development (also refer to Definitions, Section 3.02).
a. In its establishment and authorization as a Special Use, in addition to the
foregoing provisions, the following procedures, requirements, restrictions,
standards and conditions shall be observed.
b. The planned development may be exempted from the provisions of the
Subdivision Regulations and of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of
Itasca to the extent specified in the final authorization of the planned
development’s Special Use Ordinance.
3. Procedure
a. Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held
with the Plan Commission prior to filing a formal application. At such
conference, the applicant shall provide information as to the location of
the proposed planned development, the uses, and approximate area of use
for each use category, topographic map at a maximum of five (5) foot
contours; a list of any and all exceptions to the Subdivision Regulations
and Zoning Ordinance of Itasca, and any other information necessary to
clearly explain the planned development to the Plan Commission.
b. The Plan Commission shall review and consider the proposed plan as to its
compatibility with the Official Comprehensive Plan and the goals and
policies for planning of the Village of Itasca and advise the applicant on
the information, documents, exhibits, drawings, and any limitations on the
proposal that should be included in the application to the Village for a
Special Use Permit for Planned Development.
4. Preliminary Plan. Application for approval of a planned development shall
be filed with the Clerk on a form provided by the Village Clerk, accompanied
by such information prescribed by the Plan Commission. Copies of such
application shall be forwarded by the Village Board of Trustees to the Plan
Commission with a request to hold a public hearing thereof. The application
shall include, at a minimum:
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 19
a. The map or maps which shall be included as part of the application shall
be drawn at scale on one hundred (100) feet to the inch (1” = 100’), or if
the area of the site is more than two hundred (200) acres, two hundred
(200) feet to the inch (1” = 200’). The following information shall be
shown:
(1) Boundary survey. A boundary line survey of the subject site which
shall be prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor.
(2) Topography. The existing topographic character of the land with
contours shown at intervals no greater than two (2) feet.
Topographic data shall refer to the U.S.G.S. North American Datum
Mean Sea Level Elevation.
(3) A preliminary plan of subdivision. If the proposed planned
development constitutes a subdivision as defined by the Village of
Itasca Subdivision Regulations. All preliminary subdivision plans
shall conform to all requirements of the Itasca Subdivision
Regulations; on such plan shall state expressly on its face any
modifications from such requirements specifically requested by the
applicant. A subdivision may be processed simultaneously with an
application for a planned development.
(4) Site Analysis. A detailed site analysis of the property in question,
which shall show the following information:
(a) Physical factors information:
i. existing land uses both on the site and adjacent to it;
ii. scenic views;
iii. wooded areas;
iv. soil problem areas based upon a soil survey of the site to
include a report from the Kane DuPage Soil and Water
Conservation District or the North Cook County Soil and
Water Conservation District. Additional soil information
may be requested by the Plan Commission and/or the
Village Engineer;
v. portions of the site in any floodway and/or flood plain
fridge area;
vi. streams, drainage ditches, culverts and standing water;
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 20
vii. isolate preserveable trees six (6) inches or more in
diameter at one (1) foot above ground level; and
viii. general directions of the storm water runoff across the
property.
(b) Public utilities information which shall show the location and
size of any existing sanitary sewers, storm sewers, gas, electric,
telephone, and water lines both on the site and in easements
and rights-of-way and/or adjacent to the site.
(c) Other Information:
i. existing county and/or municipal zoning on all parts of
the site and on adjacent properties;
ii. municipal corporate boundaries across and adjacent to the
subject site;
iii. school district boundaries across and adjacent to the site;
and;
iv. easements (location, width and purpose) across and
adjacent to the subject site.
(5) Land Use Plan: A proposed land use plan which shall be drawn
upon a print of the topographic map for the site. The proposed land
use plan shall contain the following information:
(a) Identification and description:
i. name of the planned development;
ii. location of the subject site by section, town and range or
by other approved legal description;
iii. name and address of the land planner and/or engineer;
iv. name and address of the owner and/or trust beneficiary or
developer;
v. scale, north point and date of preparation; and
vi. acreage
(b) Design features information, which shall show:
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 21
i. right-of-way alignments, widths, and names of all streets.
Such street names shall not duplicate the name of any
street heretofore used in the Village or its environs unless
such street is an extension of or is in line with an already
named street in which event that name shall be used.
ii. the location and height of all non-residential (by use)
multi-family, or single-family attached detached buildings
and structures;
iii. off-street parking and service area;
iv. all areas to be dedicated as common open space and all
sites to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved for parks,
playgrounds, school sites, public buildings, and similar
public and quasi-public uses;
v. The pedestrian circulation system, any parkway belt
system or bicycle circulation system; and
vi. all other information necessary to clearly show the
proposed elements of the planned development.
(6) Utility Plan: A proposed utility plan which shall be drawn on a
print of the proposed land use plan. The proposed utility plan shall
show the approximate location and dimensions of all sanitary
sewers, storm drainage ditches, culverts, and storm water runoff
storage, as well as any utility easements. The utility plan shall be
accompanied by a statement from the Village Engineer attesting to
the capacity of existing sewer systems to service the proposed
development.
(7) A written statement signed by the applicant outlining and describing
in such detail as the applicant deems appropriate the arrangement by
which the applicant proposes to regulate land use and otherwise
insure development of the proposed planned development in
accordance with the approval of the Plan Commission and the
Village Board.
Such statement shall include a draft of proposed covenants intended
to be filed in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County
prior to disposition of any land in the planned development (which
covenants shall include adequate provisions to assure proper
maintenance and repair of all areas and facilities under common
ownership, including the payment therefore, and enforceability
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 22
thereof by, or on behalf of the Village), proposed Charter and By-
Laws of an association, if any, for homeowners, merchants, or
industrial owners within the proposed planned development.
(8) If a shopping center development is planned, adequate evidence to
establish the need for and feasibility of such development shall be
provided. This evidence may be in the form of a market research
report or other information which is deemed appropriate by the Plan
Commission.
(9) Preliminary engineering plans for all public or private support
facilities including roads, sidewalks, drainage, sanitary sewers,
water supply, lighting and landscaping.
b. The written statement which shall be included as part of the application for
approval of the Preliminary Plan shall contain the following information:
(1) a statistical tabulation of the acreage amounts of all of the land uses
proposed in the Preliminary Plan;
(2) the type and number of dwelling units and buildings for any
proposed residential land uses; and
(3) the stages in which the project will be built and the approximate
dates when construction of each stage can be expected to begin and
to end, with emphasis on area density, use and public facilities, such
as open space, to be developed in each stage.
c. Other information may be requested if the Plan Commission finds that the
planned development may create special problems for traffic, parking,
landscaping and/or economic feasibility, such information may include,
but is not limited to, any of the following:
(1) an off-street parking and loading plan;
(2) a traffic study indicating the volume of traffic to be generated by the
planned development or a phase of it and proposing any special
engineering design features and/or traffic regulation devices needed
to insure the proper safety of traffic circulation to, through, and
around the planned development or a phase of it;
(3) economic impact – a tax impact study detailing the impact which the
planned development will have upon all taxing bodies. In addition,
the expected number of students to be generated by any residential
portion of it shall also be quantified in accordance with the Village
Subdivision Regulations; and
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 23
(4) a landscape planting plan, indicating the height, size, location,
quantities and variety of stock to be planted, using botanical and
common names (see Section 4.19, Landscaping).
d. The procedure for the public hearing on the Preliminary Plan shall be as
follows:
(1) The Preliminary Plan shall be referred to the Itasca Plan
Commission. The Village Board shall instruct the appropriate
Village department and consultants to collaborate with the Plan
Commission in reviewing the Preliminary Plan for the planned
development for its compliance with these regulations and other
ordinances of the Village of Itasca where requested. Such
collaboration may include meetings at which the developer shall
meet with Village officials and consultants in order that the Plan
Commission may have, prior to its public hearing the informal
recommendations of its experts.
(2) The Plan Commission and the Village Board may utilize the
services of the professional Village consultants in arriving at
recommendations or decisions (see Section 4.04).
(3) Within forty-five (45) days of receipt by the Village Clerk of all
required application information and payment of any required fees,
the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on such application
at a time and place as shall be established by legal notice of hearing
by the Chairperson. The hearing shall be conducted and transcript
of the proceedings shall be preserved in accordance with rules
prescribed by the Plan Commission.
Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be
published at least once in one (1) or more newspapers with a general
circulation within Itasca and also by mailing notice thereof to the
parties in interest, including those mentioned in the following
paragraph, said publication and mailing to be made not more than
thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the
hearing.
The applicant shall submit a list of the names and addresses of all
owners of contiguous property, as recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds as appears from the authentic tax records of
DuPage/Cook Counties. All public roads, streets, alleys, and other
public ways shall be excluded in determining which property is
contiguous to the location for which the amendment is requested.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 24
No application for amendment shall be heard unless the applicant
furnished the list herein required. Any homeowner’s group who has
filed a written request to receive notices of any public hearing with
the Zoning Administrator shall be entitled to receive such notice.
Additionally, any area for which an individual application for a
change in zoning classification is being considered, shall
prominently be posted for at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
public hearing. The posted notices shall be in number, size and
location as prescribed by the Zoning Administrator and shall
indicate the present zoning classification, the proposed zoning
classification, the time and place of public hearing, and any other
information prescribed by the Zoning Administrator. Posted notices
shall be removed from the subject area within fifteen (15) days after
the public hearing has been held.
e. The Plan Commission shall proceed as quickly as possible in its review of
the Preliminary Plan. Within no more than sixty (60) days after the final
adjournment of the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall:
(1) approve or disapprove the Preliminary Plan and shall submit its
written recommendations, which may include the recommendations
of the Village Engineer, Village Planner, and/or Village Attorney to
the Board of Trustees, with a copy being sent to the applicant; or
(2) advise the applicant, in writing, if the Plan Commission finds that
changes, additions, or corrections are required in the Preliminary
Plan. The applicant shall re-submit twelve (12) copies of the revised
preliminary plan for consideration by the Plan Commission at a
continuation of or a new public hearing. The applicant shall do so
without paying an additional filing fee. The Plan Commission shall
submit its recommendations in writing to the Village Board, which
may also include recommendations of the Village Engineer, Village
Planner, and/or Village Attorney, with a copy also being sent to the
applicant.
(3) Changes in an application for a planned development initiated by the
petitioner shall require an additional filing fee.
f. The Village Board of Trustees shall accept or reject the Preliminary Plan
within sixty (60) days after its next regular meeting following receipt of
the written recommendations of the Plan Commission. The applicant and
the Village Board of Trustees may mutually agree to extend the sixty (60)
day period. The Village Board may require such special conditions in the
approval of the Preliminary Plan, as it may deem necessary to insure
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 25
conformity with the intent of all Comprehensive Plan elements and the
stated purposed of the planned development.
(1) If the Preliminary Plan is disapproved, the Village Board shall state,
in writing, the reasons for the disapproval, and such writing shall be
filed with the Village Clerk, and a copy shall be sent to the
applicant.
(2) If the Preliminary Plan is approved, the Village Board shall
authorize the applicant to submit a final development plan for the
planned development.
(3) Upon approval by the Village Board of the Preliminary Plan, a
record shall be prepared including findings of fact and setting forth
the terms of relief or modification and/or variances granted from
existing ordinances. The final plan shall be approved as the final
land use and zoning plan if it conforms with the Preliminary Plan.
The preliminary and final plans may be filed and approved
simultaneously if all requirements hereof are met.
(4) Approval of a Preliminary Planned Development Plan shall not
constitute approval of the final plan, rather it shall be deemed an
expression of approval of the layout submitted on the Preliminary
Plan as a guide to the preparation of the final plan or plans. No
building permit shall be issued for an structure until a final planned
development plan has been filed and approved.
(5) The final plan or plans shall be submitted by the developer not later
than one (1) year (or such additional time, as may be authorized by
the Village Board), after approval of the preliminary plan, for
approval by the corporate authorities of the Village and subsequent
recording upon the fulfillment of the requirements of these
regulations and conditions, if any, of the preliminary approvals.
(6) The Village Board shall notify the Plan Commission and the
applicant of its action.
5. Final Development Plan: Within one (1) year following the approval of the
Preliminary Development Plan, the applicant shall file with the Plan
Commission a final development plan containing in final form the information
required in the Preliminary Plan.
The final plan of the planned development shall conform to the Preliminary
Plan as approved, and, if desired by the developer, it may be submitted in
stages with each stage reflecting a portion of the approved Preliminary Plan
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 26
which is proposed to be recorded and developed; provided, however, that such
portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations.
a. The final development plan shall include the following:
(1) The final plan and supporting data shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator and forwarded to the Plan Commission for
certification that the final plan is in conformity with these
regulations and in agreement with the approved Preliminary Plan.
The Final Land Use Plan shall be suitable for recording with the
DuPage County Recorder of Deeds. The purpose of the final
development plan is to designate the land subdivided into lots as
well as the division of other lands not so treated, into common open
areas and building areas and to designate and limit the specific
internal uses of each building or structure, as well as of the land in
general.
(2) An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate
development within the planned development.
(3) If subdivided lands are included in the planned development, a
subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and
meeting all the requirements of a normal subdivision plat, including
easements, rights-of-way, and dedication of open space and public
areas, to the extent that compliance with the subdivision regulations
of the Village shall be required.
(4) An accurate legal description of each separate unsubdivided use
area, including common open space.
(5) A Final Site Plan of the planned development shall be filed
indicating the locations and uses of all buildings, all parking and
loading spaces, and any other special structure, facility, or feature
approved or required by the Village Board.
(6) Certificates, seals, and signatures required for the dedication of land,
and recording the document.
(7) Tabulations of each separate use area, including land area and
number of dwelling units per gross acre, percentage of open space,
and acres in right of way.
(8) Landscape plan (see Section 4.19).
(9) Utilities and drainage plan.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 27
(10) The final version of the covenants, if any, by which the applicant
proposed to regulate land use and otherwise protect the proposed
development accompanied by the written representation and
warranty of the applicant, in form and substance satisfactory to the
Village Attorney, to the effect that the owner of the real property
which is the subject of the proposed planned development has not
sold, or otherwise disposed of any interest in said property and will
not sell, or otherwise dispose of any such interest, prior to the filing
for record of said covenants in the office of the DuPage County
Recorder of Deeds.
(11) Such deeds or easement agreements, by-laws or provisions, if any,
as are required or approved by the Village Board, shall be filed in
form and substance approved by the Village Attorney conveying a
suitable ownership interest in the parcels within proposed planned
development which are to be subject to public or common
ownership.
(12) Filing a copy of the Article of Incorporation of the homeowner’s,
merchant’s, or industrial owner’s association, if any, required or
approved by the Village Board certified by the Secretary of State of
Illinois, not more than thirty (30) days prior to the filing of the final
plan; a certificate of good standing for such corporation issued by
the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois, as of a date not more
than thirty (30) days prior to the filing of such final plan; and a copy
of the by-laws of such corporation certified by the Secretary thereof,
as being a true, correct and complete copy of such by-laws, as of a
date not more than thirty (30) days prior to the filing of such plan.
(13) Final development and construction schedule.
(14) Final architectural plans.
(15) Final engineering drawings.
b. All public facilities and improvements made necessary as a result of the
planned development shall require escrow deposits or irrevocable letters
of credit in a form approved by the Village Attorney to guarantee
construction of the required improvements.
c. All common open space, at the election on the Village, shall be:
(1) Conveyed to a municipal or public corporation, or conveyed to a
not-for-profit corporation or entity established for the purpose of
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 28
benefiting the owners an residents of the planned development or
adjoining property owners or any one or more of them; or
(2) Guaranteed by a restrictive covenant describing the open space and
its maintenance ad improvement, running with the land for benefit
of residents of the planned development or adjoining property
owners and/or both.
d. The Final Development Plan shall be approved as follows:
(1) The Plan Commission shall review the Final Development Plan
within forty-five (45) days of its submission and shall recommend
approval if it is in substantial compliance with the preliminary
development plan. The Plan Commission shall certify to the Board
of Trustees that the final development plan is in conformity with the
previously approved Preliminary Development Plan.
(2) If the final plan is substantially changed from the approved
Preliminary Plan, including any new requests for variations, the Plan
Commission shall recommend to the Village Board that a new
public hearing be held in conformance with the procedures for
approval of a Preliminary Plan.
(3) The Board of Trustees, after receipt of the recommendations of the
Plan Commission, shall itself review the final development plan and
shall, if it is in conformity with the Preliminary Development Plan,
authorize issuance of the Special Use. If the Final Development
Plan is held not to be in conformity with the Preliminary Plan, the
Village Board shall inform the applicant, in writing, with regard to
the specific areas found to be not in compliance.
(4) Approval by the Village Board of the final plan for any proposed
planned development shall be effective only for a period of sixty
(60) days after the date of such approval unless, within the sixty (60)
day period, the applicant shall record or cause recordation of the
final plan, including any final subdivision plat, the final restrictive
covenants, and the deeds and/or easement agreement required or
approved by the Village Board, in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of the appropriate counties.
6. Changes and Modification of the Planned Development After Approval of
the Final Plan:
a. After the approval of the Final Plan, the use of land and the construction,
modification, or alteration of any buildings or structures within the
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 29
planned development will be governed by the approved Final Plan, rather
than by any other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village.
b. No changes may be made in the approved Final Plan except upon
application to the appropriate agency according to the following
procedures:
(1) During the construction of the planned development, the procedure
shall be as follows:
(a) minor changes, which do not change the concept or intent of
the development, including the location, sitting, and height of
buildings and structures and in the location of streets and ways
of public access and in the size and location of open space,
may be authorized by the Plan Commission as required by
engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time that
the final plat was approved.
(b) all changes in land uses and density, any rearrangements of
lots, blocks, and building tracts, any major changes in the
provisions for common open space and all other changes in
approved Final Plan shall be made by the Village Board of
Trustees, under the procedures authorized by the Zoning
Ordinance for an amendment to the zoning map.
(c) any changes which are approved for the Final Plat shall be
recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the final plat.
If changes are allowed in a final site plan, a new site plan
reflecting such changes shall be filed with the Village and the
appropriate counties.
(d) The Plan Commission shall consider the planned development
subject to revocation if construction falls more than one (1)
year behind the schedule filed with the final plan, or exceeds
five (5) years. The developer shall be notified at least sixty
(60) days prior to any revocation hearing authorized by the
Village Board. Extensions in the building schedule may be
recommended by the Plan Commission and granted by the
Village Board.
(2) After the completion of the construction of the Planned
Development, the procedure shall be as follows:
(a) Any minor extension, alterations, or modifications of existing
buildings or structures may be recommended by the Plan
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 30
Commission if they are consistent with the purpose and intent
of the Final Plan.
(b) Any building or structure that is totally or substantially
destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the
Final Plan unless an amendment to the Final Plan is approved
following the procedures for the amendment of the zoning
map.
(c) All other changes in the Final Plan shall be made by the
Village Board of Trustees, under the procedure authorized by
the Zoning Ordinance for the amendment of the zoning map.
No changes may be made in the Final Plan unless they are
required for the continued successful functioning of the
planned development, or unless they are required by changes in
conditions that have occurred since the final plan was approved
or by changes in the development policy of the Village.
7. Standards: No planned development shall be authorized unless the Plan
Commission shall find and recommend, in addition to those standards
established herein for Special Uses, that the following standards shall be met:
a. General:
(1) The uses permitted by such exceptions as may be requested or
recommended are necessary or desirable and appropriate to the
purpose of the development.
(2) The uses permitted in such development are not of such nature or so
located as to exercise an undue detrimental influence or effect upon
the surrounding neighborhood.
(3) That any industrial park areas established in the planned
development conform to all requirements therefore, as set forth
elsewhere in this Ordinance.
(4) That all minimum requirements pertaining to commercial,
residential, institutional, or other uses established in the planned
development shall be subject to the requirements for each individual
classification as established elsewhere in this Ordinance, except as
may be specifically varied in the Ordinance granting and
establishing a planned development use.
(5) When private streets and common driveways are made a part of the
planned development or private common open space recreational
facilities are provided, the applicant shall submit, as part of the
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 31
application, the method and arrangement whereby these private
facilities shall be operated and maintained. Such arrangements for
operating and maintaining private facilities shall be subject to the
approval of the Village Board.
(6) That any bulk exceptions shall be solely for the purpose of
promoting an integrated site plan more beneficial to the residents or
occupants of such development as well as neighboring property, that
would be obtained under the bulk regulations of this Ordinance for
building developed on separate zoning lots.
(7) Architectural Consistency. The architectural style and features
established for an approved planned development shall be
maintained throughout the entire project unless otherwise
recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Village
Board.
b. Residential:
(1) Residential density for a planned development shall not be greater
than the recommended density as shown in the Zoning Ordinance
for the Village, nor shall any lot to be used for residential purposed
be less in area or dimension than that required by the district
regulations applicable to the district in which the planned
development is located except that the Plan Commission may
recommend and the Village Board may grant a reduction in such lot
area and dimension, but not more than a fifteen (15) percent of the
gross area of the planned development.
(2) Business uses may be included as part of a planned residential
development when the Plan Commission finds that such business
uses are beneficial to the overall planned development and will not
be injurious to adjacent or neighboring properties.
(3) The open areas provided in the part of the planned development
containing only residential buildings shall be preserved over the life
of the planned development for use only by the residents of the
planned development or dedicated to a local government.
(4) For that part of a planned development devoted to residential uses,
the Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board of
Trustees may approve, access to a dwelling by a driveway or
pedestrian walk easement, and spacing between buildings of lesser
width or depth than required by district regulations for the district in
which the planned development is located, provided:
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 32
(a) that adequate provisions are made which perpetuate during the
period of the special use, access easements and off-street
parking spaces for use by the residents of the dwelling served;
(b) the spacing between buildings shall be approved by the Plan
Commission and shall be consistent with the application of
recognized site planning principles for securing a unified
development, and due consideration is given to the openness
normally afforded by intervening streets and alleys;
(c) the yards for principal buildings along the periphery of the
development shall be not less in width or depth than required
for permitted uses in the district regulations applicable to the
districts in which the planned development is located; and the
plan is developed to afford adequate protection to neighboring
properties as recommended by the Plan Commission and
approved by the Village Board of Trustees.
c. Cluster Subdivision:
In any single-family cluster division, the Plan Commission may
recommend and the Village Board may authorize the following exceptions
to the regulations of the district in which cluster subdivision is permitted
as a Special Use.
(1) A reduction of the lot area by not more than fifteen (15) percent,
when the planned development provides common open space equal
to not less than fifteen (15) percent of the gross area of the planned
development, and in no case shall the lot area be less than six
thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet.
(2) A reduction of the lot width by not more than fifteen (15) percent,
but in no case shall the lot width be less than forty-five (45) feet.
(3) That in the part of the planned development containing only
residential uses, the minimum lot area per dwelling unit may be not
more than fifteen (15) percent less than that required for permitted
uses in the district regulations applicable to the district in which the
planned development is located.
Reduction of such lot area shall be recommended by the Plan
Commission and approved by the Village Board only where there is
contained within the planned development permanent open area, the
area and location of which shall meet with the approval of the
Commission, and that such open space shall not be less than that
which would pertain if developed on individual lots.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 33
Such open areas shall be preserved over the life of the planned
development, for use only by the residents of the planned
development or dedicated to the Village of Itasca for school, park,
playground, or other public open space uses; and
(4) That in a planned development devoted to residential uses, the Plan
Commission may recommend and the Village Board may approve,
access to a dwelling by a driveway or pedestrian walk easement,
however, off-street parking facilities for such dwellings shall be
located not more than two hundred (200) feet from the dwelling
served; yards of lesser width or depth than required for permitted
uses in the district regulations applicable to the district in which the
planned development is located; provided
(a) that protective covenants are recorded which perpetuate access
easements and off-street parking spaces for use by the residents
of the dwellings served;
(b) spacing between principal buildings within a part of a planned
development shall be equivalent to such spacing as would be
required between buildings by district regulations for the
district in which it is located.
d. Business:
That in a planned business development, the following additional
requirements are hereby specified:
(1) All buildings shall be set back not less than fifty (50) feet from all
street rights-of-way lines bounding the site; and set back forty (40)
feet from any residentially zoned land.
(2) Required off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance
with Section 12.00 of this Ordinance and set back not less than
twenty-five (25) feet from any residentially zoned land.
(3) All walks within the planned development shall be paved with a
hard surfaced material meeting the specification of the Village.
(4) Any part of the planned development not used for buildings, loading
and access ways, shall be attractively landscaped with grass, trees,
shrubs, or pedestrian walkways, according to a landscape plan, as
approved by the Plan Commission;
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 34
(5) The overall floor area ratio for the Planned Development shall not
exceed by more than twenty (20) percent the maximum floor area
ratio which would be determined on the basis of the amount required
for the individual uses in such Planned Development as stipulated in
each district.
(6) The buildings in the planned development shall be planned and
designed as a unified and single project.
e. Variations of Minimum Requirements:
(1) Wherever the applicant proposes to provide and set out, by platting,
deeding, dedication, restriction, or covenant, any land or space
separate from single-family or multi-family residential districts to be
used for parks, playgrounds, commons, greenways or open areas, the
Plan Commission may consider and recommend to the Village
Board, and the Village Board may vary the applicable minimum
requirements of the subdivision regulations and the zoning
ordinance which may include but not necessarily be limited to the
following:
(a) Front Yard
(b) Rear Yard
(c) Side Yard
(d) Lot Area
(e) Bulk
(f) Intensity of Use
(g) Street Width
(h) Sidewalks
(i) Public Utilities
(j) Off-Street Parking
(2) Business
(a) Business uses shall be as prescribed by the Plan Commission.
(b) All business shall be conducted and material shall be stored
within a completed enclosed building.
(c) Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area shall be
covered by buildings or structures.
(d) Not less than fifteen (15) percent of the lot shall be provided or
landscaping and open space purposes.
(e) No building shall be more than sixty-five (65) feet in height.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 35
(f) No dwelling shall be permitted on the ground floor in a
planned business development.
(g) Off-street parking and loading shall be provided and
maintained on the same lot in accordance with Section 12.00 of
this Ordinance unless the Plan Commission recommends and
the Village Board requires additional off-street parking and
loading space.
(h) Service and loading and unloading facilities shall be provided
as recommended and approved by the Plan Commission;
(i) No building shall be located nearer than fifty (50) feet to any
right-of-way line or forty (40) feet to any residentially zoned
land.
(j) Business developments shall be adequately screened by
fencing or landscaping or both along the boundaries of adjacent
residential, public open spaces, schools, churches, or other
similar uses. The screen planting shall be prepared by a
landscape architect and shall meet the approval of the Plan
Commission.
(k) Outside lighting shall be so designed and placed so as not to be
disturbing to adjacent residential areas.
(l) Signs shall comply with the regulations in Section 13.00 and
Ordinance No. 165-61.
(3) Industrial:
(a) The standards for industrial areas in a planned development
shall conform to the applicable standards in the Zoning
Ordinance of the Village of Itasca.
(b) Not less than twenty (20) percent of the industrial land use
areas shall be reserved for landscape and open space purposes.
8. Conditions and Guarantees: Prior to granting any Special Uses, the Plan
Commission may recommend, and the Village Board shall stipulate such
conditions and restrictions upon establishment, location, construction,
maintenance, and operation of the Special Use as deemed necessary for the
protection and requirements specified herein or as may be from time to time
required. In all cases in which Special Uses are granted, the Village Board
shall require such evidence and guarantee as it may deem necessary as proof
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 36
that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be
complied with.
9. Effect of Denial of a Special Use: After a public hearing, no application for
a Special Use which has been denied wholly or in part by the Village Board
shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of said order of
denial, except on the grounds of substantial new evidence or proof of changed
conditions found to be valid by the Plan Commission and the Village Board.
10. Repeal of Special Use: In any case, where a Special Use has been granted,
and where no development has taken place within two (2) years, the Plan
Commission may recommend to the Village Board that such zoning be
affirmed or repealed and rezoned to it most appropriate district classification
in accordance with the procedures under this Ordinance
14.13 SITE PLAN REVIEW
1. Purpose: It is recognized that the very nature of development of vacant land,
redevelopment of improved land, and Special Uses create potential for traffic
congestion problems, overcrowding, adverse environmental effects, or poorly
designed sites. In order to ensure that new construction and uses are
otherwise in conformance with the intent of the Comprehensive Plan and with
the provisions of this Ordinance, and that the arrangement of buildings, offstreet
parking and loading facilities, lighting, landscaping, ingress and egress,
drainage, signs and other improvements is provided in a manner that will
promote safety and convenience for the public and will preserve property
values of surrounding property site plan review shall be required prior to
issuance of a Zoning certificate.
2. Scope: Two classes shall be established for site plan review and are defined
as follows:
a. Class I Site Plan Review shall be required prior to or concurrent with (i)
granting rezoning to R-3, ROC, any business, office-research or
manufacturing district, (ii) granting any Special Use Permit, (iii) granting
a planned development, or (iv) prior to approval of a zoning certificate for
any new construction in any regional office, business, office-research, or
industrial district, or (v) prior to approval of a zoning certificate for any
new construction or expansion greater than twenty-five percent (25%) in
any downtown zoning district (B-4, B-5 and B-6 zoning districts).
b. Class II Site Plan Review shall be required prior to approval of a zoning
certificate for any new construction in any residential district or prior to
construction of accessory structures, parking or signs in any District.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 37
3. Application Requirements for Class I Site Plan Review: Every application
for Class I Site Plan Review shall be accompanied by the following in the
number prescribed by the Zoning Administrator:
a. Application Form: A completed application form furnished by the zoning
administrator, which shall include the following:
(1) Project name and project address.
(2) Legal description of property.
(3) Property owner name(s) and signature(s) (or signed statement by
owner of applicant’s authorization to submit the application), name,
address and telephone number of the applicant including the name
and address of each person or entity owning an interest in the
applicant or owner and the extent of such ownership interest, unless
any such entities is a corporation or a partnership, in which case
only those persons owning an interest in excess of ten (10) percent
in such corporation or partnership need be identified by name,
address and extent of interest. For purposes of this section, the term
ownership interest shall include any legal or equitable interest held
at the time of the application in the real property which is the subject
of the application, including the interest of a contract purchaser.
The application shall include the signature of the owner(s).
(4) Applicant name and signature, address and phone number (unless
otherwise directed, the Village shall direct all written and other
correspondence and communications regarding said review to the
applicant).
(5) Name, address and phone number of persons responsible for
preparing the Plan.
(6) Present zoning of the site and adjacent properties.
(7) Description of proposed development, zoning and type of use.
(8) Other applicable permits sought: such as, Special Use, Zoning
Amendment, Variance or Building Permit.
(9) Any other information that may reasonably be required during the
design review process by the Village Board, Planning and Zoning
Commission, or Zoning Administrator, as the case may be.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 38
b. Drawing Standards: All submittal documents shall follow accepted
conventions for drawing. All drawings shall have legible line work, clear
labels, numeric and graphic scales, page numbers, revision dates and north
arrow indicated on all plans. All drawings, except the location plan, shall
be at the same standard scale.
c. Plat of Survey: A current plat of survey not more than one year old for
the proposed property, drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of
the Subject Property.
d. Existing Conditions: An existing conditions map, prepared and sealed by
a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer, shall show the location,
dimensions, size and height of the following, as applicable:
(1) Sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements and utilities, including street
lights.
(2) Buildings and structures, including top of foundation elevations.
(3) Driveways, walkways, entrances, exits, parking and loading areas.
(4) Recreation areas and swimming pools.
(5) Natural and artificial watercourses and bodies of water and
wetlands.
(6) Limits of flood plains.
(7) Areas that can reasonably be expected to or which do contain soils
or materials contaminated with hazardous materials. Underground
storage tanks, if any.
(8) The topography of existing ground and paved areas, and elevations
of streets, alleys, utilities, sanitary and storm sewers, buildings and
structures. Topography is to be shown on dashed lines illustrating
one (1) foot standard contour intervals and by spot elevations of
neighboring properties and flat areas where necessary.
e. Location and Context: A location map situating the site in relation to its
neighborhood, indicating existing site conditions on surrounding
properties and public ways, including zoning and all improvements.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 39
f. Site Plan: A site plan shall be prepared to show the location, dimensions,
size and height to scale of the following regarding the proposed
development, as applicable:
(1) For a site plan which includes any existing structures or other
improvements, an indication of those improvements that are to
remain and those which will be removed.
(2) Buildings and structures with entrances and exits identified.
(3) Dimensional setbacks from all property lines and distances between
buildings.
(4) Sidewalks, bike paths, streets, alleys, easements and utilities,
including on-site lighting.
(5) Walkways, driveways, entrances, exits, loading docks and
maneuvering areas, refuse and service areas, and parking areas
(including those designated for handicapped use).
(6) Any locations intended for the outdoor display or storage of goods
and merchandise.
(7) Fence locations, type and height.
(8) Recreation areas.
(9) Plans to remediate, remove, or control on site any contaminated
soils, materials, underground storage tanks, combustible gases, old
landfills, dumps or disposal areas.
(10) Natural and artificial watercourses and bodies of water and
wetlands.
(11) Tentative plans for collecting and depositing storm water and the
method of treatment of natural and artificial watercourses, including
a delineation of proposed limits of flood plains, if any, and including
overland water flow.
(12) A general indication of proposed grading, surface drainage, grades
on paved areas and approximate ground floor elevations of proposed
buildings and structures.
(13) Calculations of the following, as applicable:
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 40
(a) number of dwelling units and density per acre or gross square
footage of uses; gross floor area by use and FAR;
(b) number of parking spaces;
(c) number of loading spaces;
(d) total land area;
(e) total open space;
(f) total landscaped area;
(g) total impervious surface.
g. Landscape Plan: A plan showing the location and names of trees, shrubs
and ground cover to be planted and the areas to be retained in natural
vegetation. This plan may be combined with the site plan above, as long
as all site plan elements and landscaping elements are easily discernible.
Show existing trees five (5) inches or more in diameter, measured on the
trunk three (3) feet from grade, with their proposed disposition, i.e. to be
retained, removed, replaced or transplanted elsewhere on the site.
Complete final landscape plan is required with the final plan prior to
building permit.
h. Lighting Plan: Provide a site lighting plan, which can be combined with
other required documents, indicating location, type, fixture height, power
rating and shielding methods.
i. Building Elevations:
(1) Show exterior elevations of all proposed structures and exterior
elevations of existing buildings when existing buildings are
proposed to be structurally altered.
(2) Note all finish materials on drawings and provide color samples.
(3) Dimensions of building heights from finished grade.
(4) Dimensions of all exterior walls and fences, including heights.
(5) Location, type and size of signs.
(6) Location of mechanical equipment, roof equipment, electrical
transformers and solar panels, including means of screening roof
equipment.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 41
j. Signs: Elevations of proposed freestanding signs as well as the intended
sign message/display and the materials and colors intended for the sign.
“Typical” elevations shall be provided for wall mounted signs including
color renderings of all sign faces; views of supporting members, poles,
bases and pedestals; side views which indicate both signage depth and
projections; method of illumination, color samples, materials indications,
and dimensions of all sign elements.
4. Application Requests for Class II Site Plan Review: Every application for
Class II Site Plan Review shall be accompanied by the following in the
number prescribed by the Zoning Administrator.
a. A complete application form furnished by the Zoning Administrator.
b. A current plat of survey, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of
the property and the location of any existing structures.
c. A site plan and topographical plan, drawn to scale, showing the location,
dimensions, ground area, height of the proposed structure, easements, and
building lines.
5. Class I Site Plan Review Procedures:
a. Pre-Application Conference: An applicant for design review and
approval may request that the Zoning Administrator hold an informal preapplication
conference to review the preliminary design of a proposed
development and to discuss basic intentions and plans before investing
time in detailed designs and/or submittal of a formal application. This
step is optional but recommended, especially for large or complex
projects.
b. Village Staff Review: Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning
Administrator shall distribute copies of the application and supporting
documents to such Village staff and consultants as appropriate for review
and comment concerning compliance with Village requirements. Within
fifteen (15) working days of receipt of a complete application, the Zoning
Administrator shall advise the applicant, in writing, that the site plan
conforms or fails to conform with the requirements of this Chapter or
other provisions of the Municipal Code. If the site plan fails to conform,
the Zoning Administrator shall specify the reasons the site plan fails to
conform.
c. Action by the Plan Commission: Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a
complete application, the Plan Commission shall review said site plan and
the Zoning Administrator’s report. After reviewing the Zoning
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 42
Administrator’s report and the site plan, the Plan Commission shall
recommend approval, denial or modifi-cation of the site plan, with or
without conditions, or may defer the item for further study. The Plan
Commission shall submit its findings and recommendation in writing to
the Village Board within twenty (20) working days following a
recommendation for approval, denial or modification of the application.
Design review does not require any form of public notice, however a
design review application concurrently filed with an application for a
zoning map amendment or a special use permit shall state that design
review and approval is sought as part of the public notice in addition to the
requested map amendment and/or special use permit.
d. Action by the Village Board: Within twenty-one (21) days of the Plan
Commission’s final recommendation concerning the site plan, the Village
Board shall approve, deny, modify, refer the item to the Plan Commission
for further consideration or defer the item for further study. When the
Plan Commission recommends denial of a proposed site plan, such site
plan shall not be approved except upon the favorable vote of two-thirds
(2/3) of all members of the Village Board.
e. Effect of Village Board Action: Unless the Village Board provides
otherwise by ordinance or unless the Village Board has extended the term
of design plan approval, such plan approval shall automatically lapse one
(1) year after the date of approval of the plan, unless a building permit has
been issued and construction commenced.
f. Revisions to Approved Site/Design Plans: If the building application
deviates from approved site/design plans, the Zoning Administrator shall
then determine if the proposed changes are substantive. Substantive
changes to approved site/design plans require submittal of those changes
to the same process as the approval of an original design proposal.
6. Class II Site Plan Review Procedures:
a. Staff Review: Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning
Administrator shall review the site plan for conformance with the
provisions of this Chapter. Within fifteen (15) working days of receipt of
a complete application for Class II Site Plan Review, the Zoning
Administrator shall approve or deny the application. If the Zoning
Administrator denies an application for a Class II Site Plan, he shall advise
the applicant in writing of the reasons for refusal.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 43
b. Appeal:
(1) If the Zoning Administrator does not approve a Class II site plan, the
applicant may appeal the Zoning Administrator’s decision to the
Plan Commission. A notice of appeal must be filed with the Zoning
Administrator no later than fifteen (15) days after receipt by the
applicant of the decision of the Zoning Administrator. Failure by an
applicant to file an appeal in accordance with the foregoing
provisions shall be deemed to constitute a withdrawal of the
application for a zoning certificate.
(2) The Plan Commission shall act as promptly as practicable on any
appeal taken in connection with the Class II site plan. The Plan
Commission shall approve or disapprove the site plan by action
taken by a majority of the Plan Commission present at any
scheduled meeting at which a quorum is present. If the Plan
Commission approves the site plan, a building permit may then be
issued, provided that all other requirements of all other applicable
Village codes and ordinances are satisfied.
7. Standards for Class I Site Plan Review: In reviewing and evaluating Class
I site plans, the Plan Commission, Village Board, and Zoning Administrator
shall consider those factors listed below which it determines to be applicable
to a given plan. These standards are guidelines to enable new development,
redevelopment and major alterations to further the Village’s long term goals.
Variations from these standards may be allowed by the Village Board.
a. The application shall comply with the provisions of this ordinance and
other ordinances of the Village and of any other applicable laws.
b. The plan shall be in a reasonable conformity with the Comprehensive
Plan.
c. Site and Building Design: Adequate provision shall be made to ensure
that the proposed development shall be integrated with and enhance the
character of the streetscape, the surrounding context and the neighborhood
in terms of scale, massing, site layout and site and building design,
including:
(1) Relationships of Buildings to Site:
(a) The site should be planned to achieve a desirable transition to
the street, with buildings and landscaping fronting on and
reinforcing the streetscape to the greatest extent practicable,
and encouraging safe pedestrian movement.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 44
(b) Parking, loading, storage and service areas, utility structures
and machinery should not be visible from public ways and
surrounding areas. Shared parking lot access shall be promoted
where practical. Substantial and immediately effective
perimeter screening and interior lot landscaping should be
provided to break up large expanses of asphalt with plant and
other landscape materials.
(c) Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable
zoning district, the height, massing and scale of each building
should be integrated with its site, the existing terrain,
surrounding landscape and existing (or anticipated) adjoining
buildings.
(2) Building Design:
(a) Proposed buildings and structures should be encouraged to
generally enhance or relate to the surrounding buildings and
local context, or in any case, not have an adverse impact on
these. The scale, proportions, massing, articulation and design
features of structures should enhance the continuity of the
streetscape, emphasize the human scale and integrate with the
surrounding landscape.
(b) Entrances should be articulated. Long, uninterrupted wall or
roof planes should be avoided and signs, lighting, utilities and
services should be integrated with the building design.
(c) Building materials should be of durable quality, suitable for the
building type and design and related to surrounding buildings
and the local context.
(3) Signs: All signage shall be in strict accordance with the Village of
Itasca Municipal Code and shall conform with the following:
(a) Every sign should be designed as an integral architectural
element of the building and site to which it principally relates.
(b) The colors, material and illumination of every sign should be
compatible and harmonious with the building and site to which
it principally relates.
(c) Each sign should be compatible with signs on adjoining
premises and should not compete for attention.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 45
(d) Signs and other site graphics should be minimized in size and
number to promote their effectiveness. Such signs and site
graphics should be integrated with architectural and landscape
features.
(4) Lighting:
(a) Exterior lighting should be part of the architectural concept.
Fixtures, standards and exposed accessories should be
integrated with the building design.
(b) Adequate provision should be made to avoid glare of vehicular
and stationary lights that would affect the established character
of the neighborhood, and to the extent such lights will be
visible across any property line, the performance standards for
illumination shall be met.
d. Open Space and Landscaping:
(1) Maximize retention of open space and preserve scenic views from
publicly accessible locations.
(2) Configure open space to be usable, functional and appropriate to the
development proposed. Address the functional aspects of
landscaping such as drainage control, erosion prevention, screening,
provision of shade and reduction of glare, energy conservation,
windbreaks, as well as the enhancement of architectural and site
features.
(3) Minimize tree, vegetation and soil removal. Existing mature trees of
five (5) inches or more in diameter, measured on the trunk three (3)
feet from grade and shrubs shall be maintained to the greatest extent
practicable; if evidence supports removal of these, indicate the
specific procedure, types and sizes for replacement.
(4) Landscape design should provide an aesthetically pleasing design,
create a logical transition to adjoining development, screen
incompatible uses, screen unsightly activities from public view and
break up large expanses of asphalt with plant materials. Plant
materials shall be selected so as to withstand Itasca’s climatic
conditions and the specific constraints imposed by adjacent
functions.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 46
e. Access and Circulation:
(1) Streets, sidewalks and bike paths should, insofar as reasonably
practicable, provide access and good traffic circulation to and from
adjacent lands, existing streets and sidewalks.
(2) Adequate access roads or entrance or exit drives should be provided
and should be designed and improved so as to prevent traffic
hazards or problems, to minimize traffic congestion in public streets
and to encourage pedestrian access.
(3) Design should ensure that the vehicular circulation elements of the
proposed development will not create hazards to the safety of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic on and off the site, disjointed
vehicular or pedestrian circulation paths on or off the site, or undue
interference and inconvenience to vehicular and pedestrian travel.
(4) Any building or structure should be reasonably accessible to fire,
police, emergency and service vehicles. When deemed necessary
for access, emergency vehicle easements shall be provided. The
access for fire, police and emergency vehicles shall be unobstructed
at all times.
f. Public Services and Utilities: Provision shall be made to ensure that
development will be served by essential public facilities and services such
as highways, streets, parking spaces, police and fire protection, schools,
drainage, structures, refuse disposal, water, sewer, and electricity. Impact
on these services should be as minimal as practicable.
g. Environmental Considerations:
(1) Adequate provision should be made to minimize the impact on
existing or developing wetlands, steep slopes, flood plains and
hilltops.
(2) The obstruction of natural watercourses shall be discouraged.
(3) The development should incorporate measures that are adequate to
prevent pollution of surface or groundwater, to minimize erosion
and sedimentation, and to prevent changes in groundwater levels,
increased rates of runoff, and minimize potential for flooding.
(4) Drainage should be designed so that groundwater recharge is
maximized, and at the project boundaries the rate of runoff shall not
be increased.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 47
(5) Adequate provision shall be made for the collection and disposition
of all on and off-site storm water and natural water, including but
not limited to, on-site drainage retention facilities.
(6) Adequate provision shall be made to control the slippage, shifting,
erosion, accretion and subsidence of soil, as well as the slipping and
shifting of buildings and structures.
(7) Adequate provision shall be made to clean, control and otherwise
alleviate contamination or environmental hazards on land when the
site is in an area found by the Zoning Administrator to be
contaminated by a toxic substance or otherwise to contain
environmental hazards which are detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare.
h. Preservation: Adequate provision should be made to preserve unique
architectural, cultural, environmental and historical resources.
Development designs and treatments that respect such desirable resources
on adjacent properties are also encouraged.
i. Downtown Design Guidelines: All developments located in the
Traditional Downtown area (B-4, B-5 and B-6 zoning districts) shall be
compatible with the Downtown Design Guidelines, as defined in Section
3.02 Definitions. Site plans should also be forwarded to the Downtown
Itasca Advisory Committee (DIAC) and the Historic Preservation
Commission for review and comment prior to Plan Commission
recommendation.
8. Standards for Class II Site Plan Review: The Zoning Administrator, when
evaluating Class II site plans, shall review:
a. The relationship of the site plan to the policies, goals and objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan.
b. Traffic and parking layout so as to minimize danger and conflicts between
pedestrians and motorists, and otherwise comply with the requirements of
Section 12 of this Ordinance.
c. Location of principal structures, accessory structures and free-standing
signs, so that the location of accessory structures and free-standing signs
do not impede safe and efficient traffic circulation, storm water drainage,
or otherwise adversely impact adjoining land improvements.
d. The Zoning Administrator may enlist the services of the Village
departments and consultants to determine compliance with the provisions
of this Chapter and other provisions of the Municipal Code.
SECTION 14 ADMINISTRATION
14 - 48
e. That the proposed use is a permitted use in the district in which the
property is located.
f. That the proposed arrangement of buildings, off-street parking, access,
lighting, landscaping, and drainage is compatible with adjacent land uses
and employs sound site planning principles.
g. That the vehicular ingress and egress to and from the site and circulation
within the site provides for safe, efficient and convenient movement of
traffic not only within the site but on adjacent roadways as well.
h. That all outdoor storage areas are screened and are in accordance with
standards specified by this Ordinance.
i. Expansion of any non-conforming use shall be reviewed in accordance
with standards specified in the Itasca Zoning Ordinance.
j. The relationship of the site plan to the Downtown Design Guidelines,
when the site plan is located in the traditional downtown area.
14.14 FEES
The Village Board shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses for
zoning certifications, occupancy certificates appeals, application for amendments
or special use, and other matters pertaining to this Ordinance. This schedule of
fees shall be posted in the office of the Village Clerk and may be altered or
amended by the Village Board.
Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action
shall be taken on any application of appeal.
14.15 VIOLATION, PENALTY ENFORCEMENT
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or
refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this Ordinance, shall upon conviction be fined not less than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist after notification thereof shall
constitute a separate offense. The Zoning Administrator is hereby designated and
authorized to enforce this Ordinance.
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 1
15.00 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
15.01 APPLICABILITY
1. New Telecommunications Towers and Antennas: All new
Telecommunications Towers and Antennas in the Village of Itasca shall be
subject to these regulations, except as provided in Chapter 15.01 (2)-(4)
inclusive.
2. Amateur Radio Operations/Receive Only Antennas: This Ordinance shall
not govern any Tower or the installation of any Antenna that is under eighty
(80) feet in Height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur
radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only Antennas. No
Receive-Only Antenna shall exceed the highest point on the nearest residential
rooftop of a dwelling by more than ten (10) feet.
3. Pre-Existing Telecommunications Towers or Antennas: Existing
Telecommunications Towers and existing Antennas which predated this
Ordinance, shall not be required to meet the requirements of this Ordinance
other than the requirements of Section 15.02 (5), (6), (8), and (18). All preexisting
Telecommunications Towers and Antennas shall be subject to the
Telecommunications Tower & Antenna Administrative Fee as of January 1,
following the effective date of this Ordinance.
4. AM Array: For purposes of implementing this Ordinance, AM Array,
consisting of one (1) or more Telecommunications Tower units and
supporting ground system which functions as one (1) AM broadcasting
Antenna, shall be considered one (1) Telecommunications Tower.
Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from
the outer perimeter of the Telecommunications Towers included in the AM
Array. Additional Telecommunications Tower units may be added within the
perimeter of the AM Array by right.
15.02 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Special or Accessory Use: Antennas and Telecommunications Towers may
be considered either Special or Accessory uses. A different existing use of an
existing Structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an
Antenna or Telecommunications Tower on such lot; provided, however, that
such installation complies with the requirements of this Section and all other
Sections of the Zoning Ordinance and development regulations.
2. Lot Size: For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
Telecommunications Tower or Antenna complies with the Village of Itasca
development regulations, including, but no limited to, setback requirements,
lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 2
entire lot shall control, even though the Antennas or Telecommunications
Towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
3. Approved Site Zoning Districts: Antennas, Antenna Structures, and
Telecommunications Towers shall be allowed as Permitted Uses as provided
in Section 15.03 and as Special uses as provided in Section 15.04.
4. Inventory of Existing Sites: Each applicant for approval of an Antenna
and/or Telecommunications Tower shall provide to the Zoning Administrator
an inventory of its existing Telecommunications Towers, Antennas, or sites
approved for Telecommunications Towers and Antennas, that are either
within the jurisdiction of the Village of Itasca or within one (1) mile of the
border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and
design of each Telecommunications Tower. The Zoning Administrator may
share such information with other applicants applying for administrative
approvals or Special Use Permits under this Ordinance or other organizations
seeking to locate Antennas within the jurisdiction of the Village of Itasca,
provided, however, that the Zoning Administrator is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are
available or suitable.
5. Aesthetics: Telecommunications Towers and Antennas shall meet the
following requirements.
a. Telecommunications Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish
or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral
color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
b. At a Telecommunications Tower site, the design of the buildings and
related structure shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening, and landscaping that will bend them into natural
settings and surrounding buildings.
c. If an Antenna is installed on a Structure other than a Telecommunications
Tower, the Antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment
must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the Antenna and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
6. Lighting: Telecommunications Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless
required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 3
7. State or Federal Requirements: All Telecommunications Towers must
meet or exceed current standards or regulations of the FAA, the FCC, or any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate
Telecommunications Towers and Antennas. If such standards and regulations
are changed, then the owners of the Telecommunications Towers and
Antennas governed by this Ordinance shall bring such Telecommunications
Towers and Antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and
regulations, unless a more restrictive compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring Telecommunications
Towers and Antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the
Telecommunications Tower and Antenna at the owner’s expense.
8. Building Codes/Safety Standards: Any owner or operator of an Antenna,
Antenna Structure or Telecommunications Tower shall maintain the Antenna,
Antenna Structure or Telecommunications Tower in compliance with the
standards contained in the current and applicable state or local building codes
and the applicable standards for Telecommunications Towers that are
published by the Electronic Industry Association, as amended from time to
time. If, upon inspection, the Village of Itasca concludes that an Antenna,
Antenna Structure or Telecommunications Tower fails to comply with such
codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon
notice being provided to the owner or operator of the Antenna, Antenna
Structure or Telecommunications Tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days
to bring such Antenna, Antenna Structure or Telecommunications Tower into
compliance with the applicable standards.
Failure to bring the Antenna, Antenna Structure or Telecommunications
Tower into compliance within the thirty (30) day period shall constitute
grounds for removal of the Antenna, Antenna Structure, or
Telecommunications Tower at the owner’s and/or operator’s expense.
9. Measurement: For purposes of measurement, Telecommunications Tower
setback and Telecommunications Tower separation distances shall be
calculated and applied to facilities located in the Village of Itasca irrespective
of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries.
10. Not Essential Services: Antennas, Antenna Structures and
Telecommunications Towers shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this
Ordinance and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public
utilities, or private utilities.
11. Public Notice: For purposes of this Ordinance, any special use request,
variance request, or appeal of any administratively approved use or special use
shall require public notice and individual notice by the Village of Itasca to all
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 4
abutting property owners and all property owners of properties that are located
within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the zoning lot in question. Streets,
alleys, and watercourses shall not be considered in the determination of
“abutting” nor in calculating the two hundred fifty (250) feet.
12. Signs: No signs shall be allowed on an Antenna or Telecommunications
Tower other than those that may be required by the FCC.
13. Buildings and Support Equipment: Buildings and support equipment
associated with Antennas and Telecommunications Towers shall comply with
the requirements of Section 15.04 (11) of this Ordinance.
14. Multiple Antenna/Telecommunications Tower Plan: The Village of Itasca
encourages all plans for Telecommunications Tower and Antenna sites to be
submitted in a single application for approval of multiple Telecommunications
Towers and/or Antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall
be given priority in the review process.
15. Antennas on Existing Structures: Any Antenna which is not attached to a
Telecommunications Tower may be approved by the Village of Itasca as an
accessory use, provided that the Antenna complies with all FCC and FAA
regulations and all building codes and safety standards as referenced in
Section 15.02 (8) hereinabove. In accordance with the requirements of
Section 4.13(5)(a-c) of the Zoning Ordinance, any Antenna or
Telecommunications Tower that incorporates an Antenna located on
residential property where a property owner or property lessee uses such
antenna or Telecommunications Tower for a commercial purpose, shall not be
allowed as an accessory use in the R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning districts.
16. Antennas on Existing Telecommunications Towers: An Antenna which is
attached to an existing Telecommunications Tower may be approved by the
Zoning Administrator and, to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with
the proliferation and clustering of Telecommunications Towers, collocation of
Antennas by more than one carrier on existing Telecommunications Towers
shall take precedence over the construction of new Telecommunications
Towers, provided such collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent
with the following:
a. A Telecommunications Tower which is modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the collocation of an additional Antenna shall be of the
same Telecommunications Tower type as the existing
Telecommunications Tower, unless the Zoning Administrator allows
reconstruction as a monopole.
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 5
b. Height.
(1) An existing Telecommunications Tower may be modified or rebuilt
to a taller height, not to exceed thirty (30) feet over the
Telecommunications Tower’s existing height, such height not
exceeding one hundred thirty (130) feet in total, to accommodate the
collocation of an additional Antenna.
(2) The height change referred to in Subsection (b) (1) shall not require
a distance separation. The Telecommunications Tower’s
premodification height shall be used to calculate such distance
separations.
(3) The additional height referred to in Subsection (b) (1) shall not
require a distance separation. The Telecommunications Tower’s
premodification height shall be used to calculate such distance
separations.
c. Onsite Location.
(1) A Telecommunications Tower which is being rebuilt to
accommodate the collocation of an additional Antenna may be
moved onsite within fifty (50) feet of its existing location.
(2) After the Telecommunications Tower is rebuilt to accommodate
collocation, only one Telecommunications Tower may remain on
the site.
(3) A relocated onsite Telecommunications Tower shall continue to be
measured from the original Telecommunications Tower location for
purposes of calculating separation distances between
Telecommunications Towers. The relocation of a
Telecommunications Tower hereunder shall in no way be deemed to
cause a violation of this Ordinance.
(4) The on-site relocation of a Telecommunications Tower, which
comes within the separation distances to residential units or
residentially zoned lands as established in the Zoning Ordinance,
shall only be permitted when approved by the Zoning Administrator.
d. New Telecommunications Towers in non-residential zoning districts.
An applicant may locate any new Telecommunications Tower in a B-1, B-
2, B-3, O-R, ROC, or M zoning district, provided that: 1) a licensed
professional engineer certifies the Telecommunications Tower can
structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by the
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 6
applicant; 2) the Zoning Administrator concludes the Telecommunications
Tower is in conformity with the purpose set forth in the preamble to this
Ordinance and the requirements of this Ordinance; 3) the
Telecommunications Tower meets the setback separation requirements in
Section 15.04; and, 4) the Telecommunications Tower meets the following
Height and Usage criteria:
(1) for a single user, up to and including one hundred (100) feet in
height;
(2) for two users, up to one hundred fifteen (115) feet in height; and
(3) for three or more users, up to and including one hundred thirty (130)
feet in height.
17. Roadway Access: All sites on which Antennas, Antenna Structures, and
Telecommunications Towers are located must have a passable roadway access
of compacted aggregate base with a one and one half (1 ½) inch bituminous
binder course and a one (1) inch bituminous surface course, or a six (6) inch
compacted aggregate base with five (5) inch air entrained six (6) bag Portland
Cement concrete and 6 X 6 #10 welded wire reinforcing.
18. Fencing: The structures upon any site upon which an Antenna, Antenna
Structure, or Telecommunications Tower is located shall be surrounded by an
opaque screen which is no less than five feet (5’) in height and equipped with
an appropriate anti-climbing device. Screening materials shall include either
wooden or chain link fencing. Barbed wire shall be prohibited, unless the site
is owned by a tax levying body and the barbed wire fencing is recommended
by the Plan Commission and the Zoning Board. Shrubbery and bushes shall
be required, in addition to the wooden or chain link fence, unless specifically
waived by the Village of Itasca in its discretion in appropriate cases.
19. Disguised Structures: The provider of an Antenna, Antenna Structure, or
Telecommunications Tower may propose to disguise the proposed Antenna,
Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications Tower. Any such disguise must
be aesthetically consistent with the character of the surrounding area and
environment, and be constructed in such a manner where the health or safety
of Village of Itasca residents shall not be endangered. The Village of Itasca
may require the disguise of an Antenna, Antenna Structure, or
Telecommunications Tower as a condition of approval of a building permit or
special use permit if the Antenna, Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications
Tower is to be erected on a golf course or other public recreational area.
20. Annual Administrative Fee and Certifications: Each owner and/or
operator of an Antenna, Antenna Structure or Telecommunications Tower
shall be required annually on January 1 to pay an Administrative Fee of five
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 7
hundred dollars ($500.00) and to provide the following certifications in
writing by a certified engineer:
a. That the owner of operator’s Antenna, Antenna Structure or
Telecommunications Tower has been inspected and is in compliance with
all state and local building codes and standards published the Electronic
Industry Association; and
b. That the owner or operator’s Antenna is in compliance with the FCC RF
Emissions Standards.
The Village of Itasca reserves the right to increase the amount of the
Administrative Fee as it deems necessary. A separate Administrative Fee
shall be paid by each user or co-locator on a Telecommunications Tower.
21. Permit Required: Prior to the construction of an Antenna, Antenna Structure
or Telecommunications Tower the provider of the radio, television or
telecommunications services shall obtain a Permit from the Village of Itasca
for the erection of such Antenna, Antenna Structure or Telecommunications
Tower. An applicant for a Permit for an Antenna, Antenna Structure, or
Telecommunications Tower shall pay a fee in accordance with the Fee
Schedule set forth in Section 14.13 of the Zoning Ordinance, plus any
reasonable legal, engineering, or consulting fees at the conclusion of the
review.
22. Waiver of Provisions. An applicant can request a waiver of any provision of
this Ordinance upon the showing of appropriate justification and benefit to the
public. Such request shall be treated as a request for a variance and the
appropriate procedures thereto shall apply.
15.03 PERMITTED USES
1. General
The following uses listed in this Section are deemed to be Permitted Uses and
shall not require administrative approval or a Special use Permit.
2. Antennas, Antenna Structures, and Telecommunications Towers are
specifically permitted in;
a. Any M zoning district (Limited Manufacturing District), or;
b. Property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the Village of Itasca or
a Park District located within the boundaries of the Village of Itasca,
which is located in any zoning district, particularly expressly including the
Village of Itasca’s water tower sites, and Public Works and Police Station
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 8
sites, and Park District baseball fields, provided that a lease authorizing
such Antenna, Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications Tower has been
approved by the Village of Itasca. Village or Park District property
located in a flood plain shall not be considered for Permitted Use status.
3. No-Impact Antennas and No-Impact Telecommunications Towers shall be a
Permitted Use in any non-residential zoning district.
15.04 SPECIAL USES
1. General Provisions:
a. Radio and telecommunications Antennas, Antenna Structures, and
Telecommunications Towers used for Personal Wireless Facilities,
Personal Wireless Services, radio transmission, or television transmission
shall be subject to the Special Use provisions contained within Section
14.11 of this Zoning Ordinance and applications for Special Use Permits
shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance, except as modified in this Chapter 15.
b. In granting a Special Use Permit, the Plan Commission may impose
conditions to the extent the Plan Commission concludes such conditions
are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed
Telecommunications Tower on adjoining properties.
c. Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits,
whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
d. An applicant for a Special Use Permit shall submit the information
described in this Section and a non-refundable fee as established by
resolution of the Village Board of the Village of Itasca to reimburse the
Village of Itasca for the cost of reviewing the application.
e. Antennas, Antenna Structures, and Telecommunications Towers shall be
allowed as special sues only consistent with all of the requirements of this
Ordinance in the following zoning districts: R-1 (Single Family
Residence – golf course, public utility facilities, public service use
facilities with radio or TV Telecommunications Tower sites only), R-3
(General Residence – public utility facilities, public service use facilities
with radio or TV Telecommunications sites only), B-1 (Local Business
District), B-2 (Community Business District), B-3 (Service Business
District), O-R (Office Research District), and ROC (Regional Office
Center District).
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 9
f. No-Impact Towers and No-Impact Antennas shall be allowed as a special
use within zoning districts R-1 (Single Family Residence), R-2 (Single
Family Residence), and R-3 (General Residence).
2. Information Required: In addition to any information required for
applications for Special Use Permits referenced above, each petitioner
requesting a Special Use Permit under this Ordinance for an Antenna,
Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications Tower shall submit a scaled site
plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations,
and other documentation signed and sealed by appropriately licensed
professionals, showing the location, type, and dimensions of all
improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency
coverage, Telecommunications Tower Height requirements, setbacks, drives,
proposed means of access, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses,
adjacent roadway, and other information deemed necessary by the Village of
Itasca to be necessary to assess compliance for this Ordinance. In addition,
the following information shall be supplied:
a. Legal description of the parent track and leased parcel (if applicable);
b. The setback distance between the proposed Structure and the nearest
residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties and unplatted
residentially zoned property;
c. The separation distance from other such structures described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to Section 15.02 (4) shall be
shown on an updated site plan or map and the applicant shall also identify
the type of construction of the existing Structure(s) and the owner/operator
of the existing Structure(s), if known;
d. A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials;
e. The method of fencing, and finish color and, if applicable, the method of
camouflage and illumination;
f. A description of compliance with Section 15.02 (3), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9)
and (13) and all applicable federal, state or local laws.
g. A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether the construction of
the Telecommunications Tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users;
h. Identification of the entities providing the Back Haul Network for the
Structure(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or
operated by the applicant in the Village of Itasca.
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 10
i. A description of the suitability of the use of existing Telecommunications
Towers, other Structures, or alternative technology not requiring the use of
Telecommunications Towers or Structures to provide the services to be
provided through the use of the proposed new Telecommunications
Tower; and
j. A description of the feasible location(s) of future Telecommunications
Towers or Antennas within the Village of Itasca based upon existing
physical, engineering, technological, or geographical limitations in the
even t the proposed Telecommunications Tower is erected.
3. Factors Considered in Granting Special Use Permits: The Village of
Itasca shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a
Special Use Permit above and beyond those factors referenced in Chapter
14.11 of the Zoning Ordinance. The Village of Itasca may waive or reduce
the burden on the petitioner of one or more of these criteria if the Village of
Itasca concludes that the goals of this Ordinance are better served thereby.
a. Height of the proposed Antenna, Antenna Structure, or
Telecommunications Tower;
b. Proximity of the Antenna, Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications
Tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries.
c. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
d. Surrounding topography;
e. Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
f. Design of the Antenna, Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications Tower,
with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of
reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
g. Proposed ingress and egress; and
h. Availability of other suitable existing Antennas, Antenna Structures,
Telecommunications Towers, and other Structures or alternative
technologies not requiring the use of Telecommunications Towers or
Structures as discussed elsewhere in this Ordinance.
4. Height: No Antenna, Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications Tower shall
exceed a height of one hundred thirty (130) linear feet in aerial height. Where
an arm has been installed to facilitate collocation of an additional Antenna on
the existing Antenna Structure or Telecommunications Tower, the arm shall
not exceed a length of twelve (12) linear feet.
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 11
5. Setbacks and Separation:
a. Setbacks: Antennas, Antenna Structures, or Telecommunications Towers
must be set back a distance equal to the height of the Antenna, Antenna
Structure, or Telecommunications Tower from any off-site residential
structure. Antenna Structures, guy lines, and equipment shelters must
satisfy the minimum setback requirements for R-1, R-2, R-3, B-1, B-2, B-
3, O-R, ROC, or M zoning districts.
b. Separation: The following separation requirements shall apply to all
Telecommunications Towers and Antennas for which a Special Use
Permit is required; provided, however, that the Plan Commission may
reduce the standard separation requirements if the goals of this Ordinance
would be better served thereby, or if enforcement of said setback would
effectively prohibit said Telecommunications Tower.
(1) Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
(a) Telecommunications Tower separation shall be measured from
the base of the Telecommunications Tower to the lot line of the
off-site uses and/or designated areas as specified in Table 1,
except as otherwise provided in Table 1.
(b) Separation requirements for Telecommunications Towers shall
comply with the minimum standards established in Table 1.
(2) Separation distances between Telecommunications Towers.
(a) Separation distances between Telecommunications Towers
shall be applicable for and measured between the proposed
Telecommunications Tower and Pre-Existing
Telecommunications Towers. The separation distances shall
be measured by drawing or following a straight line between
the base of the existing Telecommunications Tower and the
proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed
Telecommunications Tower. The separation distances (listen
in linear feet) are as shown in Table 2.
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 12
TABLE 1
Off-Site Use/Designated Area Separation Distance
Single-family or duplex residential units,
principal building.
500 ft.
Vacant single-family or duplex residentially
zoned land which is either platted or has
preliminary subdivision plan approval which is
not expired.
500 ft.
Vacant unplatted residentially zoned lands,
including unplatted residential use property
without a valid preliminary subdivision plan or
valid development plan approval and any multifamily
residentially zoned land grater than
duplex.
500 ft.
Existing multi-family residential units greater
than duplex.
100 ft. or 100% of the
Telecommunications
Tower Height,
whichever is greater.
Non-residentially zoned lands or non-residential
areas.
None. Only setback
apply.
The shoreline of any watercourse.
500 ft.
The centerline of any State or Federal Highway.
500 ft.
TABLE 2
EXISTING TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS – TYPES
MINIMUM SEPARATION DISTANCES
Lattice Guyed Monopole
>=75 ft. High
Monopole
<75 ft. High
Lattice 1,000 1,500 500 250
Guyed 1,000 1,750 1,500 1,250
Monopole
>75 ft. High
500 1,500 250 250
Monopole
<75 ft. High
250 1,250 250 250
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 13
6. Sitting on Wetland Prohibited: No Antenna, Antenna Structure, or
Telecommunications Tower shall be located in an area which has been
designated as a wetland either by the Village of Itasca, DuPage County, the
State of Illinois Department of Natural Resources, the United States
Department of the Interior or the United States Army Corps of Engineers, and
any and all governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction.
7. FCC Signage: To the extent that signage is required by the FCC on an
Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications Tower that signage shall constitute
no more than five percent (5%) of the square footage of the Antenna, Antenna
Structure, or Telecommunications Tower or shall be no larger than is required
by the FCC, whichever shall constitute the smallest signage area.
8. Preservation of Landscape: Existing mature tree growth and natural
landforms on the proposed Antenna, Antenna Structure, or
Telecommunications Tower site shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
9. Utilities and Access Required: Radio and Telecommunications Antennas,
Antenna Structures, and Telecommunications Towers, including, but not
limited to those used for Personal Wireless Services, Personal Wireless
Facilities and Unlicensed Wireless Services, shall be required to include
adequate utilities, access, and/or other facilities necessary for the servicing of
the Antenna, Antenna Structure or Telecommunications Tower. All such
utilities shall be buried.
10. Signal Interference: No signal transmission from any Antenna, Antenna
Structure, or Telecommunications Tower shall interfere with police fire,
public works or any other governmental radio bank signals. In the case of the
possibility of such interference based upon the frequencies selected for the
proposed Antenna, Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications Tower, the
petition for Special use shall be denied.
11. Equipment Shelter and Equipment Cabinets:
a. Equipment Shelter: A provider of a radio, television, or
telecommunications Antenna, Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications
Tower may provide an equipment shelter on the site of the Antenna,
Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications Tower. The square footage of
the equipment shelter may not exceed more than twenty percent (20%) of
the total square footage of the Antenna, Antenna Structure or
Telecommunications Tower ground site or four hundred fifty (450) square
feet, whichever is greater. At any Antenna, Antenna Structure, or
Telecommunications Tower site in which more than one Antenna has been
collocated, no more than three (3) equipment shelters shall be allowed.
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 14
Multiple equipment shelters shall be contained under one roof if at all
practicably possible.
No equipment shelter shall be approved as part of the Site Plan unless
appropriate electrical power and rod ingress and egress facilities are
planned for inclusion at the equipment shelter site. The equipment shelter
shall be constructed from either brick or textured concrete materials of a
neutral color.
b. Equipment Cabinets:
(1) In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may be
located in a front or side yard provided the cabinet structure is no
greater than four (4) feet in height or twenty-four (24) square feet of
gross floor area and the cabinet/structure is located in a minimum of
ten (10) feet from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be
screened by hedging or shrubbery with an ultimate height of at least
forty-two (42) to forty-eight (48) inches and a planted height of at
least thirty-six (36) inches.
(2) In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than six
(6) feet in height or sixty-four (64) square feet in gross floor area.
The structure or cabinet shall be screened by hedging or shrubbery
with an ultimate height of eight (8) feet and a planted height of at
least thirty-six (36) inches. In all other instances, structures or
cabinets shall be screened from view of all residential properties
which abut or are directly across the street from the structure or
cabinet by a solid fence eight (8) feet in height or a hedge with an
ultimate height of eight (8) feet and a planted height of thirty-six
(36) inches.
(3) In commercial or industrial districts, the equipment cabinet or
structure shall be no greater than six (6) feet in height or sixty-four
(64) square feet in gross floor area, or ten (10) percent of the
aggregate area of the Telecommunications Tower site, whichever is
less. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by a hedge or
shrubbery with an ultimate height of eight (8) feet and a planted
height of at least thirty-six (36) inches. In all other instances,
structures or cabinets shall be screened from view of all residential
properties which abut or are directly across the street from the
structure or cabinet by a solid fence five (5) feet in height or a hedge
with an ultimate height of eight (8) feet and a planted height of
thirty-six (36) inches.
12. Code Requirements: Any Antenna, Antenna Structure, or
Telecommunications Tower must meet code requirements established by the
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 15
National Electrical Code, and BOCA codes currently in effect as required by
the Village of Itasca and all applicable marking and lighting standards as
established by the Federal Aviation Administration.
13. Engineering Justification: No new Telecommunications Tower shall be
permitted unless the applicant provides justification and demonstrates to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Zoning Board that no existing
Telecommunications Tower, Structure, or alternative technology that does not
require the use of Telecommunications Towers or Structures can
accommodate the applicant’s proposed Antenna. An applicant shall submit
information requested by the Zoning Board related to the availability of
suitable existing Telecommunications Towers, other Structures, or alternative
technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing
Telecommunications Tower, Structure, or alternative technology can
accommodate the applicant proposed Antenna may consist of the following:
a. No existing Antennas, Antenna Structures, or Telecommunications
Towers are located within the geographic area required to meet
petitioner’s engineering requirements.
b. Existing Antennas, Antenna Structures, Telecommunications Towers, or
other structures are not of sufficient height to meet petitioner’s
engineering requirements;
c. Existing Antennas, Antenna Structures, Telecommunications Towers, or
other structures do not have sufficient structural strength to meet
petitioner’s engineering requirements;
d. The petitioner’s proposed Antenna, Antenna Structure, or
Telecommunications Tower would cause electromagnetic interference
with the existing Antenna, Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications
Tower, or the Antenna on the existing structure would cause interference
with the petitioner’s proposed Antenna.
e. The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to
share an existing Antenna, Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications
Tower or to adapt to an existing Antenna, Antenna Structure, or
Telecommunications Tower are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new
Antenna, Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications Tower development
are considered unreasonable.
f. The petitioner demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render
existing Antennas, Antenna Structures, or Telecommunications Towers or
other structures are unsuitable.
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 16
g. The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not
require the use of Telecommunications Towers or Structures, such as
booster Antennas utilizing a stick-shaped or whip-shaped Antenna, or a
cable micro-cell network using multiple low-powered transmitters and
receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Cost of alternative
technology that exceeds new Telecommunications Tower or Antenna
development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable.
14. Removal of Abandoned Antennas, Antenna Structures, or
Telecommunications Towers: Any Antenna, Antenna Structure, or
Telecommunications Tower that is not operated for a continuous period of
twelve (12) months or for which the annual administrative fee is not paid
within a twelve (12) month period shall be considered abandoned, and the
owner of such Antenna, Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications Tower
shall remove same from within ninety (90) days of receipt of written notice
from the Village of Itasca notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such
Antenna, Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications Tower is not removed
within said ninety (90) days, the Village of Itasca shall remove such Antenna,
Antenna structure, or Telecommunications Tower at the owner’s expense and
file a lien against the real estate for the cost of removal or such other action as
provided by law. If there are two or more users of a single Antenna, Antenna
Structure, or Telecommunications Tower, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the Antenna, Antenna Structure, or
Telecommunications Tower.
15. Collocation: A request for approval of a Special Use Permit for the
installation of an Antenna, Alternative Antenna, Antenna Structure or
Telecommunications Tower, the Zoning Board may by express condition
require that the applicant shall allow, on a commercially reasonable basis,
other providers of personal wireless telecommunications services to collocate
additional antennas or antenna structures on a free-standing pole which is part
of applicant’s proposed personal wireless facility, where such collocation is
technologically feasible.
15.05 NON-CONFORMING USERS
1. Prohibited Expansion of Non-Conforming Use: Telecommunications
Towers that are constructed and Antennas that are installed in accordance with
the provisions of this Ordinance shall not be deemed to constitute the
expansion of a non-conforming use or structure.
a. A Telecommunications Tower other than that used for Ham Radio or as a
Receive-Only Antenna, located within the lot lines of a single-family or
multi-family residence in zoning district R-1, R-2, or R-3, which is used
for commercial purposes, shall be considered to be a non-conforming
structure.
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 17
2. Pre-Existing Telecommunications Tower: Pre-existing
Telecommunications Towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as they
presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement with a new
Telecommunications Tower of light construction and Height) shall be
permitted on such pre-existing Telecommunications Towers. New
construction other than routine maintenance on a pre-existing
Telecommunications Tower shall comply with the requirements of this
Ordinance.
3. Rebuilding Damaged or Destroyed Non-Conforming Antennas, Antenna
Structures, or Telecommunications Towers: Not withstanding any
provision in this Ordinance to the contrary, bona fide non-conforming
Antennas, Antenna Structures or Telecommunications Towers or Antennas
that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having first obtained
administrative approval or a Special Use Permit and without having to meet
the separation requirements specified elsewhere in this Ordinance. The type,
height, and location of the Telecommunications Tower on site shall be of the
same type and intensity as the original facility approved.
Building permits to rebuild a facility shall comply with the then applicable
building code and shall be obtained within one hundred and eighty (180) days
from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained
within the time specified or if said permit expires, the Telecommunications
Tower or Antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in Section
15.04(14).
15.06 ANNUAL REPORTING OF INFORMATION.
Each owner of an Antenna, Antenna Structure, or Telecommunications Tower
regulated under this Ordinance, and including those previously existing structures
which would have been regulated under this Ordinance, shall on an annual basis,
furnish the Village of Itasca, with such information as is required by the Village
of Itasca to aid with the administration of this Ordinance, such as changes in
availability of space on any Telecommunications Tower for collection of
additional Antennas, plans to abandon a position on a Telecommunications
Tower, thereby leaving space for the possible collocation of another Antenna,
plans and/or willingness to modify said Telecommunications Tower and Antenna
Structure so as to provide for the possibility of collocation, or intentions to
abandon a Telecommunications Tower structure, or other non-proprietary
information as may be required by the Village of Itasca. Upon written notice
from the Village of Itasca to the owner thereof, the effective date of this
Ordinance, which Telecommunications Tower and/or Antenna Structure would
otherwise be regulated by this Ordinance, shall register with the Village of Itasca,
and shall provide such non-proprietary information as is deemed useful by the
SECTION 15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS
15 - 18
Village of Itasca for administration of this Chapter. This Section is specifically
deemed to have retroactive effect.
ILLUSTRATIONS
16 - 1
ILLUSTRATIONS
ILLUSTRATIONS
16 - 2
ILLUSTRATIONS
16 - 3
ILLUSTRATIONS
16 - 4
ILLUSTRATIONS
16 - 5
ILLUSTRATIONS
16 - 6
ILLUSTRATIONS
16 - 7
ILLUSTRATIONS
16 - 8
 
VILLAGE OF ITASCA
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
ORDINANCE NO 616-86
ADOPTED AUGUST 12, 1986
$18.00
ITASCA COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
111 LINE STREET
ITASCA, ILLINOIS 60143

.... ·
SECTION
1.00
2.00
3 •. oo
4.00
S.00
6 .00
1.oa
8. Oil
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUBJECT
TITLE •
PURPOSE
JURISDICTION
GENERAL PROViSIONS
Interpretation
Se para bil i ty .
RULES ANO DEFINITIONS
Rules .•..•
Definitons .•.••.••.
Planned Devlopment Re9ulation
GENERAL GUIDELINES ••••••
Preliminary Consultation
Preliminary Plan •••.
Final Piat .••. • .•.
GENERAL PRO'/ IS IONS FOR SUS DIVIS ION AP PROV AL
Plan Commision Guidelines
Unsuitable Land •••••
Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
Storm Water Management • • . . • •
Dedication of Land for Public Use.
Reseveration of Public Spaces and Sites.
Dedication of ?ark and School Sites or
for Payments or Fees In Lieu-Thereof •
Dedication and Development of Detention
Ponds or Funds In-Lieu-Thereof •.
Plats of Subdivision ..•...•.
Vacation of a ?lat of Subdivision.
PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL •.••
Preliminary Consultation ....•.
Procedure for Approval of Preliminary Plan
Preliminary Plans Requirements ••••
Pians and Specifications for Required
Land Improvements •••...••
PNcedure for Approval of Final Plat •
-i-
~
1
l
z
3
4
s
6
6
6
14
15
15
15
lii
17
17
18
18
l!l
l<:I
19
20
. 24
. 25
25
21:1
28
• 30 . . 33
42
• 45
SECTION
9.00
lll.00
,.,,.,
. ; ;-·
TABLE OF CONTENTS (Cont'dj
SUBJECT
Ffnal Plat Requirements'.·. • • . . • 47
Construction of Required Land Improvements. 61
Agreements and Guarantee of Improvements. 61
Acc~p!;~nce. ...(.:) f Required. Lii nd Improvements,. 65 · . ' . ;_,: ; ~ .
?lANNiNG 'STMDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION DESIGN.
. Street Standanls.
;,_ Eas~men.tS ., " .. -.. "_:. ~- ~-- · -· ?r', .; .
·_. B1ocks- .. -... Q ~----~-- ·~ "·- .... .," ~ '"'~ ... "
.,; · Lots .. . , .... -- ., ., __ · ...... ,, .. ·;; .. " .,.- "
··Building Setback Unes.: .''-.· .~:.. .
Parks, School Sites, and. ?tiblh::;>.rea~:
. ,,- ,'j
P.DMINSTRIAT!ON AND ENFORC2M£tff 'o • ,_,-, , .• , •
Organization.
Enforcement •.•••...•
Variations and·!xceptlan•
Record of Plat$ •
Validity •••••••••
. <:: )i,pp~a1s_ ....... , • • • . •
URepi~l ~ _; .. ~ 7 f., ·- : ,~ }:·} ~- ~&; 6_"' ~:
Amendments o ; : : · ; --. ·· • ' ;
Violations and Pena11ties
Fees " .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. ,,
Public Utilities Permits.
. . " , , . Ado pti P n. • • .•
,, -" Piibticat:ion .•• Erfect. ,,
TLLtiSTRATlONS ;' •
. ~, '' -· .
: .·'·.-
-ii-
. .
·-· &
... _· .. _-
.
.·
. "'
67
67
72
73
74
75
70
77
77
7/j
79
80
80
80
80
81
81
l:ll
81
81
82
82
83
85
·--··- ---·--------·------
";';:/ ~"'. .-, "•;
,._, .. ~~--- ;.
. :..-·
AN ORDlNANCE, IMPLEMENTING 'TH'E CO~lPREHENSlVE 0 P!::.AN' Cf:' THE V !LLAGE OF ITASCA,
li..LINOIS, ANIJ ENACTI~G:u1iDER 'cHAPTER 10~ AiiD CRAP1'ER ',,;4, SECTIOI'( 3-Za: OF THE
ILLINOIS REVISED STATUTE~. AS. AMENDED', ESTABLISHING REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE
SUBDIVISION OF LAND:. ~RQV!DIH~ SJ!\)'lDARp,s·, Pll.OCEllURES. ANll RULES FOR THE
PREPARATIOW AND FlLH~G:·'1F.:N:AtS• ANLI, TO;'P~OV'!DE' FOR: SKETCH PLAN, PRELIMINARY
AND FINAL APPROVAL OR REJECTION OF 'SUCH PL:il.TS BY T1ff'ViLLAGE OF ITASCA, DU PAGE
COUNTY AND COOK COUNJY, ~LLl~OIS,;;:A~°')MPOSiitl.1. PE,f'l}\LITJES FOR THE VIOLATION OF
THIS ORDINANCE. " • . ·· , '""" . ·' :·~:
. . . ~
SECTION 1.00 - TIT.LE, ?'
This ordinance shall be ~now~ an~ ma} be desig~•ted~is the "Subdivision
Regulations for the yili'ag'e 9( I~asca": Jlliryoi,s!~qs~
. • ~ ~ "" ~ ~ .:::-' , ,.._,1tif1Sii1.<;
·:'::.~:-Jr[:~-:"'.-·: b;--:.s :·:cf.:.
While it is obvious that ~egulations' are n~e~~~.'.h~,li;sure orderly extension of
Vil 1 age streets, the other purposes of the'se"re9ul~.±jons are:
-~'..):;~;1~
A.
B.
c.
To insure sound, harmonious subdivision d,e}',1',i.PJ>)TI,ent including Planned
Developments and community growth·, ·and to 'si'l"!lgtrard the interest of
the home. owner, the subdivider, the )n.v,es~p,r, .and the Viliage.
· • -•. •.L.'J.; n-. i 2d.J._;.t
To assure that no subdivision shall be approved that is not energy
efficient as practicable in terms of density, mixture of use, site
selections, buildin; layout and orientation and landscaping.
To provide permanent assets to the locality and to the Village.
To prevent scattered development beyond existing public utilities and
prevent excessive development costs.
To assure the development of land for optimum use with necessary
protection against deterioration and obsolescence.
E. To limit and control the pollution of the environment that can be
caused by inadequate ,or incomplete urban development.
1.
F. To provide common grounds of understanding and a sound working
_relationship between the Village and subdivider.
G. To lesser. congestion ;,, the streets and highways.
H. To provide for adequate light and.air.
!. To facilitate adequate provi.sion for transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, and other public necessities. ·
J. To ensure proper legal description and proper monumenting of
subdivided land.
The regulations are established with reasonable ~onsideration of the character
of the Village with a view toward conserving the .value of buildings upon the
land and providing the best possible environment fOr huinan habitation. It is
intended that these regulations shal 1 supplement and facilitate the enforcement
of the provisions and development standards contained in "the Building Code,
Official Map Regulations, Zoning Ordinance, and the Offlcial Village
Comprehensive Plan.
SECTION 3.00 - JURISDICTION
The.Subdivision Ordinance of the Villa:;;e of It~sca, Illiriois shall apply to all
subdivisions of land, as defined herein, located within the Village of Itasca
and entirely or in part within the unincorpprated area within one and one-half
{l-1/2) miles from the corpora"te limits of the Village, in accordance with
Chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes. Th~ subdivision plans and plats,
including planned developments, proposed im;irovements to be installed, and all
procedures relating thereto, shall in a11 respects be in full compliance with
the regulations herein.
2.
SECTION 4.00 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Wherever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be °laid out wii:hin
the incorporated limits of the Village of Itasca, or within contiguous
territory not more than one and one half (l-1/2) miles beyo~q the
incorporated boundaries of the Vi11age of Itasca, the subdivider
thereof or his agent shall submi't both a preli:ninar/ 'plan and a final
subdivision plat to the Village of !'tasca for its approval. The
subdivision plats and all procedures relating thereto shall in all
respects be in full compliance with these regulations.
8. Until preliminary plans and plats fer the subdivision are approved:
1. No land shall-be subdivided, nor any street laid out, nor any
improvement~m~de to the natural land.
2.
3.
No lot, l~a~t or parcel of land within any subdivision shall be
offered ror,'safe. nor shall an; sale, contract for sale, or
option be mide'~r given.
No improvements--such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water
drainage, sanitary sewerage facilities, gas service, electric
service, lighting, grading, paving or surfacing of streets -
shall hereafter be made by any owner or owners or his or their
agent.
c. No land shall be subdivfded for an'/'use' whicr{~{i: determined by the
Plan Commission after investigation_ by the Vill'a:ge tn;ineer to be
located within areas 6f special flood, hazard until the subdivjder has
complied with the Village of Itasca, lllinois Hunicfpal Code and/or
Engineering Standards and Specifications.
D. No land shall be subdivided for any use which is determined by the
Plan Commission after investigation by the Village Engineer, to be
unsuitable for such a use by reason of flooding or bad drainage,
adverse earth and rock formation or topography, or any other features
likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future
residents in the proposed s"bdivision or of the community.
Unsuitable land located within areas of special flood hazard as
identified in the Municipal Code, shall be s_ubject to the provisions
of that Ordinance.
Unsuitable land located outside areas of special flood hazard may be
subdivided only if the subdivider agrees to make improvements which
~ill, in the opinion of the Village Ensineer, make the area safe for
occupancy and provide adequate lot and street drainage and storm water
detention facilites.
3.
E. Where the developer or subdivider of land outside areas of special
flood hazard can show in writing and with appropriate documentation
that the strict adherence to the design standards set forth causes an
unnecessary hardship, the Village Board may approve a variance. Such
variance may be granted after recommendation by the Plan Commission
and where topography and conditions peculiar to the site or
surrounding area substantiates a variance without destroyin9 the
intent of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Variances for land within areas of special flood hazard shall be
subject to the provisions of the Municipal Code.
F. All dedications of land and offerings in-lieu-of to the Village for
use as streets, highways, alleys, schools, parks, playgrounds or other
public uses shall be referred to the Plan Commission for review and
recommendation before being accepted by the Village Board or by any
other governing authority of the Village of Itasca.
G. Where a tract of land proposed for a subdivision is part of a larger,
logical subdivision unit in relation to the Village as a whole, the
Plan Commission may, before recommending approval, request that the
subdivider submit a plan for the entire area or neighborhood to be
used by the Plan Commission as an aid in j~dging the proposed plat •..
4.01 INTERPRETATION
A. MinimunvStandards Established. In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
and general welfare.
B. Higher Standards Govern. Where the conditions imposed by any
provisions of this Ordinance upon the subdivision of land are either
more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other provisions of this Ordinance or any other
applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or resulation of any kind,
the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards
or requirements shall govern.
C. Easements or Covenants not Abrogated. This Ordinance is not intendeJ
to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement,
provided that where the re9LJlations of this Ordinance are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations that such
easement, covenant, or other private agreement, the requir:ments of
this Ordinance shall govern.
4.
D. Existing Subdivisions. No subdivision of land, which was not lawfully
existing at the time of the adoption o·f this Ordinance, shall be made
lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this Ordinance; and to the
extent that said subdivision of land is in conflict in any manner with
the requirements of this Ordinance, said subdivision of·lana·remains
unlawful hereunder.
4.02 - SEPARAdlLITY
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Village Board of the Viilage
of Itasca that the several provisions of this Ordindnce be separable in
accordance with the following:
A. Separability of Parts. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall
adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this Ordinance to
be invalid, such ·judgement shall not affect any other provision of
this Ordinance not specifically included in said judgement.
a. Separability cf Application. If an; court of competent jurisdiction
shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this
Ordinance to a particular subdivision of land, such judgement shall
not affect the application of said provision to any other subdivision
of land, not specifically included in said judgement.
5.
SECTION 5.00 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS
In the interpretation of this Ordinance, the rules and definitions contained in
this Section shall be observed and applied, except when the context ~!early
indicates otherwise.
5.0l - RULES
The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the
plural the singular.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
C. The word "may" is permissive.
D. The word "1 ot" sila 11 include the words "plot", and "piece", and
"parcel".
E. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for",
"designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", and "occupied for."
5.02 - DEFINITIONS
ADT. Average Daily Traffic
ALLEY. The right-of-way which affords secondary means of access to properties
abutting upon a street.
APPLICANT. The owner or contract purchaser of land proposed to be subdivided
or his legal representative.
APRON. An extension of a driveway lying between the public sid-::walk (or tile
right-of-way line if there is no sidewalkj and the curb and gutters of a
street. The maintenance responsibility for this facility normally being with
the owner of the driveway so extended.
BLOCK. A block is a tract of land bounded by street rights-of-waj, or by a
combination of street rights-of-way and public parks, cemeteries, railroad and
utility rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or shore lines of waterways, or corporate
boundary 1 Ines.
6.
BOND. Any form of security approved as to form by the Village Attorney
including a cash deposit, surety bond, letter of credit, collateral or
instrument of credit in an amount or form accepted by the Board of Trustees.
BORINGS, SOIL. Examination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a
specific parcel of land by drilling.
BUILDING. Is a structure, with a permanent roof, separated on all sides from
adjacent open space by exterior or party walls, built for the support, shelter,
or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or immovable property of any kind,
and which is permanently affixed to the ground.
BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Village of Itasca for the
construction, erection, or alteration of a structure or building.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to the street ri;ht-of-wa1 line at a
distance from it, required by the front 1ard requirements of the Itasca Zoning
Ordinance.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The composite of the functional and geographic elements of
the Offical Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Itasca, (adopted October 18,
1977) or any segment thereof, ·;n the fonn of plans, maps, charts, text of
reports, implementing ordinances, and the Official Map.
CORINGS, PAVEMENT. Examination and analysis of the completed surface and/or
sub-surface of a finished pavement by removing a core by dril 1 ing.
CROSSWALK. A public right-of-way located across a block to provide pedestrian
access to adjacent streets·or alleys.
CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street of short len~th, having one end open to traffic and
being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turn-around.
CURB. The permanent edge of a paved surface desiJned to separate the vehicular
travelway from the parkway.
DATUM PLANE. A reference point from which elevations are measured. The datum
plane is a mean sea level as established by the United States Geological Survey
(U.S.G.S.)
DETENTION BASIN. A covered or uncovered reservoir designed to hold an
excessive accumulation of storm water so as to reduce peak flow in an storm
water drainage system.
DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real property,.
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the
area of special flood hazard or elsewhere within the Village of Itasca of i:s
area of planning jurisdiction.
7.
DRAINAGE, SWALE. A turf draina9e ditch of shallow depth with side slopes not
exceeding one to twelve (1-12j feet.
EASEMENT. An authorization or grant by a property owner for the use by another
and for a specific purpose, of any designated part of his property.
ELEVATiONS. The vertical distance measured from a point on the ~round to the
datum plane.
EXCAVATION. Any act of changing of the grade or sub-grade of a tract of land
by cutting, scraping, grading, trenching, digging, filling-in, or otherwise
reshaping the natural contour of the ground.
The following shall not be construed as excavating/filling:
1. Any cutting, grading, trenching, digging, or backfilling of any
foundation of a building approved for construction.
2. Top dressing in an area of existing homes, which top dressing does not
change the drainage patterns.
EXISTING GRADE. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
FILL; Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a
new location and shali include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FLOOD EXCAVATiDN BASE. The ~levation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
FLOOD PLAIN. The land area ad~acent to surface water bodies or waterways that
is subject to periodic inundation when greater than normal water flows are
experienced. The flood plain may be identified according to the frequency of
the flood flow that inundates it. For example, the portion of flood plain
inundated by the flow which is equaled or exceeded once in ten years is the
10-year flood plain. The flood plain inundated by a hundred year storm is the
100-year fiood plain.
FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land
areas that shall be reserved in order to discharge the base flood water without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one-tenth (l/iO)
of one (lj foot.
GRADE. The slope of land, road, street, or other public way expressed in
percent.
8.
GRADIENT OR PERCElff OF GRADE. The vertical rise in feet per one hundred (lOOj
feet of horizontal distance. (A one (1) percent grade is a rise of one (1)
feet in one hundred (100) feet, for example.)
GROSS LAND AREA. The entire area of a development including lots, streets, and
alleys, measured to the center line of any bounding streets.
IMPROVEMENTS. Grading, street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water
mains, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, trees, bushes,
landscaping and other additions to the natural state of the land which increase
Its value, utility or habitability in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
A. Private Improvement - Any installed or constructed facility for which
the responsibility of maintenance and ownership will be retained by
the owner or a homeowners association.
B. Private Common Improvement - Any installed or constructed facility for
which the responsibility of maintenance and ownership will be retained
by the homeowner or condominium association. This includes amenities
such as, swi;nming pools, tennis courts, parks, etc.
C. Public Improvement - Any facility for which the Village of Itasca or
other municipal body may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation or which is constructed for general public
us.e of benefit.
LOT. A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future of transfer of
ownership or for building development. (See Illustration Section.)
LOT, BUTT. A butt lot is a lot at the end of a block and locdted between two
corner lots.
LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two (2j or more streets,
where the interior angle of such intersection cotenninous with the right-of-way
lines of such streets does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on
streets, and which is not a corner lot.
shall be deemed front lines.
two parallel or approximately parallel
On a through lot, both street lines
LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot, the rear of ·t1hich abuts upon the side of
another lot, whether across an alley or not.
9.
LOT OF RECORD. A single lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which
has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook or DuPage
Counties, Illinois; or a single parcel of land, the deed of which has been
recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of either Cook or DuPage
Counties, Illinois.
OFFICIAL MAP. The map showing the streets, highways and parks theretofore laid
out, adopted and established by law and any amendments or additions thereto
resulting from the Village Board action or the approval of subdivision plats.
(See Chapter 24, Section 11-12-5 of the Illinois Revised Statutes)
OWNER. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust, or
any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land
sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedin~s to subdivide the
same under this Ordinance.
PARCEL. A continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as
provided for in the Plats Act. (Chapter 109, Illinois Revised Statutes as
amendedj.
PARKWAY. That part of the public street right-of-way not occupied by the
street pavement and located between the back of the curb and the sidewalk as
well as the dividing strip of a roadway.
PAVING IMPROVEMENTS. Road excavation, aprons, base course, binder course,
surface coursffe, curb and gutter, ft sidewalk, street lights and related
appurtenances excluding those in parking lots, as requir:d in this Ordinance.
PEDESTRIAN WAY (CROSSWALK).
across or within a.block for
not be limited tJ, sidewalks
Is a right-of-way
use by pedestrian
and eras swa lks.
or easement however designed,
traffic; and shall include but
PERSON. Any natural person, firm or corporation, public or private, the State
of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States
of America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant,
offices, or employee of any of the foregoing.
PLAN COMMISSION. The words "Plan Commission'', as used herein, refer to the
Plan Commission of the Village of Itasca, Illinois.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land of a size
sufficient to create its own character controlled by a single landowner or by a
9roup of landowners in common agreement as to control, to be developed as a
single entity; the character of which is compatible with adjacent parcels, and
the intent of the zoning district or districts in which it is located; the
developer or developers may be granted relief from specific land use
regulations and design standards, and ma; be granted a variationis) in retJrn
for assurances of an overall quality of development, including any specific
features which will be of exceptional benefit to the community as a whole and
which would not otherwise be required by the Zoning Ordinance.
10.
The area of a Planned Development shall remain under one ownership or unified
control unless safeguards are provided that, in the opinion of the Plan
Commission, wil 1 provide for the continuation of the ori 9inal Planned
Development concept and as modified from time to time by the Plan Commission
and approved by the Village Board of Trustees.
PLAT. A plan, map, or chart of a subdivision of land.
A. Preliminary Plan. A map showing all requisite details of a proposed
subdivision su~nitted to an approving authority for purposes of
preliminary consideration, prepared in conformance with the Plats Act
and Sections 8.02 and 8.03 of this Ordinance.
B. Final Plat. A map of all or part of a subdivision providing
substantial conformance to the Preliminary Plan of a subdivision
prepared in conformance with the requirements of the Plats Act,
Sections 8.05 and 8.06 of this Ordinance and for the recording by the
County Recorder.
PLATS ACT. Chapter lD~ of the Illinois Revised Statutes, as amended.
PLAN, SKETCH. A general map or drawing on which the subdivider' s design for
the subdivision of land is presented for discussion purposes prior to the
preparation of the preliminary plan.
PROTECTIV£ COVENANTS. Protective covenants are contracts entered into between
private parties and constitute a restriction on the use of all private property
within a subdivision for the benefit of property owners; and to provide mutual
protections against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to
impair stability of values.
RESIDUE AREA. A residue area is that portion of a development not platted as
residential lots or designed for dedication as streets or alleys.
RESUBDIVISION. The relocation of property boundaries, or the re-allocation of
property in a plat of record. The dissolution of property lines not
accompanied by the relocation of new property lines shall not constitwte
resubdivi sion.
RETENTION. A wet bottom storm water storage area that is designed to be
maintained as free water surface or pond.
ROADWAY OR ROAD. Whenever the words, "road" or "roadway" are used in this
Ordinance, it shall be deemed the paved area existing on the street
ri~ht-of-way and not the street ri~ht-of-way width and shall include all curb
and gutter facilities.
ll.
SIDEWALK. That portion of the street or crosswalk way, paved or otherwise
surfaced, intended for pedestrian use only.
SITE. A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT. Altering terrdin and/or vegetation and constructing
driveways.
SOIL TESTING. Determination and anal1sis of the subsoil conditions of a
specific land area by use of soil borings.
STREET. A publicly owned right-of-way which affords primary means of access by
pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a
street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane or however otherwise designated.
STREET, COLLECTOR. Streets penetrating neighborhoods which collect traffic
from minor streets in the neighborhood and channel it into the arterial
systems. A minor amount of through-traffic may be carried on and carries local
traffic movements within residential neighborhoods and commerical and
industrial areas.
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL. Streets and highways interconnecting with and
augmenting the principal arterial system and providing service to trips of
moderate length at a somewhat lower level of travel mobility. The s1stem
places more emphasis on land access ancj distributes travel to geographic areas
smaller than those identified with the principal arterial system. It includes
all arterials not classified as principal.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS. A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to
arterial streets and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection to local traffic from fast, through moving traffic on arterial
streets.
STREET, MINOR. Streets not classified in a higher system, providing direct
access to abutting land and access to the higher systems. They offer the
1 owest level of mobii ity an.:! have 1 imited continuity to discourage
through-traffic.
STREET, PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL. Streets and highways serving major metropolitan
activity centers, the highest traffic volume corridors, the longest trip
desires, and a high proportion of total urban area travel on a minimum of
street mileage. Service to abutting land is subordinate to the provisions of
travel service to major traffic movements. This system carries the major
portion of trips enterin9 and leaving the Itasca urban area as well as the
maiority of through movements desiring to bypass the Village.
STREET, PRIVATE. An undedicated street, generally within a Planned Development
which is privately owned or maintained or an easement of access benefiting a
dominant tenant.
12.
STREET, PUBLIC. Any arterial, collector, or minor street which is shown on the
subdivision plat and is or is to be dedicated to public use.
STREET, RIGHT-OF-WAY.
therein, acquired for
use.
A genera 1 term denoting 1 and, property, or i ;1te rest
or used as a roadway or pedestrian way or other public
STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the
public street.
SUBDIVIDER. The person or persons responsible for preparing and recording the
plats of the subdivision and for carrying out all appropriate requirements
relating thereto as outlined in this Ordinance.
SUBDIVISION. A Planned Development is, for the purposes of this Ordinance, a
subdivision whether or not it is divided into two (2) or more parts. A
subdivision is also the division of land into two (2j or more lots or parcels,
any of which is less that five (5) acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of transfer of ownership or building development, including a11 public
streets, ways for public service facilities, parks, playgrounds, school
grounds, or other public grounds, and all the tracts, parcels, lots or blocks,
and numbering of all such lots, blucks or parcels by progressive numbers,
giving their precise dimensions. The term subdivision includes resubdivisiun
and, where it is appropridte to the context, relates to the process of
subdividing or to the land subdivided, provided however, that the following
shall not be considered a subdivision and shall be exempt from the requirements
of this Ordinance:
l. The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five [5)
acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or
easements of access;
2. The division of lots or blocks of less than one (1) acre in any
recorded subdivision which does not involve any new stre2ts or
easements of access;
3. The sale or exchange of parcels of iand between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land;
4. The conveyance of parcels of land or interest therein for use as a
right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities and
other pipe lines which does not involve any new streets or easements
of access;
5. The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
6. The conveyance of 1 and for highway or other public purposes or grants
or conve1ances relatin·J to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacating of land impr~ssed with a public
use.
13.
7. Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
8. The sa 1 e or exchange of parcels or tracts of 1 and fol 1 owing the
division into no more than two (2) parts of a particular parcel or
tract of land existing on July 17, 195Y and not involving any new
streets or easements of access; and
9. The sale of a single lot of less than five(5) acres from a larger
tract when a survey is made by a registered surveyor; provided, that
this exemption shall not apply to the sale of any subsequent lots from
the same larger tract of land, as detennined by the dimensions and
configuration of the larger tract on October 1, 1Y73, and provided
also that this exemption does not invalidate any local requirements
applicable to the subdivision of land. (See Chapter 109, Plats Act,
Illinois Revised Statutes.)
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS. Subdivision design standards are the guides,
principles, and specifications for the preparation of subdivision plans
indicating, among other things, the minimum and/or maximum di~ensions of the
various elements set forth in the prel lminary plan.
THOROUGHFARE. A street with a high degree of continuity and serving as an
arterial traffic-way between the various districts of Itasca and its environs.
VILLAGE. The Village of Itasca, Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD. The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Itasca,
111 inois.
VILLAGE ENGINEER. The Village Engineer of the Village of Itasca, Illinois or
the duly authorized representative.
~ATER LEVEL, CONSTANT. The minimum depth of water designed to be contained at
all times within a retention basin.
WATER LEVEL, OCCASIONAL. The maximum depth of water designed to be contained
within a retention or detention basin during periods of peak storm water flow.
ZONING ORDINANCE. The Itasca, Illinois, Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
SECTION 5.03 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REGULATION
All sections of the Itasca Zoning Ordinance which regulate Planned Developments
excluding those sections which pertain solely to zoning regulations, are hereby
incorporated into the Itasca Zoning Ordinance by this section and are of full
force and effect as though set our fully herein.
14.
SECTION 6.00 - GENERAL GUIDELINES
Any owner of land which is within the corporate limits of the Village of Itasca
or within one and one-half (l-1/2) miles of such corporate limits or
unincorporated land, wishing to divide the same into lots or to resuqd~vide for .... ,,,.
the purpose of sale or assessment, or both, or wishing to dedicate streets,
alleys, or other lands for public use, shall follow the procedures and
requirements of this Ordinance.
6.01 - PRELIMINARY CONSULTATION
A. Informal Meeting. The subdivider submits a letter of intent to the
President of the Village Board of Trustees, with a copy of the Plan
Commission requesting an informal meeting with the Plan Commission to
discuss the proposed subdivision and proposed improvements. The
subdivider shall present to the Plan Commission general subdivision
information which shall describe or outline the existing conditions of
the site and the proposed development. The Plan Commission shall
determine the need for a sketch plan review of the proposed
development. If the Plan Commission determines that there is no need
for a sketch plan review, they shall advise the subdivider to proceed
directly to the preliminary plan phase.
B. Sketch Plan Review. When the Plan Commission determines that there is
a need for a sketch plan review of the proposed subdivision, the
subdivider shall prepare ten (lll) copies of the following information
for presentation to the Plan Commission at a regularly scheduled
·meeting:
1. General Subdivision Information
2. Sketch Plan
3. Tentative Enoineering Proposals
See Section 8.02 for details of these elements.
C. Subdivider Advised. The Plan Commission, after checking the proposed
sketch plan, shall advise the subdivider as to the apparent adequacy
of the proposed plan and apprises the subdivider of any requirements
the Village might have that should be incorporated into the design of
the subdivision.
6.02 - PRELIMINARY PLAN
A. Plan and Application. The subdivider prepares a preliminary plan,
including a proposal for the installation of improvements and intended
dedication or reservations of pu~lic lands, and submits an application
and ten (lOj copies of the proposed plan to the Village Clerk.
15.
B. Action by Village Clerk. The Village Clerk refers the preliminary
plan to the Village of Itasca Plan Commission not less that ten (10)
da1s prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Plan Commission.
C. Action by Plan Commission. The Plan Commission distributes copies of
the preliminary plan to concerned local, district, and county
officials for their review and comments. The Plan Commission shall
obtain the required written review comments and any recommendations
from the Village Engineer, and concerned public officials within
twenty (20) days. Then, after applying the provisions of the
Ordinance, it either recommends to approve the preliminary plan, or
recommends to approve the preliminary plan subject to modification, or
recommends to reject the preliminary plan. ·Findings a.nd
recommendations are reported to the Village aoard and subdivider.
D. Action by Village Board. The Village Board approves, rejects or
modifies the preliminary plan.
6.03 - FINAL PLAT
A. Plat and Documents. After complying with the above requirements the
subdivider prepares and submits to the Village Clerk, the original and
ten (10) copies of the final plat incorporating all required · ·· ·-- ·
modifications to the preliminary plan.
B. Action by Villaoe Clerk. The Village Clerk refers the final plat to
the Plan Commission not less than ten (10) working days prior to a
reguTarly scheduled meeting of tne Plan Commission.
C. Action by Plan Commission. The Plan Commission determines whether or
not the final plat is in conformance with the approved preliminary
plan and forwards the plat, with its recommendaton, to the Village
Board.
D. Action by Village Board. The Vill~ge Board approves, rejects, or
modifies the final plat.
£. Recording of Plat. After the approval of the final plat, the Village
Clerk records the plat with the Recorder of Deeds of Cook or DuPage
Counties; and the subdivider may then proceed to develop and sell lots
of his subdivision in accordance with this Ordinance.
15.
SECTION 7 .00 - GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
7 .01 - PLAN COMMIS!ON GUIDELINES
A. Particular Attention of the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission, in
the examination of subdivision plans or plats for approval, and in the
application of this Ordinance, shall take into consideration the
requirements of the community and the best use of the land being
-"'--·sub-divided. Particular attention shall be given to width and location
of streets, suitable sanitary utilities, storm water drainage, lot
sizes and arrangements, as well as local requirements such as parks
and playgrounds, schools, and recreation sites, and other public uses.
B. Conformity with Comprehensive Plan. The Plan Commission shall
especially require that all subdivision conform to the provisions and
conditions of the Official Comprehensive Pian, adopted October 17,
1977. Plat approval may be i;ithheld if a subdivision does not conform
to the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan.
C. Area Plan Required. Where a tract of land proposed for a subdivision
is part of a larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to the
Village as a whole, the Plan Commission r,1ay, before recommending
approval, request that the subdivider submit a plan for the entire
area or neighborhood to be used by the Pian Commission as an aid i~
judging the proposed plan. The Village Engineer will make available,
to the subdivider, any Village information that is available
concerning the area for which the plan is to be developed.
D. Storm Water Provisions Required. The Plan Commission shall not
recommend for approval by the Vi11 age Board any plan or pl at of
subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm or flood
water runoff channels or basins.
E. Preservation of Natural Features. In a11 subdivisions due regard
shall be given to the preservation of natural features such as large
trees, watercourses, historical sites or structures, and similar
features.
F. Solar Lot Access. The design of a subdivision and iti layout may
affect the energy efficiency of the building to be placed upon it and
other factors sucl1 as, impact on privacy, landscaping and, for solar
purposes, a shadJwing of the other person's solar reception.
The Plan Commission ma; consider variations or solar easements to
~rovide for changes in lot configuration in order to provide for
design methods to reduce energy consumption.
17.
Energy conservation methods may include, but not be limited to,
natural ventilation of structures, siting of structures in relation to
prevailing breezes and sun angles, insulation of structures, use of
landscape material for shade, direction of breezes, and transpiration.
7.02 - UNSUITABLE LAND
No land shall be subdivided for any use which is determined by the Pian
Commission, after investigation by the Village Engineer, to be unsuitable
for such use by reason of flooding or bad drainage, adverse earth or rock
formation or topography, or any other feature likely to be harmf"l to
health, safety, or welfare of the future residents in the proposed
subdivision or of the community. Land located outside areas of special
flood hazard may be subdivided only in the subdivider agrees to making
improvements which will, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, make the
area safe for occupancy and provide adequate lot and street drainage and
storm water detention facilities, the subdivision may then be approved.
7.03 - AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
When land is determined to be unsuitable b; reason of flooding or wetlands,
refer to the Municipal Code, and the Standards and Specifications for
Required Land Improvements.
:r
7.04 - STORMWATER M~NAGEMENT
The purpose of this Section is to provide standards and regulations governing
land development in order to reduce or prevent flooding and at the same time
r"nimize damage to real property, protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare. {Refer to the Municipal Code.)
7.05 - DEDICATION OF LAND FOR ?UBL!C USE
A. Acceptance of Designated land. When a final plat of a subdivision has
been approved by the Village aoard and all other required approvals
are obtained and the plat is recorded, the approval shall constitute
acceptance for the purpose designated on the plat of all lands shown
on the plat as dedicated to the public, excepting street dedications
which shall be accepted only after inspection and recommendation by
the Village Engineer.
B. Refusal of Designated Land. Whenever a preliminary plan includes a
proposed dedication of land to public use and the Plan Commission
finds that such land is not required or not suitable for public use,
the Plan Commission may either refuse to approve such dedication or
require the rearrangement of lots in the proposed subdivision to
include such land.
13.
C. Minimum Dedication. For minimum dedication of land for public use
exclusive of public dedicated roads refer to Section 7.07 of this
Ordinance.
7.0b - RESERVATION OF PUBLIC SPACES AND SITES
A. Plan to Show Public Land. Whenever a tract to be subdivided includes
a proposed site for a park, playground, school, or other public use as
indicated on the Official Map of the Village of Itasca, such space
shall be suitabl; incorporated by the developer into his subdivision
plat after proper determination of its necessity by the Plan
Commission and the appropriate Village office or other public agency
involved in the development of such public open space.
B. Adeauate Open Space Required.
1. Flood Plain Areas. The Village Board may, when It deems it
necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and
future population of the area and necessary to the conservation
of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities, prohibit subdivision
of any portion of the property which lies within the flood plain
or ant stream or drainage course. These flood plain areas shall
be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting
from clearing, grading, or dumping. of earth, waste material, or .... ~ •.
stumps. (Refer to the Standards and Specifications for Required
land Improvements.)
2. Park and Playground Sites. Refer to Itasca Park District.
C. · Acquisition of Land for Public Use. The Plan Commission shall
consider all preliminary plans and adopted or proposed studies related
thereto to determine the need for acquisition for public use of any of
the land included in the preliminary plan. Land may be acquired for:
parks, playgrounds, or other public recreation areas, or other public
purposes as provided by law.
l. Referral to Public Body. The Pl an Commission shal 1 refer the
plan to the public body concerned with acquisition for its
consideration and report. The Pian Commission maj propose
alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow the public
body or agency thirty (30) days for reply. The agencj'S
recommendation, if affirmative, shall include a map showing the
boundaries and area of the parcel to be acquired and an estimate
of the time required to complete the acquisition.
2. Notice to Property Owner. Upon receipt of an affirmative report
from an acquiring agency the Plan Commission shall notify the
property owner and shall desi~nate on the preliminary plan and
final plat that area proposed to be acquired by the public boc'y.
l~.
3. Duration of Land Reservation. The acquisition of land reserved
by a public agency on the preliminary plan or final plat shall be
Initiated within twelve (12) months of notification, in writing,
from the owner that he intends to develop the land.
Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a sketch plan for
the proposed development and a tentative schedule of
construction. Failure on the part of the public agency to
initiate acquisition within the prescribed twelve (12) months
shd 11 res ult In the remova 1 of the "reserved" designation from
the property involved and the freeing of the property for private
development.
7 .07 - DEDICATION OF PAKK AND SCHOOL SITES OR FuR PAYMENTS OR FEES IN-LIEU-OF
As a condition of approval of the Final Plat of Subdivision or a Planned
Development, each subdivider shall be required to dedicata land for park
and recreational purposes and for school sites to serve the immediate and
future needs of the residents of the development, or to provide a cash
contribution in-lieu-of actual land dedication, or a combination of both,
at the option of the Vfllage Board in accordance with the fol lowing
criteria and formula:
A. Criteria for Requiring Park and Recreation Land Dedication:
1. Requirements and Population Ratio .. The ultimate densi~y of
proposed development shall relate directly to the amount of land
required for dedication. The total requirement shall be five and
one-half (5.5) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) of ultimate
population in accordance with the following classifications:
TYPES OF MINIMUM ACRES/
RECREATION AREA SIZE RANGE l, 000 PEOPLE
(1) Play Lot 8,000 sq. ft. NA
(2 i School/Park
Neighborhood
Playground 5.0 acres 1.25
(3) Neighborhood Park 3.5 acres 1.00
(4) District-Wide Park
or Playfield 4-30 acres l.25
( 5 j Community-Wide
Recreation Park 12-30 acres 2.00
TOTAL 5.50
20.
2. Location. The Official Comprehensive Plan or the Itasca Park District
. Plan shall be used as guidelines in locating sites. A park site
adjoining all elementary school sites of not less than five (Si acres
shall be considered a minimum. A central location which will equally
serve the entire development is most desirable. In large developments
these sites can be located throughout the development according to
established standards for park area distances.
3. Credit for Private Open Spaces and Recreation Areas. When subdividers
.or developers provide their own open space for recreation areas and
facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for local public
recreation services. Depending on the size of the development, a
portion of the park and recreation area in subdivisions or planned
developments may at the option of the Village Board be prnided in the
form of "private" open spac2 in-lieu-of dedicated "public" open
space. The extent of the same shall be determined by the Village
Board, based upon the needs of the projected residents and in
confonnance to the total park and recreation land requirements for the
general area.
In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will
imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation of
recreational facilities and equipment by the developer as part of his
obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including specifications of
facilities to be installed, shall be approved bJ the Village; and before
any credit is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or
deve1oper shall guarantee that these private recreation areas will be
permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate
legal documents. Private "swimming clubs" are included in this provision.
When an adjustment for private recreation areas is warranted it will be
necessary to compute the total parkland dedication that would have been
required from the subdivision or Planned Development and then su~tract the
credit to be given.
B. Criteria for Requiring School Site Dedication:
l. Requirement and Population Ratio. The ultimate number of
students to be generated by a subdivision or planned development
shall relate directly to the amount of land required to be
dedicated for school sites. The land dedication requirement
shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of: (1) estimated
children to be served in each such school classification over the
two (2j maximum recommended number of students to be served in
each such school c1assific3tion as stated herein and the applying
such ratio to the (3) said minimum recommended number of acres
for a school site of each such school classification.
The product thereof shal 1 be the acres of 1 and di:emed needed to
have a sufficient· land for school sites to serve the estimated
increased children in each such school classification.
21.
2. School Classification and Size of School Site. Classification and
size of school sites within the Village shall be detennined in
accordance with the following criteria:
SCHOOL TYPE
Elementary Schools (K-5)
Junior High Schools (6-8)
High Schools (9-12)
MAXIMUM MINIMUM
STUDENTS ACREAGE
600 11
900 b
2,300 48
3. Location. The Comprehensive Plan and the standards adopted b; the
affected school district shall be used as a guideline in locating
sit es.
C. Criteria for Requiring a Contribution Jn-Lieu-Of Park and School
Sites. Where tile development is small and the resulting site is too
small to be practical or when the available land is inappropriate for
park purposes of a school site, the Village Board shall require the
subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in-lieu-of land
dedication required.
The cash contributions in-lieu-of park and recreation land dedica~ion
shall be held in trYst by the Village or other public body designated
by the Village, solely for the acquisition of park and recreation land
as herein before classified which will be available to serve the
immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or
development or for the improvement of other existing local park and
recreation land which already serves such needs. The cash
contribution in-lieu-of school sites shall be held in trust by the
Village, or other public body desi3nated by the Village, solely for
use in the acquisition of land for a school site, for improvement of a
school site or for construction or improvement of a school building to
serve the immediate or future needs of children from that subdivision
or development.
1. Fair Market Value. The cash contribution in-lieu-of land shall
be based on the "fair market value" of the acres of land in the
area improved as specified h~rein, that otherwise would have been
dedicated as park and recreation and school sites. The
subdivider or developer shall submit an appraisal showing the
"fair market value• of such improved land in the area of his
development or other evidence thereof. The final determination
of said "fair market value" per acre of such improved land shall
be made by the Village Board based upon such information
submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources
which may be submitted to the Village Board by the park district,
school district, or others.
22.
2. Criteria for Requiring Dedication and a Fee.
There will be situations in subdivisions or planned developments
when a combination of land dedication and a contribution.
in-lieu-of land are both necessary. These occaisions ~iJl arise
when:
a. Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as
the location for a park or school site. That portion of the
land within the subdivision falling within the park or school
location shall be a dedicated site as required by this
Section, and a cash contribution in-lieu-of-thereof shall be
required for any additional land that woJld have to be
dedicated.
b. A major part of the local park or recreation site or school
site has already been acquired and only a sma11 portion of
land is needed from the development to complete the site.
The remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and
a cash contribution in-lieu-of-thereof shall be required.
D. Densitz Formula. ihe most recent Table of Estimated Ultimate
Population Density in the Appendix shall be considered indicative of
current and short-range projected trends in family size for new
construction and shall be used in calculating the amount of required
dedicated acres or the cash contributio~ in-lieu-of unless a written
objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or developer.
In the event a subdivider or developer or affected public body files a
written objection to the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population
contained in the Appendix, he shall submit his own demographic study
showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the
subdivision or Planned Development and in that event, final
detennination of the density formula to be used in such calculations
shall be made bi the Village Board based upon such d~nographic
information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other·
sources which may be submitted to the Village Board bi the park
districts, school districts, or others. Population density, age
distribution and local conditions change over the years, and the
specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees
in-lieu-of-thereto as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and
amendment if necessary.
23.
E. Reservation of Additional Land. Where the Comprehensive Plan of
Itasca or the Park and Recreation Plan adopted by the affected public
body calls for a iarger amount of park and recreational land or school
F.
. · '
. G~
H.
7.08 -
A.
.• sites and particular subdivision or planned development than the
_developer is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the
developer's contribution shall be reserved for subsequent purchase by
the Village or other public body designated by the Village, provided
that such acquisition is made within one (1) year from the date of
first sale of the last dwelling in the Subdivision or Planned
Development. The purchase price for reserved land will equal to the
fair market value of the land at the time of approval of the Final
Plat plus fifty (50) percent of the difference between the fair market
value and the fair market value at the time of purchase by the
applicable public body.
Fair market value shall be determined as set forth in 7 .07 .C.
Combining with Adjoining Developments. Where ti1e subdivision or
Planned Development is less that forty (40) acres, public open spaces
or a sc!iooT site which is to be dedicated should, where possible, be
combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to
assemble usable recreation areas or school sites without hardship on a
particular developer •
Topography and Grading. The slope, topography, geology, shape and
locations of the dedicated site as well as its surroundings shal~ be
suitable for its intended purposes and consistent with the standards
adopted by the affected public body. Grading on sites dedicated for
park and recreational uses and for school sites shall not differ
greatly from surrounding land.
Improved Sites. All sites dedicated for any purpose under this
Section, shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of
electrical, water, sewer, and streets (including enclosed draina;e,
curb and gutter, sidewalk and trees) as applicable to the location of
the site, as acceptable provision made therefor.
DEDICATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF DETENTION PONDS OR FUNDS IN-LIEU-THEREOF
Contribution and Development of Detention Ponds or Funds Reouired. No
final plat shall be approved until such time as the subdivider shall
have f:illy complied with the provisions of this Ordinance by either
submitting detailed plans and specifications for the development of
storm water detention ponds (as required by the development of his
subdivisioni to be constructed off the site in an area desi9nated by
the Vil lase of Itasca in accordance with Section C., below.
24.
B. Engineering Studies. The developer, at his expense, shall hire a
professional engineer, registered in the State of Illinois, to prepare
a detailed study of the detention required by the subdivision.
C. Location of Detention Ponds. After the required storm water ·detention
has been determineo as specified in paragraph "A", these calculations
shall be submitted to the Vi11age for review and recommendation by the
Village Engineer.
If the detention area required to serve the proposed subdivision is
more than three (3) acre feet in size, the detention pond shall be
constructed as part of the subdivision improvements.
In subdivisions where less than three (3) acre feet of detention is
required, the developer may deposit with the Village of Itasca,
in-lieu-of construction of detention area, the funds necessary to
provide for construction of the required detention facilities of the
site and as designated by the Village of Itasca.
D. Determination of the Cost of Off-Site Detention Ponds. If it has been
determined {by the criteria specified in paragraph "C" above) that the
detention pond is to be constructed off the site of the subdivision,
the developer, at his expense, shall have a professional engineer,
.registered in the State of Illinois, prepare an estimate of the cost
to construct the detention pond at the designated site, including the
comparable cost of the land. The estimate shall be submitted to the
Village for review by the Village Engineer.
Upon approval by the Village, the funds in the amount of the approved
estimate and a cashier's check shall be deposited with the Village of
Itasca in-lieu-of the construction of the detention pond on the site.
Once deposited with the Village, the funds shall become the property
of the Village of Itasca for the sole use of construction and
.Tiaintenance of storm water management facilities.
7.09 - PLATS OF SUBDIVISION
A. Vacation of a Plat of Subdivision. Any plat or any part of a plat may
be vacated by the owner of the premises, at any time before the sale
of any lot therein, by a written instrument, to which a copy of such
plat shall be attached declaring the same to be vacated.
B. Preliminary Consultation Required. Prior to the submission of the
certified Plat of Survey required herein, the subdivider shall meet
with the Village Engineer prior to meeting with the Plan Commission
for the purpose of minimizing the risk of objections to, or rejection
of, the prepared Plat of Survey, and for.the purpose of ascertaining
the problems and requirements affecting his property.
25.
/
C. Procedure for Approval. The owner or subdivider shall file with the
Village Clerk, the original and four (4) contact prints of a certified
plat of survey showing the proposed division of such lots, block,
parcels, or tracts of land. The ori~inal and ten (1) prints of the
Plat of Survey shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission not· less that
fifteen {15) working days before the meeting of the next Plan
Commission. Within forty {40j days after the meeting at which the
Plat of Survey is referred to the Plan Commission, the Village
Engineer shall notify the owner or subdivider whether a new street or
easement of access is required. In the event that a new street or
easement of access is required, the notice shall stipulate that an
application for final plat approval containing such maps,
certifications, and supporting documents as required by the Plan
Commission shall be filed with the Village Clerk for processing as
herein set forth in this Ordinance.
The Plan Commission shall, within forty-five (45) days, recommend to
approve, approve conditionally, or reject the proposal. The Vi1lage
Board shall be notified in writing of any conditions of approval or
the reasons for rejection.
0. Re5uirements for Approval
l. Compliance with this Ordinance .. To the extent that it is
reasonable, the division of land shall comply with the provisions
of this. Ordinance governing general requirements, desi~n
standards, and required improvements.
2. Survey. The survey shall be performed and the plat prepared by a
Registered Illinois Land Surveyor.
3. Monuments. All corners shall be monumented as follows:
a. All lot corners shall be monumented in the field by iron
pipes at least twenty-four (24) inches long and one (1) inch
in diameter, or by round or square iron bars at least
t'llenty-four (24) inches long.
b. The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be
monumented in the field by iron pipes at least thirty (3j
inches long and one (l) inch in diameter or by round or
square iron bars at least thirty (30i inches long. These
monuments shall be placed at the point of intersection of
the river or stream lot line with a meander line established
not less that twenty (20) feet back from the bank of the
river or stream.
26.
E. Certificates and Affidavits.
1. Affidavits Required. The survey plat shall include the affidavit
of the surveyor who surveyed and mapped the parcel, typed,
lettered, or reproduced legibly with non-fading black ink, giving
a clear and concise description of the land surveyed by bearings
and distances, commencing with some corner marked and established
in the U.S. Public Land Survey or some corner providing reference
to a corner marked and established In the U.S. Public Land
Survey. Such affidavit shall include the statement of the
surveyor to the effect that they have fully complied with the
requirements of this section.
2. Certificates Required. The certificate of approval of the Plan
Commission shall be typed, lettered, or reproduced legibly with
non-fading black ink on the face of the original survey plat.
F. Filing of Surve1 Plat. The Village Clerk shall retain a copy of the
approved survey map and any supporting documents as required by the
Plan Commission for the Village records. The Village Clerk shall also
record the original of the approved survey plat with the Recorder of
Deeds of Cook or DuPage Counties.
27.
SECTION B.00 - PROCEDURE FOR SUBDiVISION APPROVAL
tl.01 PRELIMINARY CONSULTATION
Prior to the submission of the preliminary plan of any proposed subdivision
within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance, the subdivider shall make known any
intentions to the Plan Commission. During this preliminary or pre-application
stage, the following actions shall be taken:
A. Action by the Subdivider. The subdivider shall meet with the Plan
Commission for the purpose of presenting a general outline of a
proposal, including but not necessarily limited to the following:
1. Written Notification. Written notification in the form of a
letter of intent from the sudivlder to the Plan Commission
establishing the subdivider's intent to develop the land.
2. General Subdivision Information. General subdivision information
that shall describe or outline the existing conditions of this
site and the proposed development. This information shall
include data on existing covenants, land characteristics, and
available community facilities and utilities. Information
describing the subdivision proposal shall include the number of
residential lots and units broken down bj type, square foota~e of
building, and bedroom count; typical lot width and depth;
business areas; schools, playgrounds and park areas; other public
areas; traffic study; proposed protective covenants and proposed
utilities; street improvements; and soil boring test results.
B. Action b; the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall discuss the
proposed subdivision with the subdivider and so advise of any Village
plans or projects which might affect the proposed subdivision, the
procedural steps, design and improvement standards, and the general
planning requirements. The Plan Commission shall determine the need
for a sketch plan review of the proposed development. If the Plan
Commission determines that there is no need for a sketch plan review,
they shall advise the subdivider to proceed directly to the
preliminary plan phase as described in Section d.02. If the Plan
Commission determines that there is a need for a sketch plan review,
thej shall then inform the subdivider that a review of the sketch plan
is needed at a regularly scheduled meeting.
C. Action b; the Subdivider. The subdivider shall prov1ae the Plan
Commission with ten (10) copies of the general subdivision information
described in A-2 above. The Subdivider shall also prepare ten (lOj
copies of the following information for presentation to the Plan
Commission.
2(j.
l. Sketch Plan. A plan prepared on reproducible medium that shall
show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots'
and other features in relation to existing conditions. The
sketch plan may be a free hand sketch made directly on.a. print of
the topographic surve1. The sketch plan shall include the
existin9 topographic data and contours of not more than five (S}
foot intervals. This ma1 be attached to U.S.G.S. topographic
data.
2. Tentative En3ineering Proposals.
regarding water supply, sewerage
and street improvements.
Tentative en~ineering proposals
disposal, stormwater drainage,
D. Action by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission in conjunction
with the Village Engineer shall review the general subdivision
information, sketch plan, and tentative engineering proposals and
proceed with the following investigations:
l. Zoning Check. Check the existing zonin9 of the tract and advise
the subdivider if a zoning change Is necessary or desirable.
2. Public Facility Impact. Detennine the adequacy of existin9 or
proposed schools, parks, and other public spaces in the vicinity
of the proposed subdivision in orchestration with authorized
taxing bodies involved.
3. Site Inspection. Inspect the site or otherwise determine its
relationship to major streets, utility systems, and adjacent land
uses, and determine an; unusual problems in re;ard to topography,
uti'lities, flooding, etc.
4. School Sites. Advise the developer of the potential acreage
allotment, or funds in-lieu-thereof, to be donated and utilized
for public school sites based upon the developer's estimates of
the number and type of dwelling units to be constructed, the
potent I al needs of each affected school district, and the
Comprehensive Plan or Official Map of the Village of Itasca.
Refer to Section 7.07 of this Ordinance.
5. Comprehensive Plan Conformity. Advise the developer of the
Comprehensive Plan which delineates the land use areas.
b. Location of Flood Plains and Wetlands. Advise the developer of
the need for a Special Use hearing if the proposed subdivisioi is
located on a flood plain or wetland area as identified in
Ordinance No. 474-77 as amended.
2~.
7. Subdivider Advised. The Plan Commission, after checking the
proposed sketch ~lan, shall advise the subdivider no later than
the next regulorly scheduled meeting following the presentation
of the sketch plan as to the apparent adequacy of the proposed
plan and apprises the subdivider of any requirements the Village
might have that should be incorporated into the design of the
subdivision.
8 .02 - PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN
A. Action b; the Subdivider. The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a
preliminary plan, which said plan shall include all of the property
owned or controlled by the applicant, which properties are adjacent to
or considered to be contiguous to the proposed subdivision, together
with Improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified
and shall be submitted to the Village Clerk, with written application
for approval. In preparing this plat, due regard shall be given to
the preservation of natural features such as large trees, water
courses, historical and similar community assets. Accompanying this
preliminary plan shall be a School Demographic Study including the
latest estimated Ultimate Population p~r Dwelling Unit Table in the
Appendix of this Ordinance, ten (10) copies of the preliminary plan
and all accompanying documentations and the required filing fee shall
accompany the application.
B. Action by the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall refer the
preliminary plan to the Village of Itasca Plan Commission not less
than fifteen (15) working days prior to a regular meeting of the Plan
Commission.
c. Action b the Plan Commission.
which.districts school, park,
of the preliminary plan.
The Plan Commission shall determine
fire protection) should receive copies
Copies of the preliminary plan shail be distributed to the following
individuals with a request for a review and comments to be received in
no more than fifteen (15; days prior to the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Plan Commission.
President, Village Board of Trustees
Village Cl erk
Village Engineer
Village Public Works Director
Village Police Department
Appropriate School District(s)
Appropriate Park District(si
Appropriate Fire Protection District(s)
Cook County Su?erintendent of Hi~hwa;s
Cook County Health Depart~ent
DuPage County Superintendent of Highways
DuPage County Health Department
30.
The P1an Commission and the Vi11age En3ineer shall review the
pre1iminarj p1an for comp1iance with these regu1ations and other
ordinances of the Village of Itasca and the above revisions and
..... ,.,_ .. comments. The Plan Commission sha11, within two (2i mo.nths from the
. first regularlj scheduled meetin3 following referral: · ·
1. Make Recommendations. Approve or disapprove the proposed
preliminarj subdivision plan and submit a written report of its
actions, which shall include the recommendations of the Vi11age
Engineer, to the Village Board.
2. Advise Subdivider. lf the Plan Commission finds that chan;es,
additions, or corrections are required on the preliminary plan,
the Pldn Commission shall so advise the subdivider in writing.
The subdivider may resubmit the preliminary plan to the Plan
Commission, without paying an additiona·1 fee, for its
consideration at the next regular meeting of said Co~nission.
The Plan Commission shall at said meeting approve or disapprove
the preliminary plan and submit a written report of its actions,
which shall include the recommendations of the Engineer, to the
Village Board and the subdivider.
3. Notification to Subdivider. The Plan Commission shall notify the
owner or subdivider in writing as to tha time and "place· of the
Plan Commission meeting at which he will be afforded an
opportunity of being heard.
4. Qualifications of Approval. The following qualifications shall
govern recommendations for approval of the preliminary plan:
a. Approval of a preliminary plan by the Itasca Plan Commission
is tentative only, involving merely the general
acceptability of the layout as submitted.
b. The Itasca Plan Commission may require such changes or
revisions as are deemed necessary in the interest of the
needs of the community.
c. Approval of the preliminary plan shall be effective for a
maximum period of six (6) months, unless upon application of
the developer, the Plan Commission srants an extension. The
application for said extension shall not require an
additional filing fee, or the submittal of additional ccpies
of the ?Ian of subdivision.
5. Notice of Approval Required. Upon approval of the preliminary
plan by the Plan Commission, the following Notice of Approval
shall be stamped upon five (Si prints thereof, and required
signatures affixed.
3i.
NOTiCE OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN
Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plan of a subdivision sho1vn hereon
has received approval by the Plan Commission of the Village of Itasca,
Illinois, and upon compliance by the subdivider with requirements of
qualifications governing the approval of preliminary plans and with other
revisions and stipulations that may be required, the Plan Commission will
receive the final plan for consideration when submitted by the subdivider in
such form and within such time as required by the Subdivision Ordinance of
Itasca. ·
The Plan Commission of the Village of Itasca, Illinois
Date ___________ , 19 by
----.,,C~ha-1~-n-n_a_n-----~
Pian Commission
D. Distribution of Approved Plan. The Plan Commission shall retain one
(l) print of the approved, preliminary plan and shall send a cover
letter and four (4i copies of said plan to the Village Clerk for
di stri but ion. ·
The Village Clerk shall make copies of said cover letter and shall
distribute the prints of the approved preliminary plan and the cover
1 etter as follows:
1. One (li cover letter to the Plan Commission;
2. One (1) print and one (1) cover letter shall be sent to the
Village Ensineer;
3. One (li print and two (2) cover letters shall be retained by the
Village Clerk for filing and departmental use; and,
4. One (lj print and one (l) cover letter shall be retwrned to the
subdivider.
5. One (1) print and one (lj cover letter shall be sent to the
Director of Public Works.
Copies of the cover letter which are sent to the subdivider along with
his approved preliminary plan may also be sent to:
Appropriate School District(sj
Appropriate Park District{s)
Appropriate Fire Protection District(s)
As determined by the Plan Cornrnission.
32.
8. 03 - PRELIMINARY PLAN REQUIREMENTS
The purpose of the preliminary plan is to allow the Plan Commission and other
public bodies to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in .question
is satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest. The preliminary
plan shall be prepared by a qualified professional trained and experienced in
the layout of subdivisions.
The following graphic and descriptive items are normally required to be shown
on the preliminary plan and the accompanying application for approval. The
lack of information under any item specified herein, or improper information
supplied by the applicant, shall be a cause for disapproval of a preliminary
pl an.
A. Application for Approval. Written application oy the owner, or his
agent, for approval, on forms furnished by the Plan Commission, shall
accompany each preliminary plan and contain the following information:
1. Name for File Identification
a. Name of subdivision if property is within an existing
subdivision.
b. Proposed name if not within a previously platted
subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate the name
of any plat previously recorded.in Cook or Du Page Counties.
c. Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen.
(This is commonly the name by which the property is locally
known.)
2. Location and Description of Property. Location of property by.
government lot, section, township, range, and county.
3. Basic Facts and Proposals Pertaining to the Property.
a. Size of tract in acres or of existing lots, if any, in
square feet.
b. Existing zonin~ classification of property and any propcsed
rezoning to be requested.
c. Number of iots proposed in subdivision.
d. Area of lots proposed; minimum, average, and maximum.
e. Proposed linka~e with water and sewer facilities.
f. Any other proposals, such as parcels of land intended tc be
dedicated, conveyed, or reserved for public use, and the
conditions proposed for such disposal and use.
33.
4. Information as to Ownership, Preparation of Plan, and Submission.
a. Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner
or agent of property and citation of last instrument
conveying title to each parcel of property involved in the
proposed subdivision, giving grantor, grantee, date, and
land records reference.
b. Citation of an; existing legal rights-of-way or easements
affecting the property.
c. Existing covenants on the property, if any.
d. Name and address, including telephone number, of the
professional\si responsible for the subdivision design shall
be shown on the preliminary plan as submitted by a
Registered Professional engineer of Illinois, responsible
for the design of public improvements, and Registered
Illinois Land Surveyor, responsible for surveys.
B. School Demographic Study and Determination of Acreage Allotment
:.e:
l. Demo graphic Study Requirements. A school demo ;ra phi c study sha 11
be prepared by the subdivider and shall be subnitted for approval
in conjunction with the preli~inary plan. It shall include, but
need not be limited to the following:
a. The number and types of dwelling units to be constructed
upon approval of the plat, the density of such dwelling
units on the land, and a breakdown of each type of dwelling
unit by the number of bedro_oms.
b. Estimates of the number of children to be generated from the
different types of dwelling units based on general standards
approved by and on file with the Village of Itasca. (See
Appendix - Estimated Ultimate Population per Dwelling Unit
Table).
c. Estimates of the number of children to be generated in each
school classification of each school district situated
wholly or partially within the dred depicted in any such
pl an.
2. From the estimates made in this school demographic study, the
subdivider shall estimate the added acreage necessitated for each
school classification of each school district for school sites
resulting from the estimated additional school children to be
~enerated from the particular subdivision. Such estimate shall
be in accordance with the following:
34.
a. Each school district's official policy as to the various
school classifications of the district, the maximum
recommended number of students for each school
classification, and the minir.ium recommended number of acres
for school sites under each such school classification shall
be as filed with and as approved by the Village Board.
b. Estimates by the subdivider of this added acreage
requirement shall be herein referred to as the "acreage
allotment" as to each school classification.
c. The acreage allotment for each school district and school
classification shall be determined by obtaining tne ratio of
the estimated children to be served in each school.
3. Determination of Acreage Ailotment. Final determination of such
acreage allotment sha11 be made by the Board of Trustees based
upon the demographic information submitted by the subdivider and
by information submitted to the Village Board by the affected
school districts. (See Section 7.07j
C. Accompanying Documentation Required. The preliliJinary plan of
.subdivision shall be accompanied by:
l. Annexation Statement. A st'a tement that the pro posed subdivision
(where contiguous) is or is not to be annexed to the Village.
2. Preliminary Plan for Sewer and Water. Either a preli.11inary
engineering plan for sewer, water and storm sewers or a written
statement setting forth general plans for such iinprovements and
indicating the method to be employed to overcome particular
problems that ma;,; be encountered with the development of th:
proposed subdivision.
3. Engineer's Certification. An en9inee~'s certification licens~d
by the State of Illinois of the ability of any tract or portiJn
thereof to support a sewer or water facility, structural
foundations, and roads shall be secured after any approved
topographical changes, incl;;din; filling, regrading, or soil
removal have been made to the tract in question.
35.
4. Soils Analysis. A soils anal1sis for each proposed subdivision
shall be completed by an engineer registered in the State of
Illinois and shall be of sufficient scope to point out potential
ground absorption, runoff, flooding deficiencies, the.presence of
unstable soils or of soils of such low bearing capacity as to
constitute pro bl ems for conventional construction, of the
presence of subsurface rock that would affect the installation of
underground improvements or the provision of above ground
i1.1provements. If the subdivision contains questionable soil and,
in the opinion of the Village Engineer, additional soil
investigations, borings, or other soil tests are necessary to
detennine the nature and extent of such questionable material,
the owner or developer shall retain or cause to be retained the
services of a competent testing laboratory to perform the needed
investigations. '
a. Co pi es of the completed reports prepared by the testing
laboratory shall be filed with the Village Engineer.
- --- b. Neither the Village Engineer nor the Village shall have an;
liability for costs connected with the tests, borings, or
interpretations of results of such work.
5. Protective Covenants. Draft of protective covenants, whereby the
sudivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivisions and
otherwise protect the proposed development • .
D. Drawin·s and Data Re uired. All plans shall be at a scale of fifty
50 feet to the inch when the longest dimension of the trdct is seven
hundred (?OOj feet or less, and one hundred (100) feet to the inch
when the 1 ongest dimension of the tract is more than seven hundred
(700; feet. In certain unusual instances (for example, where the
subdivided area is of unusual size or shape), a variation of the scale
of the plat may be permitted but at no time shall the scale be greater
than twenty (20), ten (lOj, five (5), or one (l) foot to the inch.
1. Identification and Description. Identification and description
sha 11 be as fo 11 ows:
a. Name of the Subdivision.
plat heretofore recorded
Page Counties, Illinois.
Not a duplication of a name of any
in the Village or in Cook or Du
b. Location of the Subdivision. Location by section, township,
and range or by other approved legal description, including
present tract designation according to official County
records.
3o.
c. Survey of the Subdivision. Boundary line survey on an
·accompanying map which is prepared and certified by a
registered land surveyor in the State of Illinois.
d. Designer of the Subdivision. Name and address of.the site
architect, engineer, and/or planner.
e. Owner of the Subdivision. Name and address•of the owner
and/or subdivider.
f. Drawing Identification. Drawing number and date of
preparation with provision for revisions of drawing.
g. North Arrow. A north arrow shall be shown on all
preliminary plans and accompanying maps.
h. Street Names. Street names shall be consistent with any
policies of the Village.
2. Existing Conditions. Data required as a basis for the
pr~liminary ~lan sha11 include existing conditions as fo11ows,
except when otherwise specified by the Plan Commission.
a. Boundary Lines. In accordance with l.c. above.
b." Total Acreage. ilithin the boundary 1 ines.
c. Existing Zoning Districts. Both in proposed subdi~isions
and adjacent tracts.
d. Existing Improvements. Locations, widths, and names of all
existing or previously platted streets or other
ri9hts-of-way showing type of improvements (if anyj,
railroad and utility rights-of-way and other public open
spaces, permanent buildings and structures and their street
address numbers, easements, and section and corporate lines
w1tn1n the tract and to a distance of one hundred 1lOUj feet
beyond the tract.
e. Utilities on and Adjacent to the Tract. Location and size
of existing sewer lines, water mains, culverts, or other
underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of
one hundred (100) feet beyond the tract --also indicatin;
such data as locations and surface and invert grade
elevations of catch-basins, manholes, and fire hydrants. If
water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract,
indicate the direction and distance to, and the size of,
nearest usable facilities.
37.
f.
g.
Location Map. Drawn at a scale of not less than one inch
equals one thousand feet (l" = 1,000') or larger, showing
boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land
within an area bounded by nearest arterial streets. or other
natural boundaries, but not less than one-half (l/2i mile
beyond the subdivision boundaries in subdivisions located
beyond the Village limits, identifying type of use and
ownership of surrounding land and showing alignments of
existing streets.
Topographic Data. Data including existing and proposed
contours at vertical intervals of not more than two (2)
feet; shall extend one hundred ilOOj feet beyond the defined
subdivision boundaries, and shall include contours
delineating boundaries of marginal soil conditions, except
in unusual topographical conditions such vertical intervals
may be required to be altered as determined by the Village
Engineer, (topo9raphic data shall refer to United State
Geological Survey or adjusted Viliage of Itasca Datumj.
h. Stormwater Drainage Systems. Where tile exists their size
and location shall be indicated on the topo 0raphical map
heretofore mentioned. The engineer's opinion regarding the
adequacy of such drainage facilities should be stated, as
well as the drainage ditches, lakes or impounding of waters,
or other structures intended to facilitate drainage are to
be constructed, their size, location, material, grade and
other pertinent data shall be given, location of which shall
be shown on the topographical map.
Drainage design shall conform to the Standards and
Specifications for Required Impruvements for the Village of
·Itasca, Illinois.
i. Other Conditions on the Tract. Water courses, marshes, rock
outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees six (6)
inches or more in caliper at one (1) foot above ground
level, houses, barns, shacks, and other significant
features.
j. Reference to Monuments. Locations of or reference to
locations of existing monuments or survey markers used in
preparation of survey and grade elevation of each monument
and marker.
k. Proposed Public Impro.vements. Highway or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future
construction on or near the tract.
38.
1. Easements. Location, width and purpose.
m. Other Conditions on Adjacent Land. Approximate direction
and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or
retaining walls, character and location of buildings,
railroads, power lines, towers, and other nearby
non-residential land uses or adverse influences; and owner
of adjacent unplatted land (for adjacent platted land refer
to subdivision plat by name, recording date, and number and
show approximate percent built-up, typical lot size and
dwelling type).
3. Subdivision Desisn Features. Subdivision design features shall
be as follows:
a. Accord with Comprehensive Plan. The preliminary plan shall
be in accord with the Comprehensive Plan adopted October 18,
l'.:177.
b. Proposed Zoning Changes. The Vil1a9e of Itasca zoning
districts proposed for the subdivision shall be shown.
c. Public Improvements. The subdivider of any proposed
subdivision within the corporate limits of the Village of
Itasca and within one and one-half (1-1/2) miles of the
corporate limits of the Village of Itasca and within the
jurisdiction of the Plan Commission, shall provide, at the
subdivider's expense, the fo11owlng public improvements, in
accordance with the Standards and Specifications for
Req~ired Land Improvements, obtainable from the office of
the Village Engineer:
(l) Water Mains (Section 8.03.D.Z.e and Section 8.04)
(2) Fire Hydrants (Section S.03.0.3.j and Section 8.04)
(3j Streets \Section 9.0lj
(4j Curbs and Gutters
(Si Street Name Signs
(6) Stormwater Sewers (Section 8.03.D.2.h and Section 8.04)
(7) Sidewalks
(8) Street Lighting
\~i Sanitary Sewers (Section 8.03.w.3.k and Section 8.C4)
(10) Bikeways (Section S.08.D.3 and Section 8.04)
(11) Other Improvements (Section 8.08.D.3)
39.
!-
:::·
d. Layout of Streets. Showing right-of-way widths and street
names (not duplicating the name of any street heretofore
used in the Village or its environs unless such street is an
extension of or in line with an already named.street in
which event that name shall be used) and showing proposed
through streets extended to the boundaries of the
subdivision and approximate grades and gradients. The
street numbering system as adopted by the Village shall be
adhered to.
e.
f.
g.
h.
The subdivider, at his own expense, shall improve all
existing and proposed streets with roadway surfacing of such
materials, width and thickness, and in conformity with such
design and specifications as shall be required by the
Village of Itasca.
Other Rights-of-way. Location and width of pedestridn ways,
and utitility easements.
Location of Utilities. If not shown on other exhibits.
lotting. Layout, total number of lots, di~ensions on the
lot containing the minimum width and depth and on the lot
con ta ini ng the maximum widths and depth, 1 ot numbers and
block numbers.
Sites to be Reserved or Dedicated. Sites, if any, to be
reserved or dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds, or
o-ther public uses. Such sites shall be desi~nated by letter
or number.
i.. Setback Lines. Minimum front and side street building lines
-- indicating dimensions.
j. Watermains, Sewers, and Drainage. Proposed location of
sewer lines and stormwater drains and proposed methods of
sewage and waste disposal including sufficient information
to show the intent of surface drainage and detention and/or
retention facilities conforming to minimum standards of the
Village of Itasca.
Such layout shall show the storm and sanitary sewers, stubs,
valves, line hydrants and water mains, including size,
capacity, and location. Included with this shall be
specifications for the storm and sanitary sewers and water
mains, and a written statement by the sudivider or his
engineer describing the adequacy of these proposed
facilities as well as the effect they will have on existing
or future facilities.
40.
k. Sanitary Sewage Reoilirements. The subdivider of any
proposed subdivision which is located within the corporate
limits of a Sanitary District or within a Du Page or Cook
County Wastewater Facility planning area shall submit to the
Plan Commission, a letter from such Sanitary Dist'rict or
Wastewater Facility Planning Area lead agency certifying
either that:
(1) Wastewater treatment plant capacity and/or sanitary
sewers are available for said proposed subdivision, and
the specifications and requir:ments of said lead agenc1
for the construction of sanitary sewers within said
proposed subdivision have been adequately met; or
(2) Wastewater treatment plant capacity does not exist to
serve the proposed subdivision and/or sanitary sewers
cannot then be installed to serve the proposed
subdivision.
1. Bikeways. Bikeways shall be provided as shown in the Itasca
Bikeway Plan, in each new subdi·1ision and shall be subject
further to the fol lowing:
(l)·c Collector streets, as may be required in new
subdivision, shall contain a minimum of eight (8)
additional feet (refer to Street Right-of-Way Width
Table) of paved width for bicycle movements, unless
provided in a separate right-of-1;ay. The bicycle lanes
shall be striped, physically separated, or other1<ise
marked so as to define the area for use by bicycles.
(2) Additional bikeways may be requir=d to provide
efficient bicycle movement between recreational areas,
education facilities, community centers, employment, or
commercial centers. The Itasca Bikeway Plan will 'erve
as a guide for the alignment and pl a cement of sue h
bikeways.
m. Grading. The subdivider shall submit proposed detailed
grading plans of blocks and lots. No land will be appnved
for subdivision which is subject to periodic f~ooding c~
which contains inadequate drainage facilities or other
tupographic conditions which may increase danger to hea~th,
life, er property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard
unless the subdivider agrees to ma~e improvements which
will, In the opinion of the Village Engineer and ?lan
Commission, make such land safe for development and
occupancy, including construction of adequate stormwatsr
detention or retention facilities.
41.
Development of any flood plain or wetlands area shall be in
accordance with the. Standards and Specifications for
Required Land Improvements.
n. Land Use Intent. Sites, if any, for multi-family awellings,
shopping centers, churches, industry, or other non-public
uses exclusive of single family dwellings.
8.04 - PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
A. Engineering Plans Required.· After the approval of the prel imlnary
plan and prior to filing an application for approval of the final
plat, the subdivider shall submit to the Village Clerk ten (lOj
complete sets of engineering plans and specifications for the land
estimate of the cost of the proposed improvements. Said plans and
specifications shall bear the seal of the design engineer and shail
include the following documents:
1. Topographic Map. A topographic map of the proposed SJbdivision
at a minimum scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1"=
200'), the limits of which shall extend not less than one hundred
(100) feet beyond the limits of •he proposed development or a
'"-- grading plan of proposed structures, the direction of fiow of
surface runoff, the finished grade of all corners of a lot, etc.
2. Construction Drawinos. Construction drawings with a horizontal
scale of Olle inch equals one hundred feet (l"= 100') and a
vertical scale of one inch equals ten feet (l"=lO'j. Existing
and proposed construction are to be shown on these dra1iings.
3. Detail Sheets. Detail sheets of the Village of Itasca showing
the various standards for streets, manholes, catch basins, valve
boxes, sewer and water services, shall be attached to and made a
part of the subdivider's construction drawings.
4. Specifications. Complete set of specifications covering the \York
to be done.
5. Engineering Documents Required. Prior to the submittal of a
Final Plat, final engineering documents shall be submitted for
review and approval as follows:
a. Stormwater Management Facilities. The engineering drawings
sho1dng proposed stormwater facilities as required by
Section 7.04 shall be submitted to and approved by the
Village Engineer.
42.
b. Profile Study. A reproducible mylar containing the
following information sha11 be approved by the Village
Engineer as required by the Plats Act (Chapter 109, Illinois
Revised Statutes).
(1) All elevations shall be referenced to the United States
Geological Survey datum.
(2) Existing contours at one (li foot intervals, indicating
the locations and elevations of bench marks used to
determine said contours.
(3) Finished grade contours are one (1) foot intervals of
the proposed site.
(4j Top of foundQtion elevations for existing and proposed
structures.
(5) Rim and invert elevations of all existing and proposed
drainage structures within the development.
(6) Size, slope, and location of all storm se1vers.
(7) Size, shape, invert and location of the downstream
receiving drainage structures.
(Bi Signature Blocks Required on Profile Study.
(a) Owners Surface Water Drainage Certificate, Section
8.05.F.2.b.
(b) Engineer's Surface Water Drainage Certificate,
Section 8.05.F.2.
c. Sewage Disposal Facilities.
Public Sewer: The engineering drawing showing the proposed
sanitary sewer system shall be submitted to and approved by
the Village Engineer.
d. Water Supply.
Public Water: All engineering drawin9s showing proposed
public water supply systems shall be approved by the Vil!age
Engineer.
e. Street Engineering Plans. The engineering drawings show'.ng
proposed street improvements shall be submitted to and
approved by the appropriate Highway Authority.
43.
f. Other Engineering Plans. Other engineering plans shall be
provided as needed to meet the requirements of this
Ordinance.
g. As Built Drawings.
shall be sutmitted
said i1nprovements.
As built drawings of all imp'rovements
and approved prior to the acceptance of
h. Removal of Top Soil. The applicant for approval of final
plat shall certify in writing that no top soil shal 1 be
removed from the subdivision premises 1;ithout first
complying with the Village of Itasca Ordinance entitled, "An
Ordinance Concerning Removal of Top Soil".
8. Engineering Plans Aooroval. The Village Clerk shall forward two (2)
complete sets of such copies of preliminary plans and specifications
for land Improvements and grading plans to the Plan Commission, one
(l) such set of plans and specifications to the Public Work Director.
1. Review by Village Engineer. The Village Engineer and other
public officials having jurisdiction shall approve such
engineering and specifications or set forth the revisions
·necessary for approval. Based upon the conditions of approval of
the plans and specifications, the subdivider shali have prepared,
by a registered engineer, final plans and specifications covering
such required land improvements. Such plans and specifications
shall be approved by the Village Engineer and other public
officials having jurisdiction, and such approval shall be ·
certified on the final plat. The Plan Commission shall not
approve a final plat and engineering plans and specifications for
required land improvements until such plans and specifications
have been approved by the Village Engineer.
2. Review Fees. The Village shall charge the subdivider for review
of plans for required surface and underground improveme~ts on a
time plus material basis as established by the Village of Itasca
and the Village Engineer.
The subdivider shall pay this fee before any action whether
approval or disapproval, shall be taken by the Village of his
engineering plans.
44.
./
d. 05 - PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT
A. Action by the Subdivider
1. Application to Village Clerk. Application for approval of the
final plat including all engineering drawings, shall be submitted
in writin~ to the Village Clerk and shall be accompanied by the
recording fee and engineering review fees as required in these
regulations. The application shall include the ori~inal and ten
(10) copies of the final plat and all other required documents.
2. Conformance with Preliminary Plan. The final plat sha11 conform
substantially to the preliminary plan as approved, and, if
desired by the Plan Commission, it shall constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plan which the subdivider
proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however,
that such portion conforms to all requirements of these
regulations. Any extension of time for the remaining portion of
the preliminary plan is subject to the discretion of the Plan
Commission.
B. Action by the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall submit the final
plat and other required documents to the Plan Commission far its
review and recommendations for approval or disapproval at least ten
(10) days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting.
C. Action by the Plan Commission. Within two (2i months after its
regularly scheduled meeting, at which the application for approval of
final plat is reviewed, the Plan Commission shall approve or
disapprove it. If the Plan Commission approves, it shall affix upon
ti1e plat, the certifying si9nature of its Chairperson. If it
disapproves, it shall set forth its reasons in its own records and
provide the applicant and the Village Board with a copy.
D. Action by the Villaoe Board.
1. Plat Submitted to the Village Board. After approval of tile final
plat by the Plan Commission and the fulfillment of the
requir1ments of these re9ulations, one (1) tracing of the final
plat of the subdivision, drawn in ink on reproducible drafting
material not to exceed thirty-six inch~s by forty-eight inches
(36" x 48") in size, shall be submitted to the Village aoard for
approval.
2. Action by the Village Board. Action raa; be taken by tne Vil lase
Board within two (2) months after the meeting at which the final
plat, engineering specifications for required land improvements,
and all other drawings, maps and other required documents ha1e
been submitted for its approval. The applicant and the Vil1<3e
Board may mutually agree to extend the two (2) month period.
45.
3. Approved Plat Copies. Upon approval by the Village Board,
Village Clerk shall receive from the subdivider one (1) mylar
reproducible print and three (3j contact prints of the approved
final plat, and three (3) copies of the approved supporting
documents. The cost of such prints and copies of such documents
shall be paid by the subdivider.
a. One {l) contact print of the final plat, when applicable,
one (1) cop/ of the accompanying protective covenants, and
one (li copy of the supporting dociJments shall be delivered
to the Plan Commission;
b. One (lj contact print and all specifications, drawings, and
estimates shall be delivered to the Village Engineer; and
c. One (1) transparency print and one (li contact print and all
other supporting documents shall be retained by the Village
Cl erk.
E. Filing of Final Plat
1. Filing with County. Upon approval by the Village Board, Village
Clerk shall record the plat with the Cook or Du Page County
Recorder within two (2) months. · ·
2. Filing for Local Record. The final plat in exact form as
approved by the Village Board, and as filed with the Cook or Du
Page County Recorder, shall be filed for local record by the
Village Clerk. Such local file copy shall bear the appropriate
documentation number such as assigned by the Cook or DuPage
County Recorder.
F. Orawings and Date for Final Approval. The final plat shall be
accurately drawn in ink on reproducible drafting material, in a manner
that's clear and legible so that transparent or contact prints or
photostatic copies can be made. The final plat shall be at a scale of
fifty (50) feet to the inch when the longest dimension of the tract is
seven hundred (700) feet or less, and one hundred (100) feet to the
inch when the longest dimension of the tract is more than seven
hundred (700) feet, at no time shall the scale be other than twenty
{~O), ten (10), five (5), or one (1) foot to the inch be used. Where
necessary, the plat may be drawn on several sheets accompanied by an
index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions,
the final plat may be submitted for approval progressivel/ in
contiguous sections satisfactory to the Plan Commission.
46.
8.06 - FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS
The final plat shall show the following:
A. ·General Information. General information shall be as follows:
1. Boundary Lines. In accordance with Section 8.03.0.2.a. of this
Ordinance.
2. Layout of Streets. Showing right-of-way and street names (not
duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the Village
or its environs unless such street is an extension of, or in line
with an already named street in which event that name shall be
used) and showing proposed through streets extended to the
boundaries of the subdivision.
3. Other Riohts-of-Way. Location and width of alleys, pedestrian
ways, and utility easements.
4. Sites to be Reserved or Dedicated. Sites to be reserved or
_dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public uses,
or for the exclusive use of property owners within the
subdivision. Such areas shall be designated by letter or number
·and by legal description.
5. Accurate Dimensions. Accurate angular and lineal dimensions for
all lines, angles, radii, and arcs used to des.cribe all
boundaries including perimeter surv~y of tract, streets,
easements, areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use, and
other important features. Error of closure of boundary line
surveys shall not exceed one in ten thousand (one (1) foot for
each ten thousand (10,000j feet of perimeter survey). Angular
error shall not exceed plus or minus twenty (20) seconds. Lot
lines shall show dimensions in feet and hundreths, and when an
angle occurs in any 1 ot 1 ine between 1 ot corners, the measurE·ment
of the angle shall be shown in degrees, minutes, and seconds.
The final plat shall show accurately the location of all
permanent lot markers as actually installed.
6. Control Points. True angles and distances to the nearest
established street lines and official monuments (not less than
three (3), which shall be accurately described in the plat by
location, size, and elevation, to which all dimensions, anglfs,
bearings, and similar data on the plat shal 1 be referred.
7. Identification System. An identification system for all bl or ks
and lJts using consecutive numbers for lots within a block a~i,
where applicable, a street address number in accord with curr~nt
Village policies.
47.
,I
8. Correlation with Existing Boundaries.
selection 1 ines accurately carrel ated
by distances and angles.
Municipal, township, or
to the lines of subdivision
9. Location of Monuments. Accurate location of all monuments which
shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, and at
intermediate points as shall be r~quired by the Viilage Engineer,
and installed in such manner that they may be located by a
licensed surveyor. All U.S.G.S., State, County, Village, or
other official bench marks, monuments, or triangulation stations
in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise
position.
Designation of the points where monuments marking the external
boundaries of the subdivision may be found. These monuments
shall be placed at all corners, at each end of all curves, at the
point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points in
any line and at all angle points along a meander line, the points
to be not less than twenty (20) feet back from the normal water
elevation of a lake or from the bank of a stream, except that
when such corners or points fall within a street or proposed
future street, monuments shall be placed on the right-of-way of
the street.
10. Covenants. Protective covenants, if any, are to be placed on the
final plat or as an accompanting document in form for recording.
11. Seback lines. Proposed building setback 1 ines on all lots and
other sit es.
12. Name of Subdivision.
·. 13. Location. By section, township, and range.
14. Title, Scale, North Arrow.
15. Certification. Certification b; a registered land surveyor
certifyin~ to the accuracy of the survey and plat.
16. Drawing Number and Date.
17. Other Data. Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements,
or.dedications as may be required by the Plan Commission in the
enforcement of these regulations.
48.
~· .
B. · · Certification Required. The dppllcation for approval of the final
plat shall not be deemed completed until the following certificates,
other than the Village Clerk Certificate, have been duly executed:
(In preparing certifications for final plat approval, only include
applicable County name.)
1. Owner's Certificate
2. Owner's Surface Water Drainage Certificate
3. En9ineer's Surface Water Drainage Certificate
4. Notary Certificate
5. Surveyor's Certificate
6. Plan Commission Certificate
7. Village Engineer Certificate
8. Village Treasurer Certificate
9. Village Board of Trustees Certificate
10. County Clerk Certificate
11. County Recorder Certificate
12. County Health Department Certificate
13. County Superintendent of Highways Certificate
14. Village Clerk Certificate
15. Plat Certification
49.
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF COOK
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGE)
OWNER'S CERTICATE*
This is to certify that -----------' and __________ _
his wife are the owners of the land described as. in
Cook or Du Page County, Illinois, shown hereon as (Lot _ Block _ 1 and
that no other person has any right, title, or interest in said land, and that
said owners have caused the same to be survejed and subdivided as indicated
thereon, for the uses and purposes therein set forth, and do.hereby acknowledge
and adopt the same under the title indicated.
Dated this _ ~ _ day of __________ 19 •
Name
Address
*Corporate owner's certificate sho~ld be accompanied by a corporate form of
a ckno1~1 ed9ement.
so.
2.
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF COOK j
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGE)
OWNER'S SURFACE WATER
DRAINAGE CERTIFICATE*
This is to certify that owner of the 1 and her;:i n ~~~~~~~~~~~
described or duly authorized attorney certify that to the best of my knowledge
and belief the drainage of s~rface waters will not be changed by the
construction of such subdivision or any part thereof, or that, if such surface
water draina;e will be changed, adequate provision has been made for collection
and diversion of such surface waters into public areas, or drains which the
subdivider has a right to use, and that such surface waters wi11 not be
deposited on the property of adjoining land owners in such concentrations as
may cause damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of the
subdivision.
Name
Address
Dated this _____ day of __________ l9 _
*Corporate owner's certificate should be accompanied by a corporate form c,f
acknowledgement.
Sl.
3.
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF COOK )
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGEi
ENGINEER'S SURFACE WAT£R
DRAINAGE CERTIFICATE
This is to certify that I, Registered Professional Engineer, certify that ta
the best of my knowledge and belief that drainage of surface waters will not be
changed by construction of such subdivision or any part thereof, or that if
such surface water drainage will be changed, adequate provisions have been made
for collection and diversion of such surface waters into public areas, or
drains which the subdivider has the right to use, and that such surface waters
will not be deposited on.the property adjoining land owners in such
concentrations as may cause damage to the adjoining property because of the
construction of the subdivision.
Name
Address
Dated this day of l~_.
~~~~- -~~~~~~~~~
52.
4.
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF COOK )
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGE)
NOTARY CERTIFICATE
I,-----------• a Notary Public in and for and residing in the
County and State aforesaid, DO HEREBY CERTIFY THAT _________ and
-----------, his wife, personally known to me to be as such
0wner1 s appeared before me this day in person and acknowledg2d that they signed
and delivered the plat as their own free and voluntary act for the uses and
purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seai this _day of ________ , 19 __
Notary Public
53.
5.
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF COOK )
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGE j
I, , a Registered Illinois Land Surveyor, DO HEREBY. ~~~~~~~~~~~~
CERTIFY that I have surveyed and subdivided the lands shown on the ?lat and
described in the above caption, and that the said plat, drawn to a scale of 100
feet per l inch,* is a true and correct representation of the said survey and
subdivision. I do further certify that I have placed iron stakes at all
corners and at all curve control points as permanent monuments from which
future surveys may be made. Al 1 measurements are· shown in feet and in decimal
parts of a foot.
I do further certify that ( (no part). or (part) ) of the property covered by
this ;ilat is situated within 500 feet of a surface drain or watercourse serving
a tributary area of 640 acres or more.
Dated at Itasca, Cook or Du Page County, Illinois this __ day of _____ ,
19
Registered Illinois Land S~rveyor
*See Section 8.03 0. for other scales based on size of .drawings.
54.
6.
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF COOK
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGE)
PLAN COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
This is to certify that the members of the Plan Commission of the Village of
Itasca, Illinois have reviewed and recommend approval of this plat.
Dated at Itasca, Cook or Du Page County, !11 inoi s, thi s _ day of -----
l~_.
7.
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF COOK )
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGE)
Chairman
Secretary
VILLAGE ENGINEER CERTIFICATE
I,-----------• Village Engineer of the Village of Itasca,
Illinois, hereby certify that the land improvements described in the plat, and
the plans and specifications therefore, meet the minim~m requir•ments of said
Village and have been approved by all public authorities having jurisdicticn
thereof.
Dated at Itasca, Cook or DuPage County, Illinois, this --, day of --
Village Engineer
55.
I
8.
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF COOK . )
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGE)
VILLAGE TREASURER CERTIFICATE
I,-----------• Village Treasurer for the Village of Itasca,
Illinois, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent or unpaid current or
forfeited special assessments or any deferred installments thereof that have
not been apportioned against the tract, included in the plat.
Dated at Itasca, Cook or Du Page County, Illinois, this __ day of _____ ,
19 __
Village Treasurer
9.
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF COOK )
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGE)
This is to certify that the Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Itasca,
Illinois, have reviewed and approved this plat •
. Dated at Itasca, Cook or DuPage County, Illinois, this __ day of ____ _
19 _ .
President
ATTEST:
Village Clerk
55.
10.
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF COOK
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGEj
COUNTY CLERK CERT!CATE
I, -----------' County C1 erk of Cook or Du Page County,
Illinois, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that there are no delinquent general taxes, no
unpaid curr2nt general taxes, and no unpaid forfeited taxes, and· no redeemab1e
tax sales against any of the land included in the plat.
I further certify that I hdve received all statutory fees in connection with
the pl at.
Given under my hand and seal of the County Clerk at Chicago, Cook County or
Wheaton, Du Page County, I11inois, this day of
~~ ~----------
19_.
11.
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF COOK )
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGE)
•
County Clerk
COUNTY RECORDER CERTIFICATE
This plat was filed for record in the Recorder's Office of Cook or Du Page
County, Illinois, on the ---day of , A.O., l~---' at ---~~----
o'clock m. as document number
~----- -~---~
County Recorder
57.
12.
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF COOK )
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGEj
COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT CERTIFICATE
I, ------------Cook or Du Page County, !11 inois, do .hereby
certify that the subdivision shown on this plat complies with all sanitary
sewage requirements of the Cook or Du Page County Health Department.
Dated at Chicago, Cook, or Wheaton, Du Page County, Illinois, this day
of--------• 19 _
Name & Title
13.
COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF HiGHWAYS
CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF COOK )
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGE)
I,------------• County Superintendent of Highways of said
County, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that the plat has been examined by me and found to
compl; with the highway requirements as set forth in a regulation. ~overning
plats of subdivided lands adopted by the County Board of Cook or Du Page
County, Illinois.
Dated at Chicago, Cook County or at Wheaton, DuPage County, Illinois, this __
day of _______ , 19 _ •
58.
County Superintendent of
Highwa1s
14.
STATE OF ILL!NO!S)
COUNTY OF COOK
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGE)
VILLAGE CLERK CERTIFICATE
I, , Village Clerk of the Village of Itasca, !11 inois, ~~~~~~~~~
hereby certify that the plat was presented to and by resolution duly approved
by the Village Board of said Village at its meeting held on.~~~~~~~~
l~~· and that the required bond or other guarontee has been posted for the
completion of the improvements required by the regulations of said Village.
In witness whereof, I have hereto set my hand and seal of the Village of
Itasca, Illinois, this day of , l~_.
~~~~- -~~~~~~~
Village Clerk
59.
15. Subdivision Outside Corporate Limits. Except as otherwise required by
statute, certification of final plats of subdivision located in the
unincorporated areas within one and one-half (l-l/2j miles .beyond the
Village limits shall be those required by the Cook County or Du Page
County Subdivision Regulations except, when the Village of Itasca
Subdivision Regulations are more restrictive, the applicable
certifications contained herein shall also be required.
If certification of the final plat is required in accordance with the
·Cook County or Du Page County Subdivision Regulations, the following
certification shall be included on the final plat.
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF COOK
or
COUNTY OF DU PAGEi
?LAT CERTIF!CATIO~
Approved by the Board of of County,
~~~~~~~~~~- -~~~~~~~~
Illinois, this day of 19_.
~~~~~~~ ~~~~~~~~~~-
Plat Officer
60.
8.07 - CONSTRUCTION OF REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
A. Installation Required. The subdivider shall, before the recording of
his final plat, enter into a contract with the Vi11age of Itasca
agreeing to install street and utility improvements and other
improvements indicated on the approved preliminary plan and as
approved in the final engineering documents in accordance with
specifications hereinafter provided. Such contract shall be in such
form as required by Section 8.08 of this Ordinance.
B. Deeding of Improvements. All underground public improvements up ta
the property line shall be deeded over to the Vil lag~ of Itasca and
become the property of the Village after approval by the Village
Engineer and when accepted by resolution of the Village of Itasca.
All labor and material for installing under9round public improvements
shall be furnished by the subdivider. All testing required for
acceptance shall be done by the subdivider under the supervision of
the Village Engineer.
8.0tl - AGREEMENTS AND GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS
The requirements of this Section shall be complied with prior to the
approval and recording of a Final Plat of Subdivision.
A. Action by the Subdivider. Prior to the filing of an application
for a final plat, the subdivider shall submit the following to
the Village Clerk.
1. Statement of Acreement. A statement of agr~ement that:
a. The land improvements, required by this Ordinance,
shall be completed by the owner or subdivider in
accordance with the plans and specifications approved
by the Village Engineer.
b. Four (4) sets plus one (1) reproducible set on mylar of
as built plans, as required by Section 8.09 shal 1 be
submitted by the owner or subdivider.
c. If payment in-lieu-of funds is to be made on
installment basis, the SJbdivider shall inform the
Building Department in writing within five (5) da s of
any such initial occupancy of a family uni: and a so
submit any such payment concurrent therewith to t ~
Village Treasurer for ultimate payment to the
appropriate school district.
61.
I
6.
d. All improvements and the as-built plans of sa1a improvement,
shall be completed by the owner or subdivider within two {2j
years following approval of the final plat by the President
and the Village Board.
e. That no home in any block shall be occupied for longer than
six (6) months without all sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and
roadway base and surfacing being completed for the entire
block by the owner or subdivider, or whenever, at least
seventy-five (7Si percent of a designated block has
completed homes on it, then the owner or subdivider shall
have completed constructing all of the sidewalks, curbs,
gutters and street pavements in that block.
2. Letter of Credit. An irrevocable Letter of Credit naming the
Village Board of Trustees as beneficiary thereto. Said Letter of
Credit shall be from a sound and reputable banking or financial
institution authorized to do business in the State of Illinois.
Said Letter of Credit shall be in effect for the length of time
required to complete the public improvements and in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of all land improvements as
required by Ordinance. Said irrevocable Letter of Credit shall
be reviewed by the Attorney and meet the approval of the
President and the Village Board.
Action by the Village Clerk. The Villa9e Clerk shall not certify the
approval of the President and the Village Board on the final plat
until the requirements of this Section have been completed.
C. Guarantee of Completed Improvements. Upon completion of the
improvements covered by the Letter of Credit, the subdivider shall
notify the President, and Village Board of Trustees of the Village of
Itasca, in writing, and request inspection of the completed
improvements. The subdivider shall submit, with the request for
inspection, an as-built plan covering the improvements to be
accepted. Said as-built plan shall meet the requirements of Section
8.09 herein. After the improvements have been inspected by the
Village and found to be complete, but before acceptance by the Village
Board, the subdivider shall furnish a Letter of Credit, guaranteeing
the improvements against faulty workmanship and/or materials for a
period of one {l) year after acceptance. Said Letter of Credit shall
be of an amount equal to at least ten (10) percent of the total cost
of the improvements to be accepted.
62.
-•.'
Since a Letter of Credit is already on file guaranteeing completion of
the same improvements, the subdivider need not furnish the Letter of
Credit before acceptance by the Village Board. However, said
acceptance by the President and Village Board shall release an amount
equal to not more than ninety (YO) percent of the original Letter of
Credit to enable the subdivider to furnish a new irrevocable Letter of
Credit equal to ten (10) percent of the cost of the improvements for
one (1) year after acceptance.
D. Letter of Credit Required.
1. The irrevocable Letter of Credit shall be substantially in the
same form as s h;iwn herein:
The Village of Itasca, Illinois:
Gentlemen:
We hereby authorize you to draw at si~ht on the iname of bank)
---.,--,,-----0.f up to an aggregate
amount of /lOO Unit::d States Doliars, for
account of:
-------(r.N~a-m_e_o~f~De_v_e~l-o_p_e_r~)-~-------~
This Letter of Credit is available against presentation of your
draft accompanied by: a signed statement by the Village Engineer
of the Village of Itasca, Illinois that ------
(Name of Developer)
has failed to complete the required construction of street and
off-site improvements for -.,.--,-,,.,---,-,----,-....,..,.-.,-·Subdivision,
in accordance with Village Specifications and the Letter
Agreement, dated , 19_, by the Village of
Itasca, Illinois, and
----~(~N~a-m_e_o_f,_,D~e-v-eTl_o_p-er-),-------~
This credit is subject to the "Uniform Customs and Practice for
Documentary Credits (1962 Revision), International Chamber cf
Commerce Brochure No. 222."
We hereby agree to honor each draft drawn under and in comp1'ance
with the terms of this credit, if duiy presented (together >;~th
the documents as specified) at this office in
Illinois, on or before ----.--,,l~Y=:_-::__-_-_-.-
Drafts under this credit should bear upon their face the words:
"Drawn Under the
----~-~---,.--\N-am,e. ~of- -B,an.k.) .,.------~
of_..,... ________ , Credit No. _________ _
dated , lY __ .
2. Subdivision Outside Corporate Limits. Such agreements as set
forth above, shall not be required for subdivisions located in
the unincorporated areas within one and one-half (1-1/2) miles
beyond the Village limits when there is evidence that agreements
are entered into between the owner or subdivider and C'ook or Du
Page Counties, except when the Village standards for public
improvements are of higher quality than Cook or Du Paye Counties'
standards, such agreements may be required by the Village.
3. Other Improvements.
a. Bi keways
Bikeways shall be provided as shown in the Itasca Bikeway
Plan, in each new subdivision and shall be subject further
to the following:
(1) Collector streets, as may be requireJ in new
subdivisions, shall contain a minimum of eight (8)
additional feet of paved width for bicycle movements,
unless provided in a separate right-of-way. The
bicycle lanes shall be striped, physically separated,
or otherwise marked so as to define the area for use by
bicycles.
(2) Additional bikeways may be required to provide
efficient bicycle movement between recreational areas,
education facilities, community centers, empl~yment, or
commercial centers. The Itasca Bikeway Plan will serve
as a guide for the alignmen~ and placement Df such
bikeways. When the construction of a bikeway is
required to be incorporated int? the read ~igh~-of-way,
bikewa{s shall be constructed with a four \4) inch
compac ed gravel base and two (2) inch rolled asphait
surface.
b. Trees Required. Trees shall be planted in the front yards
of each proposed lot. Existing trees shall be preserved, if
possible, as determined b; the Village Forester or a
Landscape Architect. Trees newly planted shall be not
further apart than fifty (SO) feet or one (1) tree per
inside lot and two (2) trees on corner lots and the type of
tree shall be limited to those varieties as recommended by
the Plan Commission and approved by the Village Board.
(l i Tree Caliper.
1 ess than two
foot from the
Newly planted street trees shall be not
(2) inches in caliper, measured one (l)
ground.
64.
)
{2j Prohibited Trees. The planting of the following
varieties of trees within the public rights-of-way
shall be prohibited.
Botanic Name
Acer Negundo
Acer Saccharinum
At1 arithus Al ti ssima
Betu1a Spp.
Catalpa Speciosa
Elaeagnus Spp.
Ginko Biloba (female)
Macluna Pomefera
Malus Premila
Marus Spp.
?1 a ta nus Spp.
Populus Spp.
Prunus Spp.
Salix Spp.
Ulmus Spp.
Coniferales Order
Common Name
Box Elder
Silver Maple
Tree of Heaven
Birch
Catalpa
Russian Olive
Female Ginko
Osage Oran~e
Apple
Mulberry
Sycamore
Cottonwood
Poplar, Aspen
Cherry, Pl um
Wi 11 OW
Elm
Coniferous Order
8.09 - ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS*
' ..
A. Acceptance of Improvements by Resolution. Upon the completion of
construction of any public improvements required by this Ordinance, in
conformance with approved engineering plans and specifications, the
subdivider shall prepare and submit to the Village Department of
Public Works four (4) sets, plus one (lj reproducible set on mylar of
as built plans and certification by the Village Engineer that such
public improvements have been satisfactorily completed in accorda~ce
with the approved engineering plans and specifications. The Vill~ge
Board will enact a resolution accepting said improvements.
*In reviewing and updating Standards and Specifications for Required Land
Improvements, this section way be included.
65.
j
- i
B. Final Plat Approval Not Acceptance of Improvements. If an1 final plat
of subdivision contains public streets or thoroughfares which are
therein dedicated as such, whether located within the corporate limits
of the Village, or all or in part outside thereof, or contains
existing streets located outside of said corporate limits, the
approval of the final plat by the Village Board or the subsequent
annexation of the property to the Village shall not consitute an
acceptance thereon or therein, irrespective of any act or acts by an
officer, agent, or employee of the Village with respect to such
streets or improvements. The acceptance of a Resolution by the
Village Board, after there has been filed with the Village Clerk, a
certificate by the Village Engineer certifying that all improvements
required to be constructed or installed in or upon such streets or
thoroughfares, in connection with the approval of the plat of
subdivision by the Village Board, have been fully completed and th2
construction or installation thereof has been approved by him.
66.
SECTION Y.00 - PLANNING STANOARDS FOR SUBDIVISION DESIGN
The subdivision of land - including the arrangement, character, extent width,
grade, and location of all streets, cross-walks, easements, sites for parks,
playgrounds, and schools or other land to be dedicated for public use - shall
conform to the Official Comprehensive Plan, (adopted October l~, 1Y77j, and
Official Map of the Village of Itasca. Approval of design standards shall be
considered on the basis of their relation to existing and platted streets,
reasonable circulation of traffic within the subdivision and adjacent land,
topographic conditions, runoff of stormwater, public convenience and safety,
and appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the area to be served.
9.Ul - STREET STANDARDS
A. Street Arran ement. Where such is not shown on the Comprehensive
Plan, adopted October 18, 1977), and/or official Map, the arrangement
of streets within a subdivision shall either:
1. Continuity. Provide for the continuation or projection of
existing principal street in adjacent areas; or
2. Conformity with Plan. Conform to a plan for the area of
neighborhood approved Gr adopted by the Plan Commission to meet a
particular situation where topo~raphical or other conditions make
con ti nuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable.
B. Street Design. All required street rights-of-way, pavement widths,
curves, gradients and sight distances shall be as shown in the
accompanying Standards and Specifications for Required Land
Improvements and in accordance with the following:
1. Street Jogs. Street jogs between residential streets, arterials
and collector streets with ~enterline offsets of less than two
hundred and twenty-five \2251 feet shall be avoided. Street jogs
between minor streets with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred and fifty \i5Di feet shall be avoided. (Se.:
Illustrations).
2. Intersections. It shall be evidenced that all street
intersections and confluences encourage safe and efficient
traffic flow, and, in general, be at or near right angles; c:r1d in
no case shall a street intersect any other street at less than
sixty \60; oe;rees. An intersection of more than two (2j st~eets
shall not be permi•ted.
67.
I
3. Cul-de-Sac Street. A cul-de-sac street, in single family
residential districts shall be not more than five hundred (500)
feet in length, measured from the centerline of the intersecting
street t~ the center of the turnaround. In multiple family
residential areas, cul-de-sac streets shall not be pennitted.
Each cul-de-sac street shall have a terminus of nearly circular
shape with a minimum right-of-way diameter of not less that one
hundred and twenty (120) feet and a pavement outside diameter of
not less that eighty (80i feet.
4. Median Strips. Median strips other than a raised center curb
separating lanes of traffic within a single right-of-way shall
not be allowed. However, where a parkway exists on a new street
which is an extension of the existing street, a median strip may
be constructed not more than five hundred (500) fe:t in length to
provide the transistion to no median strip. All such median
strips as described above shall have barrier curbs with gutters.
5. Access from Arterial Streets. Provisions shall be made for
vehicular and pedestrian access to residential property abutting
an arterial street either by providing: (a) a marginal access
street, or {b) by backing lots to the thoroughfare and ~roviding
access by a collector, minor, or cul-de-sac street one (1) lot
depth removed and with a no-access strip easement not less than
twelve (12j feet wide along the rear lot line. These standards
are established for the purpose of providing protection for the
residential properties and to provide for traffic safety and the
efficient use of the major street for its intended function of
accommodating through traffic.
6. Reserve Strips. Reserve strips or areas enabling access to
"interior lots from public streets are prohibited in residential
subdivisions containing lots less than one (1) acre in area
providing there is no conflict with the applicable zoning
classification. If in the decision of the Plan Commission all
purposes of this Ordinance are served, a variance of up to ten
(10) percent in area may be granted each resulting lot providing
the total being divided shall not be contructed to be less than
two (2j acres in area. Reserve strips shall not be allowed on
private streets.
68.
.1·
7. Street Riqht-of-Way ~idths. All street right-of-way widths shall
be not less than the following dimensions:
STREET TYPE
a. Arterials (in conformance
the Thoroughfare Planj
b. Collector
c. Minor
d. Marginal Ace es s Streets
e. Cul-de-Sac Streets
RIGHT-OF-WAY ~IDTHS
{In Feet)
with 100 (or as shewn on
Offi ci a 1 Pl an)
80
t>6
40
65
the
8. Pavement Widths. All pavement ~idths shall be not less than the
following dimensions:
STREET TYPE
a. Arterials l
b. Collector 1•2
c. Minor
d. Marginal Access Streets
e. Cul-de-Sac Streets
f. Turn arounds
(minimum diameter)
PAVEMENT WUTH
(In Feet)
54 {or two-25 foot lanes
with 20 foot median strip
or as shown on the Official
Pl anj
36
34
*
34
120 (measured from the
outside curb
~n conformance with the Illinois Department of Transportation
Standards and the approved Year 2000 Street and Highway Plan for
Ou Page County, where applicable.
1 •~n additional 8.0 feet of pavement may be provided, subject ~o
the approval of tiie appropriate Hi;;hway Authority, for bicycle
lanes where required and sha11 be striped, physically separat~d.
or otherwise marked so as to define said areas.
*Pavement widths to be determined by the Village Engineer.
c9.
f
-~· - "'
9. Street Levels. Street levels shall provide proper relation
between the street and the elevation of the houses to assure
positive draina,;e from the building to the street. The top of
the foundation of homes must be not less than six (6) inches
above the level of the street. ·
10. Street Grading Construction Plans. Street gradin~ construction
plans shall conform to the Standards and Specifications for the
Required Land Improvements for the Village of Itasca.
11. Deflection Angles.
center lines within
ten (lUj de;rees, a
less than:
Where there is a·deflection in horizontal
a given block at any given point in excess of
curve shall be inserted with a radius of not
Collector Streets 300 feet
Minor Streets l~ O feet
12. Street Connection Gradients. Different connecting street
gradients shall be connected with vertical parabolic curves.
Minimum length in feet of these curves shall provide a stopping
sight distance of not less than three hundred (300) feet.
- 13. Private Streets. Private streets with right-of-way width as
required by these regulations, enabling access to interior lots
from public streets, are permitted in residential subdivisions
containing lots two acres in area and over.
14. Provision shall be made for serving lots for residential use
abutting arterial streets and highways by either the use of (a)
marginal access streets, (b) backing lots. to the arterial street
with a screen planting contained in a non-access reservation
along the rear propertj line, (c) deeper lots fronting on the
arterial street with rear service alleys. These methods are
recommended for the purpose of providing adequate protection of
residential properties and to afford separation of through and
local traffic.
15. Street Gradients. Gradients of streets shall be at least 0.4
percent and not exceed on:
Collector Streets 5 percent
Minor Streets 7 percent
7 o.
/
lo. Alleys and Pedestrian Ways.
a. Alleys shall be at least eighteen (l~) feet wide, where
pennitted in residential areas. Alleys at least twenty-two
(ZZj feet wide shall be provided in commerical areas -unless
such areas are otherwise provided with off-street
loading space.
b. Pedestrian ways shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide and
a shrub or tree hedge shall be planted at side boundary
1 i nes.
C. Private Access Streets
l. Planned Developments
a. Oesisn Approval. The complete desi;n for private access
streets, including specifications and designations of
traffic ways, driving lanes, paving widths, thickness,
materials, etc., shall be submitted to the Plan Commission
for review and approvai prior to the issuance of buildin~
pennits or the sale or lease of buildings or land in
"Planned Developments" as defined in this Ordinance. The
minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be in
accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of
the Village of Itasca. Where more than one (1) owner or
leasee are to use the same private marginal access road or
parking lot, a trust identure shall be recorded before
approval of the multi-family, commercial or industrial
subdivision as defined herein.
b. Ingress and Egress. A minimum distance may be recommended
by the Plan Commission and required by the Vi11age Board
where deemed necessary between points of ingress and egress
where all propertj to be subdivided is under one (1)
ownership on the effective date of this Ordinance. Where
property has frontage on a state or federal highway, the
spacing and design of the points of ingress and egress to
the major highway shall be subject to approval of the
Illinois Department of Transportation.
2. Convention Development. A paved accessway from the property line
to the street shall be provided as wide as the driveway for :he
dwelling to be served, except that no access driveway shall
exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width. In the case of prope;-ty
zoned for other than single-family dwelling units, the
requirements for access driveways sha11 conform as closely as
possible therewith. Pavement shall be of concrete except in
single-family residential areas.
71.
I
I
D. Public Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways. Public sidewalks and pedestrian
ways shall be included in any proposed subdivision within the
corporate limits of the Village of Itasca, and within one and one-half
(1-1/2) miles of the corporate limits to the Village of Itasca at the
- · subdivider's expense. Such sidewalks shall be not less than five \5)
feet wide.
~.02 -
A.
...... ·_.
B.
c.
EASEMENTS
Easement Desi"n and Location. Easements not less than five (5j feet
wide shall be provided for the construction and maintenance of public
utilities across the rear of all lots where no alleys are platted and
adjacent to the side lines of all lots where necessary for continuity
of such utilities from block to block except that easements shall not
be required for water service. When the rear of all lots abut public
or unsubdivided lands, that easemtnts shall specify that no building
or other structures may be erected on such easements. The Final Plat
for each subdivision or resubdivision containing more than three (3j
lots or tracts shall set forth on the face thereof, general
restrictions or covenants which require that all public utility
structures and facilities, whether located on public or private
property, shall be constructed wholly underground, except for
transformers, transformer pads, light poles, regulators, valve markers
and similar structures approved by Village Engineer prior or
subsequent to recording of the Final Plat, and except for structures
and facilities existing prior to recording of the Final Piat. Where
such public utilities are required to be installed underground, the
installation and maintenance thereof shall be in compliance with
applicable orders, rules and regulations of the Illinois Commerce
Commission now or hereafter effective, and the owner or subdivider of
any property to be served from such underground installations shall be
responsible for compliance with the rules and re~ulations applicable
to such underground facilities, now and hereafter effective and filed
with said Commission pursuant to the Illinois Public Utilities Act, of
any public utility whose services are required to be provided by such
underground facilities.
Lake and Pond Easements. A ten (luj foot wide land easement shal 1 be
provided, measured from the established shore line of all bodies of
water, and where necessary a ten (10; foot wide access easement tJ a
public roadway.
Clear Si ht Distance (Line of Site Easementj. An easement to protect
c ear sight distance not to exceed three \3 feet above curb level
shall be provided at all intersections. Such easements shall be a
triangular area measured twenty-five (25) feet from the intersections
of any two (2j ri9ht-of-wa1 lines. (See Illustrationsj.
72.
D. Easement Responsibility. Each lot owner shall be responsible for the
maintenance, operation, and preservation of all drainage structures,
both on the surface and underground, which cross or enter upon his lot
. or lots. The owner may relocate, within the bounds of his lot or
lots, and draina3e structure subject to prior approval by the Village,
Engineer, however, he must preserve the hydraulic characteristics of
such structures.
9.03. - BLOCKS
A. Configuration of Blocks. The shape of blocks shall be determined by
topographical features, the basic street system and the traffic
pattern, lot depths, and areas designated for public and other
non-residential land uses. In addition to these, the lengths, widths,
and shapes of blocks sha 11 be determined with due regard to:
l. Site Adeouacy. Provision of adequate building sites suitable to
the special needs of the type of use contemplated.
2. Zoning. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions
within the corporate limits of the Village of Itasca.
3. Convenience. Needs for convenient access, circulation, control
and safety of street traffic.
B. Length of Blocks
l. Residential. In residential subdivisions, the maximum length of
blocks containing lots of seventy-five (75) feet and over in
width shall be eighteen hundred (1800) feet, and the maximum
length of blocks containing lots less than seventy-five (75) feet
in width shall be twelve hundred (1200) lineal feet. No block
sha11 be less than nine hundred (900i linea1 feet in length
unless recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the
Village Board.
2. Non-Residential. In other than residential subdivisions, maximilm
length of blocks sha11 be as recommended by the Vi11 age En~ineer
and approved by the Village Board.
C. Non-Residentail Blocks. Blocks or portions thereof intended for
non-residentia1 use shall be designated as such, and the plan shall
show adequate off-street areas to provide for parking, loading drcks,
and other such facilities in accordance with the Itasca Zoning
Ordinance.
73.
I
'
0. Subdivision Bordering Public Rights-of-Way. Where a subdivision
borders on or contains a rail.road right-of-way or limited access
thoroughfare right-of-way, the Plan Commission may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a
distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land as
for: {a) park purposes, (b) deep residential lots backing to
railroad or primary street with planting screen in a non-access area
at rear of property lines of lots, or (c) motor vehicle parking,
business, or industry in appropriate districts. Such distances shall
be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades
and future grade separations.
9.04 - LOTS
A. Configuration of Lots. The lot size, width, depth, sha?e, and
orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision
and for the type of development and use contemplated and, in general,
lots should be as nearly rectangular in shape as parcticable.
1. Conformance with 2oning Regulations. Width and area of lots
shall c"nform with lot width and area requirements set forth in
the 2oning Ordinance of the Village of Itasca or that of Cook or
Du Page Counties in the unincorporated areas beyond the village
1 imits.
In case of corner lots, the Plan Commiss.ion may make variations
to enco~rage the proper development of intersection design and
traffic safety; and corner lots shall be increased in width by
twenty-five (25) percent over the width of typical interior lot
except where the typical lot is ninety (90) feet wide or more.
2. Non-Residential Lots. Width, area, and depth of lots in a
non-residential subdivision shall be as specified in the Itasca
Zoning Ordinance.
3. Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines of lots shall be at right an"les
or radial to the street line, or substantially so.
4. Butt Lots. Butt lots shall be platted at least five (5) feet
wider than the average interior lots in developments containing·
lots less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet in area.
B. Access to Lots. All lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street.
74.
.•. --·
C. Separation for Major Streets. Double frontage and reverse frontage
lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of
residential development from major streets or highways or to overcome
specific disadvantages of topography, orientation and noise:
An easement shall be provided, the width of which shall be determined
by the Village Engineer, (but in on case less than twelve (12) feet
widej for the purpose of providing a noise and si;ht barrier and to
prevent the right of access across the rear or side lot line of lots
abutting such highway and/or major thoroughfare. Within this easement
shall be constructed or installed an earth berm, landscape planting,
or a fence which is to be continuous. The Village Engineer shall
det2rmine the height and review the selections of materials and type
of improvement to be used.
D. Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage lots are not permitted, except:
l. Where lots back upon- a primary street, and in such instances,
vehicular and pedestrian access between the lots and the primary
streets is prohibited; and
2. Where topographic or other conditions render subdividing
otherwise unreasonable, such double frontage lots shall have an
additional depth of at least twenty (20) feet in order to allow
for a protective screen planting on one frontage.
E. Lots Abutting a Water Course. Lots abutting a water course,
drainageway, channel, or stream shall have an additional depth or
width as recommended by the Village Engineer and approved by the
Village Board to provide an acceptable building site.
F. Preservation of Natural Features. In the subdivision of an; land, due
re~ard shall be given to the preservation of natural features, such as
trees, water courses, historical landmarks, and similar communit
assets, •hfch ff preserved, would add to the attractiveness and V!lue
of the subdivision, nei9hborhood, or the community as a whole. T'1e
Village Engineer shall include in its report recommendations to the
Plan Commission, its conclusions as to compliance.
9.05 BUILDING SETBACK LINES
Building setback lines in all new subdivisions shall conform to t:1e
front yard provisions of tne Itasca Zoning Ordinance .
75.
9.06 -
A.
B.
D.
PARKS, SCHOOL SITES, AND PUBLIC AREAS
Where a propose~ubi i c park or playground and other ;iubl i c-usc/areas,
as determined by th~Plan Commission and the President and.Board of
Trustees, is located ~f whole or in part within a subdivision~ the
subdivider shall make a·~ailable such lands to the Village oy'Itasca
provided, however, that_~ie total dedication (exclusive of~ublic
streets, alleys, and pede~trian ways) shall not exceed tery1 (10)
percent of the total gross\acreage owned or controlled bf the
subdivider. Where an area that is specifically designated by the
Pre:sident and Board of Trustlles for a public park or p)'ayground and
other public use exceeds the a\ea equivalent to ten μo) percent of
the area of the total acreage o'\ned by the subdivid9'1', the entire area
shall be reserved for such use on, all subdivision plans and plats; and
the acquisition of such additiona1' area shall the,r{ be secured by the
Village of Itasca or arrangement made for its acquisition within a
period not to exceed three (3i year~from the date of approval of the
preliminary plan. The value of the subject la.fid in excess of ten (10)
percent, shall be established by three\(3i q~lified appraisers, one
(1) of whom shall be appointed by the P1an faommission; one (1) by the
subdivider; and one (l) of whom sha11 be\motua11y agreed upon by the
other two (2). /,
Where less than ten (10) percent of th/to~l gross area being
subdivided is proposed for public par)(s, playgrounds, or other public
use areas, as designated by the Plan!Commissf'on and the President and
Board of Trustees, the subdivider shall dediccl-te such area that is
less than ten (lo) percent and, ij addition, pa'y to the Village of
Itasca a sum of money so that eythe~ or both the\dedication and the
paflllent equal to ten (10) perJnt of the appraise'd value of the land
before it is subdivided. \
'
The entire sum of money equ/i to the appraised valu'~ of land
comprising an area equival~nt to ten (10) percent of\~ne total area of
the tract shall be paid ti6' the owner or subdivider tu\the Village
Itasca in the event that/there are no public open spac~s required by
tile Plan Commission and1the President and Board of Trus\ees.
Sums of money so rec~{~ed by the Village of Itasca shall\e placed in
a special fund to be1 known as the PUBLIC LA!iD PURCHASE AND\ IMPROVEMENT
FUND, and allocated1 by the President and Board of Trustees ,~]ely for
purchase of 1 and f6r public parks or playgrounds and other · ubl i c
areas. I \
7 fi.
9.06 - PARKS, SCHOOL SITES, AND PUBLIC AREAS
A. Where a proposed public park or playground and other publicuse
areas, as determined by the Plan Commission and the President
and Board of Trustees, is located in whole or in part
within a subdivision, the subdivider shall make available
such lands to the Village of Itasca -- provided, however,
that the total dedication (exclusive of public streets,
alleys, and pedestrian ways) shall not exceed ten "(10) percent
of the total gross acreage owned or controlled by the
subdivider. Where an area that is specifically designated
by the President and Board of Trustees for a public park or
playground and other public use exceeds the area equivalent
to ten (10) percent of the area of the total acreage owned
by the subdivider, the entire ~rea shall be reserved for such
use on all subdivision plans and plats; and the acquisition of
such additional area shall then be secured by the Village of
Itasca or arrangement made for its acquisition within a period
not to exceed three (3) years from the date of approval of
the preliminary plan. The value of the subject land in excess
of ten (10) percent, shall be established by three (3) qualified
appraisers, one (1) of whom. whall be appointed by the
Plan Commission; one (1) by the subdivider; and one (1) of
whom shall be mutually agreed upon by the other two (2).
B. Where less than ten (10) percent of the total gross area being
subdivided is proposed for public parks, playgrounds, or other
public use areas, as designated by the Plan Commission and
the President and Board of Trustees, the subdivider shall dedicate
such area that is less than ten (10) percent and, in addition,
pay to the Village of Itasca a sum of money so that either
or both the dedication and the payment equal to ten (10) percent
of the "fair market value" of improved land.*
C. The entire sum of money equal to the "fair market value'' of*
improved land comprising an area equivalent to ten (10) percent
of the total area of the tract shall be paid by the owner
or subdivider to the Village of Itasca in the event that there
are no public open spaces required by the Plan Commissi~n and
the President and Board of Trustees.
D. Sums of money so received by the Village of Itasca shall be
placed in a special fund to be known as the PUBLIC LAND PURCHASE
AND IMPROVEMENT FUND, and allocated by the Presic=nt
and Board of Trustees solely for purchase of land for p~blic
parks or playgrounds and other public areas.
*Underscoring denotes amendent
passed by the Board of Trustees
on June 19, 1990
76.

SECTION 10.0u - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10.0l - ORGANIZATION
The following offices of the government of the Village of Itasca are i:o·ncerned
with the administration of this Ordinance.
A. The Village Board. The Village Board is vested with the following
responsibilities in regard to subdivision control:
1. Plats. Approval or disapproval of all final plats referred to it
by the Plan Commission.
2. Variations. Approval or disapproval of all variations and
exceptions recommended by the Plan Commission.
3. Amendments. l>Jnendment of the regulations of this Ordinance when
found necessary and desirable after review by the Plan
Commission.
4. Enforcement. Ini ti at ion of appropriate proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance.
B. The Village Engineer.
c.
l. Review of Plats. The Village Enginee'r shall review all
preliminary subdivision plans and make detenninations in the
areas of design standards and engineering specifications, as
stipulated herein.
2. Inspection of Work. The Village Engineer shall inspect all
improvements required by this Ordinance both during construction
and after completion to insure compliance with this Ordinance and
with good construction practice.
3. Conflict of Interest. The Village Engineer shall not be retained
by a subdivider or other interested party to perform engineering
work in any subdivision subject to the app1 ication of this
Ordinance.
The Village Plan Commission.
provisions of this Ordinance,
sila 11:
The Plan Commission shall administer the
and in furtherance of said authority
l. Maintain Ordinance. Maintain permanent and current records cf
this Ordinance, including amendments thereto.
2. File Plans and Plats. Receive and file all preli.~inary plans and
final plats Ltogether with applications).
77.
3. Liaison with Concerned Agencies. Forward copies of the
preliminary plan to the President of the Village Board and other
appropriate offices and agencies for their recommendations and
report.
4. Preliminary Plans. Approve or disapprove of all preliminary
plans.
5. Liaison with Village Board. Forward decisions made on all
preliminary plans to the Village Board.
ti. File all Checked Plats. Receive and file all final plats, and
check their compliance with the preliminary plan.
7. Forward Plats to Villaoe Board. Forward with recommendations to
the Village Board all final plats.
8. ·Other Determinations. Make all other determinations required by
the regulations herein.
D. The Village Clerk.
1. Recording. The Village Clerk shall record the final plat with ·
the Cook or Du Page County Recorder within two (2) months.
2. Recording, local. The Village Clerk shall file for local record,
the final plat in exact form as approved by the Village Board,
·and as filed with the Cook or Ou Page County Recorder.
10.02 - ENFORCEMENT
A. Plat Officer to Administer Ordinance. ·The Chairman of the Plan
Commission designated as Plat Officer shall administer this Ordinance
and bring any violations or lack of compliance here,;itil to the
attention of the Village President.
B. Compliance Required Before Sale of Lots or Issuance of Building
Permit. No owner or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located
in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell such parcel, nor
shall any public official issue a building permit for the construction
of buildings or structures within a proposed subdivision, before the
final plat of ;aid subdivision has been approved bJ the Village Board,
in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and filed with the
Recorder of Deeds of Cook or Du Page Counties, Illinois.
78.
C. Use of Metes and Bounds Measure Prohibited. The subdivision of any
lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds for the
purp.:>se of sale, transfer, or lease with the intent of evading this
Ordinance wi11 not be pennitted. All such described subdivisions
shall be subject to all of the requirements and regulations co·ntained
in this Ordinance. ·
D. Compliance Required Before Plat Approval. No final plat of
subdivision shall be approved which does not comply with all the
provisions of this Ordinance.
10.03 - . VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
A. Hardships. Where the Plan Commission finds that extraordinary
hardships or particular difficulties regarding the physical
development of land may result from strict compliance with these
regulations, it may recommend variations or exceptions to the
regulations so tht substantial justice may be done and the pub1ic
interest secured, provided the Plan Commission shall not recommend
variations or exception to the regulation of this Ordinance unless it
shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each
specific case that:
1. Public Welfare Protected. The granting of the variation will not
be detrimental to .the public safety, health, or welfare or ·
injurious to other property or improvements in the nei~hborhood
in which the property is located.
2. Unique Conditions. The conditions upon which the request for a
variation is based are unique to the property for which the
variation is sought and are not applicable, generally, to other
property; and
3. Particular Physical Conditions. Because of the particular
physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the
specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner
would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the
strict letter of the regulations were carried out.
B. Conditions. In recommending variations and exceptions, the Plan
Commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgement,
secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requireme;,ts
of this Ordinance.
C. Procedure. A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider ·at the time the preliminary plan is fil~d
for consideration by the Plan Commission. The petition shall state
fully the grounds for the application and all of the fact relied upon
by the petitioner.
7':J.
I
D. Recommendations. Such variations and exceptions as may be recommended
by the Plan Commission shall be forwarded to the Village Board in
writing substantiating the recommended variations and/or exceptions .
.. rt!.e. Village Board may approve such.variations or exception~- from the
··requirements of this Ordinance in specific cases as listed on the
final plat, which in its opinion do not adversely affect the adopted
Comprehensive Plan or the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
10.04 - RECORD OF PLATS
All of such plats of subdivision, after the same have been submitted and
approved as provided in this Ordinance, shall be copied upon a book of
piats of said Village of Itasca and shall be filed and kept by the Village
Clerk of the Village of Itasca.
10.05 - VALIDITY
".. .
If any iection, subsectio~. sentence; clause, or.phrase of this ·ordinance
is adjudged to be void, such decision shall not affect the validi.ty o_f the
remaining portions of this Ordinance.
10 .06 APPEALS
Any person or corporation may appeal within sixty (60j days to the Village
·Board any final action taken by the Plan Commission. The Village Board
shall act as a Board of Appeals and shall hear and decide appeals from and
review any final order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Pian Commission, under this Subdivision ~ontrol Ordinance. The concurring
vote of the majority of Trustees present shall be necessary to reverse any
final order of the Plan Commission under this Ordinance.
10.07 - REPEAL
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the prov1s1ons of
this Ordinance are, to the extent that such conflict exists, hereby
re pea 1 ed.
80.
10. 08 - AMENDMENTS
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare, the
Vil 1 age Board may from time to time amend the regulations imposed by this
Ordinance. The Plan Commission may consider proposed amendments.and make
recommendations thereon to the Village Board.
10.09 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any
of the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be subject to a fine of not less
than one hundred ($100.00) dollars and not more than five hundred ($500.UO/
dollars; and each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
Whoever shall sell or offer fur sale, lease or offer for lease, while this
Ordinance is in effect, an1 lot or lots or block or blocks, within the
incorporated limits of the Village of Itasca, or any subdivision of any lot
or block therein, or within contiguous territory and not more than one and
one-half (l-l/2i miles beyond the incorporated boundary of the Village of
Itasca before a Final Plat of Subdivision has been approved by the Plan
Commission and the Village as r.equired bJ this Ordinance, shall be fined
not less than twenty-five ($25.00) dollars nor more than five hundred
($500.00) dollars for each lot, block, or part tpereof so disposed of,
offered for sale, or leased.
10.10 - FEES
A. Fee Schedule for Planning Review. See Resolution No.~~~~-
b. Recording Fees. Jn addition to the fees listed in Resolution No.~,
the subdivider shall also bear the cost of recording the plat.
10.ll - PUBLIC UTILIT!t::S PERMITS
Public utilities sha11 obtain permits from the Vi11age Board for the
installation of communications, electric power, gas, or other utility
servic~s before any installation work is started.
10.12 - ADOPTION
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval, and publication as required by law.
81.
I
10.13 - PUBLICATION
This Ordinance· shall be published in book, or pamphlet form as provided by the
!11 inois Municipal Code.
10.14 - EFFECT
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its approval,' passage
and publication according to law.
Passed by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Itasca, Cook
and Du Page Counties, Illinois, this day of A1ig11st
19 86
Voting record of the Village Board of Trustees enacting this Ordinance:
BY NAME AYES NAYS ABSENT
James Anderson x
Walter Butler x
Carl Herren x
Steve Hoglund x
Jean Runnion x
Karl Schmidt·· x
Adopted by the Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Itasca, Illinois on
this date of ___A u"""gu_s_t_l. 2.. ' '-----------------' 19_8_6_ __
/:
(.
.l/~: .. ,:l. ; .· :' ""·'"" .. ~ .: _,.r...·/ f ~ ~ .:2.__ ..
VILLAGE CLERK
Approved by me as President of the Village Board of Trustees, of the Village of
Itasca, 111 inois, this __ ,_,__ ____ day of ---""'~:W...-------
19 86 ,,....... /'; I . ,/Y .·. t1·'
I 1 /;;.y•r, ./:1':-ff,'r .\ I •. i,.. 4 • . lei / - • ~ ./ • A / /
PRESIDENT, '0LLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
ATTEST:
/
"i ' . .·-. . ) . • ·-· ._;-·:., ,' •. , . , ,/7 - \.: ./ l .... V.- L• . ·- .. - - • ,,.....- -
VILLAGE CLERK
82.
.. ~-
:···. ... . ·: .. · .. ·.·-
·.·
.-·:
·.·\
~ .... ; ..
.. •·.

Typo of Unit
Oetnched Single Family:
2 Badroom
J Bedroom
JI Bedroom
5 Bedroom
Attached Single family
I Bedroom
2 Bedroom
3 Bedroom
4 Bedroom
Apartments
Efficiency
I Bedroom
2 Bedroom
3 Bedroom
Pre-School
0-4 Years
.125
.JOO
• 472
• 402
.051
.217
.Jn
.Ol8
.208
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
Children P • r
Elomentary_
Grades K-5
5-10 Yeers
.120
• JUI
• 51 J
.620
.075
.212
• Jl6
.065
.157
J~n!{)r !ti gfi_
Grades 6-6
11-IJ Yeors
.026
.174
• J 14
.420
.Oii
.022
.166
.021
.OJ7
U n I t
!2!t!-.
Grados K-8
5-1 l Years
, 146
.555
,027
1.040
.086
.2}4
.482
.006
.194
Ill gh Schoo I
Grades 9-12
14-17 Years
.018
.146
• JI J
.J27
.021
.051
.180
,Ol5
.082
PMC-FWB-9/ I /BJ
Adults
( IB--upl
.. 700
1.970
2. 195
2.650
1.050
1.741
I. 775
2.J}}
1.000
1.190
1.500
2. JJO
NOTE: Thero are only three significant cotogorles provided In this chort. Because of tho similarity of yields of oil typos of
Attached Single famlly, only one caiegory Is provided. Tho samo Is true with apar1monts, thus only one c&topory. 0ocnuse
of the short h1story of some newer types of single units, both detached and attached lnd1vldun1 evaluatlons may be nocessarv~
Copyright l9Bl
Total Per"
Unit
1.909
2.987
}. 807
4.419
1.050
1,899
2.277
}. }28
1.000
1.190
1.659
z. 614
tlOTE: The latest copyrighted edition of the followinf) Table may be utilized
in computing all land and/or fees to be donated by the subdivider, as
per the requirements of this Ordinance, this table presents the estinli't.
c:tl, schoo1 populations and estimated total population to rleterr.1ine
park requirements.
Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc.

. ·- ,,;"£ ·•. ·.-·~· ••
~: .....
<~· , ..
;; .•. ·
/
. : ~ ·, .
: ;_:
· .. :_
·.-
.;_·
. '"·
- :··· . ;, •' . '"·
. ;· -..
. .;.. .
.....
. . ·. -~·
·-.--·

str-1'
rigM·of·way
I in ct
LESS THAN
135°
EXAMPLE OF RESIDENTIAL LOT TYP:~~ ·
See Zoning Ordinance for Yard Reql.!4remerrts.

1!50'mln.
..._ __ _,,_tr11et rl<;;ht·ofwoy line ----'ll
:'1<-J.----pavftm1tnt !hw-------lc,,t:
~'f-+----strfft cmt'IN'lin1t ----4--+"'1<
2.Z5' min.
MINIMUM MINOR STREET JOG MINIMUM STREET JOG
---· ·--- --- 900 INTERSECTIONS
(BetwGHin Residential, Arterials and
Co!lll!Ctor Str'IH!ts)
A*R TERIAL
COl..l.ECiOR 10 O'
OTHER 50'
MINIMUM TANGENTS
SETWEEN CURVES
LOCAL STREET DESIGN STANDARDS

' ' ! ·!
j
)
........
llllllllllllllllllllllll
···.~-~~ •.. ·. ::::::::::::::::::::::::.
::::::::::::::::::::::~:::
::::::::::::::::::::::::::
Eggg;g~~gggEggg~.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::: ::::::::::::::::::::::::::: :::::::::::::::::::::::::::
~gggggg~ggggg~E:
BAD
ll.l.i ll ............................ ~ ........................................................... ..
H~H~HH;~HHHHHHHH~HH ·:::::: :: ::::::: :::::::::::::::: n·····•·••n•u••••••no•••
;;~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
!lllllll~llllllllllllllllllll/11 .................................
SETTER
lllllllllllllllllllllll
'~
llllill~~~IB~rJ~~ r /~m 111111111~111~m11111111
4-WAY INTERSECTKlN
16 COLLISION PONTS
JOG INTERSECTION
DANGEROUS TRAFFJC PATTERN
1~111111lll1~1ll111Hg1111lllllllm~illl
gi1i1·i2~··1im'fi"m1111m1lll11111
::::::::::::::::::::: :::::::::::::::::::
:::::::::::::::::::::~ ::::::::::: :: :: ::::
::::::::::::::::::::::.::::::::::::::::::!
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
3-1\0l.Y INTERSECTION
ONLY 3 COLLISION POINTS
INTERSECTION DESIGN EXAMPLE

street
right· of· wcy•----..:..l
!in Ill
pavement-----+-'>!
line
LINE OF SIGHT EASEMENT
(clear sight distance )
..
") ) ) ) .
) ) ) ) )
} , ) , , ) ) ) ) )
) ) ) )
.) ) ) ) ) , ) )
> ' ) ) ) .. ...) .) ) )
~ • ' l , ' .. ) )
' ' I ) )
> I I I ) .. '
c ( ( ( <
( ( ( ( ( . ( ( ( (
( ( ( ( (
( ' ( ( ( c. ( ( (
( ( t • (
( ( ( c c
• ( c ( <
( ( ( ( (
( c • ( (
( ( ( .. ( ( ( (
<'
SHRUBBERY SHALL
NOT EXCEED :3.0 FEET
/
IN HEIGHT ABOVE CURB
LEVEL.
®c:
...
') "
( ( ( ( . < ( ( c c ( < ( ( ( ( •
( t ( ( (
t)I) (({((
>))))(((((
>l>>>(C({{
)))))(((((
)l))){C((( ,, ) ) ) ( ( ( < ) ) ( ( (
> <

!+ ! I I ! I
·a ARTERIAL
~-
-·1· -·+-· --··++--·· -·t· -·1·
-·1=·
--· ·t. -·+-· -·+-·
! ! 1· '
STREET
·.r:
:t:
··-1,.
·.t,·.
:t.·
·t:
·g COLLECTOR STREET
il'flil iii
101 DOUBLE FRONTAGE AND REVERSE FRONTA&~
LOTS SHALL BE PROHIEITED EXCEPT '.IH<-,;
NECESSARY TO PROVIDE SEPARATION OF
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT FROM THROUGH
TRAFFIC OR TO OVERCOME SPEC! FIC DIS·
ADVANTAGES OF TOPOGRAPHY AND ORI ENTtr
TION.
THE NUMBER OF INTERSECTIONS ALONG
MAJOR STREETS SHALL BE HELD TO A
MINIMUM. WHEREVER PRACTICABLE THE
Jl-t:~1 DI STANCE BETl-IEEN SUCH INTERSECTION
SHALL NOT BE LESS THAN 1,800 FEET.
(SEE SECTION 9.03)
BLOCK LENGTHS IN SUBDIVISIONS
SHALL BE NOT MORE THAN 1 ,800
FEET IN LENGTH. (SEE SECT! ON 9. 03
PROPOSED SUBDIVISIONS ADJACENT TO
MAJOR STREETS SHALL PROVIDE FOR
ADEQUATE PROTECTION OF RESIDENTIAL
1 _!UJ.=---tf-i~71 PROPERTIES, CONTROL OF ACCESS, AN1>
- THE SEPARATION OF THROUGH AND LOCAL
TRAFFIC BY (a) MARGINAL ACCESS
STREET OR (b) REVERSED FRONTAGE
WITH SCREEN PLANTING.
CUL-DE-SAC STREETS DES I GNED TO HA1/£
ONE END PERMANENTLY CLOSED SHALL
NOT EXCEED 500 FEET IN LENGTH. (Set
ORD! NANCE)
DESIGN STANDARDS EXAMPLE

• J
'4.A.RGtNAL ACCE:SS mm '·-·-·-·
MAJOR STRfiT
ARTERIAL STP.EETS (MAJOR) should carry through traffic past
residential areas.
COLLECTOR STREETS (MAJOR OR LOCAL) should serve to carry
traffic from the local areas to the arterial system.
MINOR STREETS (LOCAL) should only serve abutting land.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS (FRONTAGE ROAD) provide access
to properties which would otherwise have to abut a major
street or other right-of-way in an undesirable manner.
CLASSIFICATION OF STREETS EXAMPLE

BLOCKS SHALL HAVE SUFFICIENT
WIDTH TO ?ROVIDE FOR T"wO
TIERS OF LOTS OF AP?ROPR!ATE
DEPTH EXCEPT Wl!ERE OTHERWISE
REQUIRED TO SEPARATE RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT FROM THROUGH
TRAFFIC.
SIDE LOT LINES SHALL BE AT
RIGHT ANGLES TO STRAIGHT
STREET LINES OR RADIAL TO
CURVED STREET LINES ON
WHICH THE LOTS.FACE.
o)c ~~)~~~~~~~~~--1 ESATCRHE ETOST HESHR AALTL AINST ENRESAERCLYT
RIGHT ANGLES AS TOPOGRl'.PRY
AND OTSER LIMITING FACTORS
OF GOOD DESIGN PERMIT.
a£MENTARY
SCHOOL SITE
CO_RNER LOT SHALL HA VE AN
EXTRA WIDTH THAT IS ADEQUATE
TO PERMIT BUILDING SETBACKS
FROM SIDE STREETS.
DESIGN STANDARDS EXA-MPLE

 




 


