
Justice, IL Code of Ordinances


JUSTICE, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES



Supp. No. 30 contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2016-20, passed 5-23-2016



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



OFFICIALS
of the
VILLAGE OF JUSTICE, ILLINOIS



 




Krzysztof Wasowicz




Village President








Kathleen M. Svoboda




Village Clerk








Melanie A. Kuban




Edward C. Rusch, Jr.




Suzanne M. Small




Richard H. Sparr




Richard K. Symonds




Henry D. Oszakiewski




Trustees








Calene M. Zabinski




Village Treasurer








Louis F. Cainkar, Ltd.




Village Attorney





 



PREAMBLE



   The Justice village code, originally published by Municipal Code
Corporation in 1989, has been kept current by regular supplementation. In
1991, Sterling Codifiers, Inc., began providing supplement service for the
village code.  In 2008, American Legal Publishing Corporation, began
providing supplement service for the village code.



   This village code of the village of Justice, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2016-20, passed May 23, 2016.
Ordinances of the village adopted after said ordinance supersede the
provisions of this village code to the extent that they are in conflict or
inconsistent therewith. Consult the village office in order to ascertain
whether any particular provision of the code has been amended, superseded or
repealed.



                                       A
merican Legal Publishing Corporation



                                       C
incinnati, Ohio



PREFACE



   This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of
the Village of Justice of a general and permanent nature.



   Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1972
Code, as supplemented through Ordinance No. 86-1, and ordinances subsequently
adopted by the board of trustees. The source of each section is included in
the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of
such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first
time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables
appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of
the 1972 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.



   The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the
sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes
which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant
provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law
citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the
back of this volume.



   Numbering System



   The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many
state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component
parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the
chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the
section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 2 is numbered
2-1 and the fifth section of Chapter 3 is 3-5. Under this system, each
section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections
or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by
using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new
material consisting of three sections that would logically come between
sections 3-2 and 3-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be
numbered 3-2.1, 3-2.2 and 3-2.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in
the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 4 and
5, it will be designated as Chapter 4.5. Care should be taken that the
alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new
chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or,
in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing
the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the
article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to
the article or division.



   Index



   The index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each
particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings
being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still
others in language generally used by municipal officers and employees. There
are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as
guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is
interested.



   Looseleaf Supplements



   A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is
especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental
servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date
periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be
properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted.
These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with
instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the
obsolete pages.



   Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend
largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will
then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted
according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the
publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to
avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and
filed for historical reference purposes.



   Acknowledgments



   The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Richard S. Jalovec and Ms.
Patricia Kirk, Village Attorneys, and Ms. Dolores R. White, Village Clerk,
for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this
Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted
in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the village readily
accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the
day-to-day administration of the village's affairs.



   AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING CORPORATION



   Cincinnati, Ohio



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 89-9



AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE VILLAGE OF JUSTICE,
ILLINOIS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED
THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE
MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE
SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE.



BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF
JUSTICE, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS:



Section 1. The Code entitled the "Justice Municipal Code," published by the
Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 12, each
inclusive, is adopted.



Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or
before October 10, 1988, and not included in the Code or recognized and
continued in force by reference therein are repealed.



Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed
to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a
subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.



Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person
convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $500.00 for any one offense. Each act of violation and
each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a
separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another
penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code
section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory
ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the village may
pursue other remedies, such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and
revocation of licenses or permits.



Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to
indicate the intention of the president and board of trustees to make the
same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code so
that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.



Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 10, 1988, that amend or refer to
ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they
amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.



Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective June 12, 1989.



Passed this 12th day of June, 1989.



/s/ David D. Mack



President-Village of Justice



/s/ Judith A. Brogdon



Village Clerk



CERTIFICATE OF ADOPTION



I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at
the regular meeting of the president and board of trustees of the Village of
Justice, Cook County, Illinois, held on the 12th day of June, 1989.



/s/ Judith A. Brogdon



Village Clerk



CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 1-1.  Title1:



   This code shall constitute the official code of the village and shall
be known and cited as the Justice Municipal Code. Any reference to the number
of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position
of the same under its appropriate chapter heading, and to the penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal document.



(Code 1972, § 1-1-1)



1State law reference–Revision of ordinances, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-3.



Sec. 1-2.  Acceptance In Courts, Etc.2:



   This code shall be received without further proof as prima facie
evidence of the contents, passage and legal publication of the ordinances
included herein in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state.



(Code 1972, § 1-1-2)



2State law reference–Ordinance book as prima facie evidence, 65 ILCS
5/1-2-6.



Sec. 1-3.  Catchlines Of Sections:



   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface
type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section
and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any
part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.



(Code 1972)



Sec. 1-4.  Definitions3:



3State law reference-Statutory construction, 5 ILCS 70/1 et seq.; definitions
applicable to the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-2; "street" defined,
625 ILCS 5/1-201.



   Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context makes
such meaning repugnant thereto:



   Agent: A person acting on behalf of another.



   Board, Board Of Trustees: The board of trustees of the village.



   Code: The Justice Municipal Code and amendments thereto.



   County: The County of Cook.



   Datum: The word “datum” shall be so interpreted that all elevations
shall refer to City of Chicago datum.



   Fee: A sum of money charged by the village for the carrying on of a
business, profession or occupation.



   Fiscal Year: The fiscal year of the village shall begin on January 1 of
each year and end on the following December 31.



   Knowingly: The word “knowingly” imports only a knowledge that the
facts exist which bring the act or omission within the provisions of this
code. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or
omission.



   License: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.



   Negligent: The word “negligent”, as well as “neglect”,
“negligence” and “negligently”, imports a want of such attention to
the nature of probable consequences of the act or omission as a prudent
person ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.



   Nuisance: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of
the inhabitants of the village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating
a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person
or to the community.



   Occupant: The word “occupant”, applied to a building or land, shall
include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or
land, whether alone or with others.



   Offense: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the
omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.



   Officers, Etc.: Whenever reference is made in this code to an officer,
employee, department, board or other agency by title only, this shall be
construed as though followed by the words “of the Village of Justice”.



   Operator: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.



   Owner: The word “owner”, applied to a building or land, shall
include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee
of the whole or of a part of such building or land.



   Person: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association
or corporation in his or its own capacity or as administrator, conservator,
executor, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed by the court.
Whenever the word “person” is used in any section of this code
prescribing a penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or associations, the
word shall include the partners or members thereof, and such word as applied
to corporations shall include the officers, agents or employees thereof who
are responsible for any violation of such section.



   Personal Property: The term “personal property” shall include every
description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action
and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title
to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated,
discharged or diminished and every right or interest therein.



   Retailer: The word “retailer” shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities direct to
the consumer.



   Shall, May: The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is
permissive.



   State: The State of Illinois.



   Street: The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.



   Tenant: The word “tenant”, applied to a building or land, shall
include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or
land, whether alone or with others.



   Village: The Village of Justice, County of Cook, State of Illinois.



   Wholesaler, Wholesale Dealer: The terms “wholesaler” and
“wholesale dealer” shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.



   Wilfully: The word “wilfully”, when applied to the intent with
which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to
commit the act or make the omission referred to. It does not require any
intent to violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage.



   Written, In Writing: The terms “written” or “in writing” may
include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but
when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official
or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark.



(Code 1969, Ch. 2; Code 1972, § 1-3-2; Ord. 2009-25, § 2, 11-23-2009)



Sec. 1-5.  Rules Of Construction1:



   The following rules of construction shall apply in this code; however,
these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code
which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the
subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto:



   (1)   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears
requiring the head of a department or some other village officer to do some
act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the
department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates
to perform the required act or perform the duty.



   (2)   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall apply
to females and to all other persons, as defined in section 1-4 of this
chapter.



   (3)   Number: Words importing the singular number may extend and be
applied to several persons or things, and words importing the plural number
may include the singular.



   (4)   Tense: Words in the present tense include the future.



(Code 1972, § 1-1-4)



1State law reference—Statutory construction, 5 ILCS 70/1 et seq.



Sec. 1-6.  Interpretation:



   In the interpretation of the provisions of each section of this code
the following rules shall be observed:



   (1)   Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order to
constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud
any person.



   (2)   When the provisions of any section of this code prohibit the
commission of an act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited act
or omitting the directed act, but also the employer and all other persons
concerned with or in aiding or abetting the person, shall be guilty of the
offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.



(Code 1972, § 1-1-4)



Sec. 1-7.  General Penalty1:



   Except where otherwise provided in this code, any person convicted of a
violation of any provision of this code shall be fined in a sum not to exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any one offense. A separate and
distinct offense shall be held to have been committed each day any person
continues to violate any of the provisions hereof.



(Code 1972, § 1-4-1; Ord. 95-30, § 1, 11-27-1995; Ord. 2012-24, § 1,
9-24-2012)



1State law references-Punishment for violations of ordinances, 65 ILCS
5/1-2-1 et seq.; enforcement of ordinances, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-7.



Sec. 1-7.1.  Penalty For Uncollectible Checks:



   Any person who presents any uncollectible check to the Village for
payment of any fees or services, including, but not limited to:



   Water bills;



   Sewer bills;



   License fees;



   Building fees;



   Liquor license fees;



   Permit fees; or



   Village ordinance violations;



shall be assessed a penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00). This penalty fee
must be paid prior to any license or permit being issued, or any bill being
declared paid. Payment to redeem an uncollectible check shall be with cash,
cashier's check or money order, paid to the order of the Village.



(Ord. 88-19, § 1, 7-25-1988)



Sec. 1-8.  Revocation Of Village License Upon Conviction Of Code Violation:



   When a person is convicted of a violation of any provision of this code
any license previously issued to him or her by the village may be revoked by
the court or by the board of trustees2.



(Code 1972, § 1-4-3)



2Cross reference-Business regulations, Ch. 3.



Sec. 1-9.  Application Of General Penalty:



   (a)   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to
every section of this code the same as though it were a part of each separate
section. Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this code
where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is
of a continuing nature or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this code.



   (b)   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is
created by different clauses or sections of this code the prosecuting officer
may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had
against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation
of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to
bar any other penalty being enforced.



   (c)   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code, and there is
no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of
this chapter shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues.



(Code 1972, § 1-4-4)



Sec. 1-10.  Liability Of Village Officers, Employees1:



   No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
intention of the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such
officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section
creating the duty.



(Code 1972, § 1-4-5)



1Cross reference-Administration, Ch. 2.



Sec. 1-11.  Severability Of Parts Of Code2:



   The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code
are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of
this code or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or
decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality,
invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases,
clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code or any other
application thereof.



(Ord. of 9-21-1961; Code 1972, § 10-2-3)



2State law reference-Severability of statutes, 5 ILCS 70/1.31.



Sec. 1-12.  Effect Of Code On Former Ordinances, Offenses, Penalties Pending
Action:



   (a)   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture
or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the
new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall
conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the
party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance
takes effect.



   (b)   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express
words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new
provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.



   (c)   Nothing contained in this code shall be construed as abating
any action pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the village
herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in
this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment
of the same provision; nor shall this code be deemed as discontinuing,
abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as
affecting the liability of any person or as waiving any right of the village
under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption
of this code.



(Code 1972, § 1-2-3)



Sec. 1-13.  Certain Ordinances Not Affected By Code:



   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
construed to affect:



      (1)   Tax levy ordinances;



      (2)   Appropriation ordinances;



      (3)   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;



      (4)   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations;



      (5)   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants;



      (6)   Salary ordinances;



      (7)   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets,
alleys or other public places;



      (8)   Improvement ordinances;



      (9)   Ordinances relating to bond issues or other indebtedness
or financing;



      (10)   Ordinances relating to specific elections;



      (11)   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate or personal property by or from the village;



      (12)   Ordinances relating to specific subdivisions or
consolidations of property;



      (13)   Ordinances rezoning specific property or granting a
variance from the Zoning Ordinance;



      (14)   Ordinances relating to specific redevelopment projects;



      (15)   Ordinances establishing one-way streets and other
traffic regulations for specific locations;



      (16)   Ordinances consistent with this code relating to
railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or
relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities;



      (17)   Ordinances establishing the amounts of officers' bonds;



      (18)   Special and temporary ordinances.



   All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force
and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code.



(Code 1972, §§ 1-2-1, 1-2-2)



Sec. 1-14.  Code Alteration:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Code books, while
in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the village and shall be returned to the village when
directed to do so by order of the board.



(Code 1972, § 1-1-5; Ord. 2009-15, § 1, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 1-15.  Amendments To Code:



   Any  ordinance amending  this code shall set forth the chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended. All such amendments
or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifier and
the ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in
each copy of this code.



(Code 1972, § 1-1-3)



Sec. 1-16.  Supplementation Of Code:



   (a)   By contract or by village personnel, supplements to this code
shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board. A
supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general
parts of ordinances passed by the board during the period covered by the
supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a
supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and
will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially
obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been
inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the
latest ordinance included in the supplement.



   (b)   In the preparation of a supplement to this code, all portions
of the code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the
omission thereof from reprinted pages.



   (c)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier
(meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal,
nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the
supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified
code. For example, the codifier may:



      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
subdivisions;



      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for
sections and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement and
make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;



      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other
subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate
new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;



      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the
same meaning to “this chapter”, “this article”, “this division”,
etc., as the case may be, or to “sections             to        
    “ (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the code
which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the
code);



      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve
the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted in the Code, but in no
case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.



(Code 1972)



Sec. 1-17.  Administrative Adjudication:



   (a)   Purpose:  The purpose of this section is to provide as fair
and efficient enforcement of village ordinances as may be allowed by law
through an administrative adjudication of violations of such village
ordinances.



   (b)   Adoption:  The village hereby adopts 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et
seq. in its current form and as it may be amended from time to time for
adjudication of municipal code violations to the extent permitted by the
Illinois constitution.



   (c)   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context
requires otherwise:



   Code: Any municipal ordinance except for building code violations that
must be adjudicated pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., in its current
form and as may be  amended from time to time, and any offense under the
Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation
governing the movement of vehicles and except for a reportable offense under
Section 2-604 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.



   Hearing Officer: A municipal employee or an officer or agent of the
village, other than a law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:



      (1)   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine
whether or not a code violation exists;



      (2)   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested
parties relevant to the existence of a code violation;



      (3)   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of
the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearings; and



      (4)   Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order
stating whether a code violation exists.



   (d)   Code Hearing Department:



      (1)   There is hereby established a code hearing department in
the village.  The function of said code hearing department is to expedite
the prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner set forth
herein.



      (2)   The code hearing department may adjudicate any violation
of a municipal ordinance except for: building code violations that must be
adjudicated pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., in its current form and
as amended from time to time, and any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code
or similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of
vehicles and except for any reportable offense under section 6-204 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code.



   (e)   Qualifications of Hearing Officers: Prior to conducting
proceedings under this section, the hearing officer shall successfully
complete a formal training program that includes the following:



      (1)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing
that they will conduct;



      (2)   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations
that they will administer;



      (3)   Observation of administrative hearings; and



      (4)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on
evidence and issuing final orders.



      In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed
to practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years.



   (f)   Hearing Procedure Not Exclusive: This section does not
preclude the village from using other methods to enforce the provisions of
its Code.



   (g)   Procedures For Code Enforcement:



      (1)   When a police officer, an auxiliary police officer, or
other individual authorized to issue a code violation finds a code violation
to exist, he or she shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation
notice and report form that indicates: the name and address of the defendant;
the type and nature of the violation; the date and time the violation was
observed; and the names of the witnesses of the violation.



      (2)   The violation report form  shall be forwarded to the
code hearing department where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies
of the report and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided
for that purpose on the form.  The  hearing date shall not be less than
thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) days after the violation is reported.



      (3)   One (1) copy of the violation report form shall be
maintained in the files of the code hearing department  and shall be part of
the record of hearing, one (1) copy of the report form shall be returned to
the individual representing the municipality in the case so that he or she
may prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on
the date indicated, and one (1) copy of the report form shall be served by
first-class mail to the defendant along with a summons commanding the
defendant to appear at the hearing.



   (h)   Subpoenas; Defaults: At any time prior to the hearing date,
the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of either
party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If on
the dates set for the hearing the defendant or his or her attorney fails to
appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant in default and shall
proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a
code violation.



   (i)   Continuances; Representation At Code Hearings: No continuances
shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this section
except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the
rights of the defendant. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a
continuance. The case for the defendant may be presented by the defendant,
his or her attorney, or any other agent or representative of the defendant.



   (j)   Hearing; Evidence: As indicated in subsection (c) of this
section, a hearing officer shall preside at all hearings as provided herein,
and accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of a code
violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply to hearings authorized by this section. The hearing officer
shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of
the village board.



   (k)   Findings, Decision and Order:



      (1)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing as to whether or not a code violation exists. The determination may
be in writing and may be designated as findings, decision or order.



      (2)   A monetary sanction for a violation under this section
shall not exceed the amount provided for in 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-45 in its current
form and as amended from time to time. A copy of any findings, decisions, or
orders shall be served on the defendant within five (5) days after the copy
is issued. Service shall be in the same manner that the report form and
summons are served under subsection (g)(3) of this section. A monetary
sanction for a violation under this subsection shall not exceed a maximum
penalty of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per occurrence. Furthermore,
a penalty may include, or consist of, a requirement that the defendant
perform some reasonable public service work.



   (l)   Review Under Administrative Review Law: The findings, decision
and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the circuit
court of Cook County. The provisions of the administrative review act and the
rules adopted thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the
judicial review of the findings, decisions, and order of a hearing officer
under this section.



   (m)   Judgment on Findings, Decision and Order:



      (1)   A fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any
fine, other sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion
of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the
administrative review act shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as
such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law.



      (2)   After expiration of the period within which judicial
review under the administrative review act may be sought for a final
determination of the code violation, the village may command a proceeding in
the circuit court of Cook County in the village for purposes of obtaining a
judgment. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the village from
consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and orders against a person in
such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file a
certified copy of the findings, decision, and order, which shall be
accompanied by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the
findings, decision, and order was issued in accordance with this section and
the applicable municipal ordinances. Service of the summons and a copy of the
petition may be by any method provided that the total amount of fines, other
sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order does not
exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is
satisfied that the findings, decision and order was entered in accordance
with the requirements of this section and the applicable municipal ordinance
and that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this section
and for judicial review as provided in this section:



         A.   The court shall render judgment in favor of the
village and against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings,
decision, and order, plus costs.  The judgment shall have the same effect
and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of
money;



         B.   The court may also issue any other orders and
injunctions that are requested by the village to enforce the order of the
hearing officer to correct a code violation.



   (n)   Impact on Existing Administrative Adjudication Systems:  This
section shall not affect the validity of systems of administrative
adjudication that were authorized by state law, including the village
ordinances, and in existence prior to the effective date hereof. 



(Ord. 2007-27, § 2, 2007)



CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION 1



   Art. I.   In General,  §§ 2-1-2-25



   Art. II.   Officers Generally,  §§ 2-26-2-55



      Div. 1.   ADA Coordinator, § 2-41



      Div. 2.   Office/Human Resources Manager §§ 2-42-2-55



   Art. III.   Board Of Trustees, §§ 2-56-2-135 



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 2-56-2-75



      Div. 2.   Rules Of Order, §§ 2-76-2-110



      Div. 3.   President, §§ 2-111-2-135



   Art. IV.   Village Clerk,  §§ 2-136-2-160



   Art. V.   Village Attorney; Village Prosecutor,  §§ 2-161-2-180



   Art. VI.   Village Treasurer, §§ 2-181-2-200



   Art. VII.   Collection Of Special Assessments, §§ 2-201-2-225



   Art. VIII.   Village Collector, §§ 2-226-2-245



   Art. IX.   Department Of Special Events And Public Relations,  §§
2-246-2-265



   Art. X.   Water And Sewer Collector, §§ 2-266-2-280



   Art. XI.   Building Department Administrators, §§ 2-281-2-305



   Art. XII.   Special Assessment Attorney, §§ 2-306-2-330



   Art. XIII.   Treasurer, Sewer And Water Accounts, §§ 2-331-2-355



   Art. XIV.   Sanitation And Drainage Inspector, §§ 2-356-2-380



   Art. XV.   Civil Emergencies, §§ 2-381-2-400



   Art. XVI.   Taxation, §§ 2-401-2-480



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 2-401-2-420



      Div. 2.   Retailers' Occupation Tax, §§ 2-421-2-435



      Div. 3.   Service Occupation Tax, §§ 2-436-2-455



      Div. 4.   Taxation Of Occupations Or Privileges, §§
2-456-2-464



      Div. 5.   Municipal Electricity Tax, §§ 2-465-2-472 (Rep. by
Ord. 2005-01, § 12, 1-10-2005)



      Div. 6.   Municipal Amusement Tax, §§ 2-473-2-480



   Art. XVII.   Boards And Commissions, §§ 2-481-2-699



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 2-481-2-495



      Div. 2.   Emergency Management Agency And Department Of
Homeland Security, §§ 2-496-2-525



      Div. 3.   Zoning Board Of Appeals, §§ 2-526-2-555



      Div. 4.   Electrical Commission, §§ 2-556-2-575



      Div. 5.   Board Of Fire And Police Commissioners, §§
2-576-2-600



      Div. 6.   Youth Commission, §§ 2-601-2-620



      Div. 7.   Board Of Health, §§ 2-621-2-635



      Div. 8.   Board Of Public Improvements, §§ 2-636-2-650



      Div. 9.   Police Pension Board, §§ 2-651-2-659



      Div. 10.   Emergency Telephone System Board, §§ 2-660-2-669



      Div. 11.   Senior Advisory Committee, §§ 2-670-2-699



      Div. 12.   Economic Planning Board



   Art. XVIII.   Code Hearing Department, §§ 2-700-2-749



   Art. XIX.   Ethics, §§ 2-750-2-759



   Art. XX.   Justice Park Department, §§ 2-760-2-762



   Art. XXI.   Code Enforcement Officer, § 2-800



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 2-1.  Corporate Seal:



   The corporate seal of the village shall be as follows:



   Facsimile.



(Code 1969, Ch. 2; Code 1972, § 1-17-1)



Sec. 2-2.  Official Flag1:



   The flag designed by Katina Rae Harper is hereby designated as the
official flag of the village and shall be flown on all appropriate occasions.



(Ord. 71-20, 10-7-1971; Code 1972, § 1-17-2)



1 5 ILCS 465/3b.



Sec. 2-3.  Local Elections:



   Elections for village offices shall be held as is provided by statute,
and at the time prescribed by statute2.



(Code 1972, § 1-18-1)



2  10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq., 5/2A-1 et seq.



Sec. 2-4.  Precincts Established:



   The village is, for the purpose of conducting municipal elections and
for such other purposes as hereafter may be provided by law, divided into
such precincts as shall be prescribed for the county3.



(Code 1972, § 1-18-2)



3  10 ILCS 5/11-1 et seq.



Sec. 2-5.  Determination Of Precinct Boundaries:



   Wherever a street is indicated as a boundary of a precinct, the center
line of such street shall be considered to be the boundary line of such
precinct; provided, however, that if such street or some part thereof
constitutes some portion or all of the distance for which such street is
here-inabove designated as the boundary of any precinct, then that part of
the street which is the boundary of the village shall also be the boundary of
such precinct. If any street is not dedicated throughout the entire distance
for which it is indicated as one of the boundary lines of any precinct, then
the prolongation of the center line of such street shall be considered to be
such boundary line.



(Code 1969, Ch. 18; Code 1972, § 1-18-3)



Sec. 2-6.  Participation In Retirement Fund4:



   (a)   The village does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois
municipal retirement fund, effective January 1, 1987.



   (b)   The standard for IMRF participation shall be a position
normally requiring performance of duty for one thousand (1,000) hours per
year.



(Ord. 86-30, 9-22-1986)



4  40 ILCS 5/7-132.



Sec. 2-7.  Official Vehicles:



   (a)   Unauthorized persons shall not be allowed to ride in official
village vehicles at any time.



   (b)   Prisoners, victims of crime, or persons on official business
shall be transported in official vehicles with the approval of the department
head or his or her authorized designee.



   (c)   A violation of this section shall subject the offender to
suspension by the village president and board of trustees. Repeat offenders
may be dismissed from their positions by the president and board of trustees.



(Ord. 88-30, 10-10-1988; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001; Ord. 2012-24, § 2,
9-24-2012)



Secs. 2-8–2-25. Reserved:



ARTICLE II. OFFICERS GENERALLY1



1  65 ILCS 513.1-15-5 et seq., 5/3.1-30-5 et seq.



Sec. 2-26.  Appointed Officers–Designation:



   Among the officers of the village to be appointed by the president, by
and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, and whose offices
are hereby created and established, are the following:



   All deputies to officers



   Building commissioner



   Code enforcement officer



   Emergency services and disaster agency director



   Health officer



   Inspectors in all departments



   Office/human resources manager



   Public works director



   Village attorney



   Village engineer or a public engineer



   Village prosecutor



   Village webmaster



   All appointees may, from time to time, be suspended or removed from
office by the president and board of trustees, and all vacancies may be
filled in like manner.



(Code 1972, § 1-5-1; Ord. 91-9, § 1, 6-24-1991; Ord. 2001-05, § 2,
2-26-2001; Ord. 2007-17, § 1, 9-24-2007; Ord. 2009-13, § 2, 6-1-2009; Ord.
2009-18, § 2, 7-27-2009; 2009-24, § 2, 11-9-2009; Ord. 2012-03, § 3,
1-9-2012)



Sec. 2-27.  Appointed Officers–Term:



   The officers enumerated in section 2-26 of this article shall hold
their appointive offices until the first Monday of May in each year following
their appointments and until their successors have been appointed and
qualified, subject to removal at any time by the president and board of
trustees, with or without specification of cause therefor2.



(Code 1972, § 1-5-2)



2  65 ILCS 5/3.1-55-15.



Sec. 2-28.  Oath:



   All officers of the village, whether elected or appointed, shall,
before entering upon the duties of their of their respective offices, take
and subscribe an oath or affirmation as specified under the state statutes.
Such oath or affirmation shall be filed in the office of the clerk.



(Code 1972, § 1-5-3)



Sec. 2-29.  Bonds–Persons Covered; Amount:



   Officers of the village shall execute a bond as required in this code
or by village ordinance and the state statutes3. If the amount of bonds is
not otherwise specified, officers shall execute to the village a bond in a
sum of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).



(Code 1972, §§ 1-5-4, 1-27-1; Ord. 77-31, 5-19-1977)



3 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-25.



Sec. 2-30.  Bonds–Surety To Be Licensed Company:



   Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the village is required as a
prerequisite to exercising the duties of any office or position, or to the
issuance of a license or permit or the exercise of any special privilege, the
surety on such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do
business in this state as a surety company, in the absence of specific
provision to the contrary by ordinance.



(Code 1969, Ch. 3, Art. 2; Code 1972, § 1-5-4)



Sec. 2-31.  Bonds–Execution:



   The bond of each officer shall be executed to the village, with two (2)
or more sureties conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of
his office, the payment to the proper officer of all monies coming into his
hands by virtue of his office. Each of the sureties shall be freeholders of
the county and shall schedule real estate herein, clear of all encumbrances
and other legal obligations, in value not less than the penal sum of the
bond, which schedule shall be made separately by the sureties and sworn to
before some officer authorized to administer oaths, and attached to the bond;
provided, that any officer of the village may procure as surety upon any bond
he may be required to give any responsible surety company or corporation. No
member of the board of trustees shall sign any bond in any case wherein the
village is interested.



(Code 1972, § 1-5-5)



Sec. 2-32.  Bonds-Approval:



   The bonds of all village officers shall be subject to the approval of
the president and board of trustees. After the approval, as aforesaid, the
clerk shall endorse thereon the date thereof.



(Code 1972, § 1-5-6)



Sec. 2-33.  Failure To Qualify:



   If any person elected or appointed to any office of the village shall
fail to qualify by taking, subscribing and filing the oath of office, and
making, executing and filing his official bond as provided in this article
within ten (10) days after he is officially notified of his election or
appointment, the office shall become vacant.



(Code 1969, Ch. 3, Art. 1; Code 1972, § 1-5-7)



Sec. 2-34.  Compensating; Paying Over Of Fees, Etc., Received:



   (a)   The compensation paid to the elected and appointed officials
of the village and to the various employees thereof shall be set from time to
time by the president and board of trustees.



   (b)   No officer, deputy to an officer, employee, inspector or
person acting as a representative of the village shall retain any license
fee, permit fee, inspection fee or compensation for any service in his
capacity as such, for any thing, act or service required to be done or
authorized by this code, but all fees are to be turned over to the village.



(Code 1972, § 1-5-8)



Sec. 2-34.1.  Fees For Professional Services1:



   (a)   Any resident or property owner seeking a review of plans,
plats, and documents by a village officer, employee, or professional
consultant, including, but not limited to, the village engineer, village
attorney, the building department, the public works department, and the sewer
and water departments, shall deposit with the village a payment sufficient to
reimburse the village for the professional services rendered by its officers,
employees, and professional consultants. The hourly rate for the services
provided shall be deducted from the payment deposited as those services are
rendered and the billing paid to the officer, employee, or professional
consultant involved. Evidence of such payment shall be presented to the
officer, employee, or professional consultant whose services are requested
before any services are rendered. At or near the time the deposit is
exhausted by payment of fees, an additional deposit shall be required. The
balance of the payment on deposit with the village shall be refunded to the
depositor promptly upon request after all deductions for payment of fees.



   (b)   The village shall keep an accounting of such deposits and
payments. The village shall post the current hourly rate for professional
services rendered by the village’s officers, employees, and professional
consultants and shall assist residents and property owners in estimating the
required deposit. The villageshall provide notices to a depositor or to
village officers, employees, and professional consultants as necessary to
accomplish the purposes of this section.



(Ord. 97-22, §§ 1, 2, 6-23-1997)



1  See also § 13-1 of this Code.



Sec. 2-35.  Surrender Of Village Property2:



   Any person having been an officer or employee of the village, whose
term has expired or who has resigned or been removed from office, shall,
within five (5) days after notification and request, deliver to his successor
in office all property, books and effects of every description in his
possession belonging to the village or pertaining to his office.



(Code 1972, § 1-5-9)



2  65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-35.



Sec. 2-36.  Duties Generally:



   Each officer, besides the specific duties which may be required of him
by virtue of his office, shall also perform such other and further duties and
be subject to such rules and regulations as the president and board of
trustees may, from time to time, require or by ordinance provide and
establish.



(Code 1972, § 1-5-10)



Sec. 2-37.  Examination, Inspection Of Books, Other Records1:



   All books, papers, vouchers, warrants, entries, accounts, memoranda and
other records of every agent, officer and employee of the Village may be
examined and inspected at any time by the President. The president and board
of trustees may, by resolution, call upon any officer to make a report, in
writing, of any subject matter which the board may designate in such
resolution and within such time as the resolution may prescribe.



(Code 1969, Ch. 3, Art. 1; Code 1972, §§ 1-5-11, 1-7-13)



1 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-20.



Sec. 2-38.  Contracts For Supplies; Advertising For Bids:



   (a)   All contracts for supplies of any kind or nature let by an
officer of the village or board of trustees, where the amount of such
contract exceeds an amount as required by state statutes2, shall be furnished
by contract and let to the lowest responsible bidder, after advertising for
the same unless the board of trustees, by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all
the trustees elected, specifically waives this provision before purchasing
supplies.



   (b)   Advertising shall be in a newspaper for general circulation in
the village and bids submitted to and received by the village president’s
duly authorized designee.



(Code 1969, Ch. 2; Code 1972, § 1-5-12; Ord. 2009-15, § 2, 6-22-2009)



2  65 ILCS 5/8-9-2 and 30 ILCS 555/1 et. seq.



Sec. 2-39.  Purchase Requisition System:



   In the interest of better control of expenditures associated with all
purchases to be made by the village exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00), all
departments responsible for spending such village funds will have to have a
purchase requisition approved by the department head and then signed by the
committee chairman before an order can be issued. The administration office
will then issue an order number for the purchase and, when the merchandise
has been received, the administration office shall be notified by the
departments to indicate that the order was completed.



(Code 1972, § 1-5-13; Ord. 75-3, 1-2-1975)



Sec. 2-40.  Indemnity3:



   (a)   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used
in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:



      (1)   Employee: Any person formerly or presently employed by
the village.



      (2)   Official: Any former or present trustee or commissioner
or officer of the village.



   (b)   Claims Or Actions: If any claim or action, civil or criminal,
is brought or instituted against an official or employee, where such claim or
action arises out of an act or omission of the official or employee,
performed or made in good faith in the discharge of his official duties or in
the course of his employment, the village shall indemnify such official or
employee for any reasonable costs incurred by such official or employee in
the defense of such claim or action, including reasonable attorney fees, and
shall pay any judgment or settlement arising out of such claim or action.



   (c)   Judgment Or Settlement: If an official or employee, who has
acted in good faith in the discharge of his or her official duties or in the
course of his or her employment, becomes involved in any investigation which
can lead to a criminal prosecution where the subject matter of the
investigation concerns village matters, the village shall indemnify such
official or employee for any reasonable costs incurred by such official or
employee in the defense of such claim or action, including reasonable
attorney fees, and shall pay any judgment or settlement arising out of such
claim or action.



   (d)   Costs: If an official or employee, who has acted in good faith
in the discharge of his or her official duties or in the course of his or her
employment, becomes involved in any investigation which can lead to a
criminal prosecution where the subject matter of the investigation concerns
village matters, the village shall indemnify such official or employee for
any reasonable costs incurred, including reasonable attorney fees, in
connection with such investigation or proceedings.



   (e)   Exceptions: This section shall not apply:



      (1)   To any portion of a judgment representing an award of
punitive or exemplary damages;



      (2)   When a claim, action, investigation or proceeding arises
out of conduct which results in an official or employee being convicted of a
crime.



   (f)   Scope: This section shall apply to any investigation or legal
proceeding.



(Code 1972, § 1-5-14; Ord. 76-21, 12-16-1976)



3  745 ILCS 10/1-101 et seq.. and 10/2-302.



DIVISION 1.  ADA COORDINATOR



Sec. 2-41.  ADA Coordinator:



   (a)   The village president, by and with the advice and consent of
the board of trustees, is hereby authorized to appoint an Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) coordinator, whose term is indefinite and will
continue until his or her successor is appointed and approved in a similar
manner.



   (b)   The ADA coordinator shall receive a compensation and expense
money for travel, phone calls and other matters in accordance with section
2-34 of this article.



   (c)   The deputy building commissioner shall be appointed as the ADA
coordinator.



(Ord. 93-3, §§ 1, 2, 1-11-1993; Ord. 93-4, § 1, 1-25-1993; Ord. 2012-24,
§ 3, 9-24-2012)



DIVISION 2.  OFFICE/HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGER



Sec. 2-42.  Office/Human Resources Manager:



   (a)   The office/human resources manager shall be appointed by and
serve at the will of the village president with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees. The appointment shall be made solely on the basis of
executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to the
candidate’s specific professional education for, actual experience in, and
knowledge of the accepted practices with regard to municipal administration
and finance. The office/human resources manager need not be a resident of the
village. The village president shall have full authority to remove the
office/human resources manager with or without cause.



   (b)   The office/human resources manager shall receive compensation
and benefits in accordance with section 2-34 of this article.



(Ord. 2009-13, § 3, 6-1-2009)



Sec. 2-43.  Duties:



   The office/human resources manager shall have the following duties:



      (1)   Organize office operations and procedures by supervising
payroll, distributing correspondence, designing filing systems, reviewing and
approving supply requisitions, and assigning and monitoring clerical
functions;



      (2)   Maintain office staff by recruiting, selecting and
training employees;



      (3)   Attend all village board and standing committee meetings
at which the office/human resources manager’s attendance is requested;



      (4)   Act as the village’s budget officer by preparing an
annual budget; scheduling expenditures; analyzing variances and initiating
corrective actions; performing regular cash-flow, financial and managerial
analyses; and supervising accounting staff;



      (5)   Ensure that approved invoices are paid in a timely
manner;



      (6)   Balance and reconcile any accounts over which the
office/human resources manager is given supervisory authority, and create
monthly financial reports for all village department heads;



      (7)   Oversee preparation of grant or loan applications,
administer any money received from loans or grants, and prepare related
reports in collaboration with the village’s community development director;



      (8)   Oversee preparation of information for bond issues and
related matters, and for annual audits of village finance and performance;



      (9)   Enforce administrative policies, rules, regulations and
procedures; maintain accurate personnel files for village employees; and
track vacation and compensated time for village employees;



      (10)   Act as a signatory on designated village accounts;



      (11)   Prepare board meeting and committee meeting agendas and
minutes in the absence of the village clerk; and



      (12)   Other duties as assigned by the village president
and/or board of trustees.



(Ord. 2009-13, § 3, 6-1-2009)



Secs. 2-44–2-55.  Reserved:



ARTICLE III.  BOARD OF TRUSTEES



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 2-56.  Composition; Qualifications; Election; Oath; Duties:



   The legislative and governing body of the village shall consist of the
president of the village and six (6) trustees, who shall possess the
qualifications for office, be elected by legal voters of the village, take
the oath of office and perform the duties provided by the state statutes1.



(Code 1969, Ch. 1; Code 1972, § 1-6-1)



1  65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-5 et seq., 5/3.1-10-5; 10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.; 65 ILCS
5/3.1-10-25.



Sec. 2-57.  Regular Meetings:



   Regular meetings of the president and board of trustees shall be held
on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at seven thirty o'clock (7:30)
P.M. at the village hall. In case such meeting should fall on a legal
holiday, then such meeting date shall be set by the village president.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-2; Ord. 85-5, 5-2-1985)



Sec. 2-58.  Special Meetings:



   Special meetings may be held at any time on call of the president or
any two (2) or more trustees. Such call shall be in writing, duly signed, and
shall be presented to the clerk, who shall proceed immediately to cause
notice of the same to be served upon the president and trustees in person or
by registered letter. Such notice shall describe in brief the nature or
object of the call.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-3)



Sec. 2-59.  Quorum:



   A majority of the corporate authorities shall constitute a quorum to do
business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time, and may compel
the attendance of absentees under such penalties as may be prescribed by
ordinance.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-4)



Sec. 2-60.  Compensation:



   Each member of the board of trustees whose term of office commences
after the effective date hereof shall receive compensation in accordance with
section 2-34 of this chapter. A trustee is allowed two (2) absences of board
meetings. Each absence in excess of that number shall result in the trustee
forfeiting the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00). In addition to the
trustee's compensation, the board of trustees may pay expenses of a trustee
of a sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-6; Ord. 80-25, 12-4-1980; Ord. 88-8, 4-25-1988; Ord.
96-27, § 1, 9-9-1996; Ord. 2002-32, § 1, 7-22-2002; Ord. 2005-01, § 2,
1-10-2005)



Sec. 2-61.  Electronic Attendance At Board Meetings:



   (a)   A quorum of trustees must be physically present at the
location of an  open or closed meeting of the board of trustees.



   (b)   Minutes of all meetings shall reflect if a trustee was
physically present or present by means of a video or audio conference. Lack
of such a specification shall be  deemed to indicate that the trustee in
question was physically present.



   (c)   As provided herein, trustees who are not physically present
may participate in open or closed meetings by means of a video or audio
conference. Such  electronic participation may only occur if the trustee is
prevented from physically attending by: personal illness or disability;
employment purposes; business of the public body; a family emergency; or
another emergency. If a trustee wishes to attend a meeting electronically,
the trustee must notify the village clerk or his or her designee at least
forty-eight (48) hours before the meeting, unless advance notice is
impractical.  Notification may be in person or in writing, or by phone,
e-mail or facsimile transmission. The notification shall include a detailed
recitation of the particular circumstances why the trustee cannot attend, and
also cite one of the five (5) above-specified categories.  The notification
also shall substantially follow the format laid out in section 2-62 of this
chapter.  Notice given to the village clerk or his or her designee shall be
sufficient. Copies of the request shall be provided to all trustees promptly,
but in no event later than the meeting in question.



   (d)   Upon receipt of notice of intent to participate
electronically, the village clerk or his or her designees shall make
appropriate arrangements for the trustee to participate electronically, such
as by arranging a speaker-phone for the meeting room and obtaining contact
information. The equipment shall provide output sufficient for persons
attending the meeting, and members of the audience, to hear the trustee
speak, and also shall allow the trustee to hear other trustees and any person
who addresses the board of trustees.



   (e)   The board of trustees allows electronic attendance for
qualifying reasons listed in the Illinois Open Meetings Act, as a matter of
policy. The audio or video equipment shall be activated at the beginning of
the meeting, or at the time requested by the trustee, so that the trustee can
participate.



   (f)   If the trustee who is attending electronically would normally
chair the meeting, a president pro tempore who is physically present may be
appointed.



   (g)   When a trustee attends a meeting electronically, all votes
shall be by roll call vote. An electronically attending trustee must identify
himself or herself by name and be recognized by the president before speaking.



   (h)   An approved request to participate electronically shall
entitle the trustee involved to attend at the subject meeting and any closed
sessions called during that meeting.



   (i)   This section shall apply in like manner to any subsidiary
committee, subcommittee or other agency of this body that is a "public body"
under the Illinois Open Meetings Act. 



(Ord. 2007-20, § 1, 7-23-2007)



Sec. 2-62.  Sample Format For Electronic Attendance Request:



   The format for submitting a request for electronic attendance shall be
as attached to Ordinance No. 2007-20, passed July 23, 2007, and adopted by
reference as if fully set forth herein. 



(Ord. 2007-20, § 1, 7-23-2007)



Secs. 2-63–2-75.  Reserved:



DIVISION 2. RULES OF ORDER



Sec. 2-76.  Generally:



   The provisions of this division shall be the rules of order for the
conduct of village business by the president and board of trustees.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Sec. 2-77.  Presiding Officer; Roll Call; Reading Of Last Meeting's Journal1:



   The president shall, if present, take the chair at the hour appointed
for the meeting of the board of trustees; if he or she is not present the
board of trustees shall elect a temporary chairman from among themselves who
shall act in his or her stead. The meeting being called to order, the roll of
members shall be called, and if a quorum is present the presiding officer
shall cause the journal of the last preceding meeting or meetings to be read
unless such reading is dispensed with by vote of the board. (Code 1972, §
1-6-5)



1  65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50.



Sec. 2-78.  Points Of Order:



   The president shall preserve order and decorum. He or she may speak to
points of order in preference to any member and shall decide points of order
subject to an appeal of the board of trustees by any two (2) members, on
which appeal no member shall speak more than once unless by leave of the
board.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Sec. 2-79.  Statement Of Question Prior To Debate; Motions Reduced To
Writing:



   Every question shall be distinctly stated by the president before it is
open for debate. Every motion shall be reduced to writing if the president or
any member shall so demand.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Sec. 2-80.  Substitution Of Chairman:



   The president may call on any board member to perform the duties of
chairman; no such substitution, however, shall extend beyond the adjournment
of the particular meeting.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Sec. 2-81.  Addressing Presiding Officer; Recognition Before Speaking
Further:



   Every board member previous to speaking to any question shall audibly
address the presiding officer as “Mr. President” or “Mr. Mayor”. Such
member shall not, however, speak further until he or she is recognized and
named.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Sec. 2-82.  Reading Of Ordinances:



   Every ordinance shall be read before the same shall be passed by the
board.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Sec. 2-83.  Laws Governing Passage Of Ordinances, Resolutions And Motions:



   The passage of all ordinances, resolutions and motions shall be
controlled by 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-40 and any other applicable laws.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Sec. 2-84.  Voting Required Unless Excused; Refusal To Vote2:



   Every member present when a vote is taken shall vote unless excused by
the board of trustees, or unless he or she shall be directly interested in
the matter pending, in which case such member shall not vote. Any member
refusing to vote or passing his or her vote shall be counted as voting with
the majority.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



2  50 ILCS 105/3 et seq.



Sec. 2-85.  Committee of the Whole:




   (a)   Established. There is established a seven-member standing
committee of the whole composed of those persons holding the elective office
of village president and village trustee.





   (b)   Purpose. The committee of the whole is established to create a
less formal parliamentary setting to discuss village business.





   (c)   Meetings. The committee of the whole shall meet at 7:30 p.m.,
in the Village Board Room, on the Wednesday preceding the second and fourth
Monday of a calendar month. Special meetings of the committee of the whole
may be called by the chairman or upon the request of two (2) members by
notice to the chairman no later than sixty (60) hours in advance of such
special meeting.





   (d)   Chairman. The village president shall serve as chairman of the
committee of the whole.




   (e)   Procedure; Authority; Reporting. The procedures of the
committee of the whole shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order (Newly
Revised), current edition. The committee of the whole shall consider,
investigate, and recommend in an advisory capacity such matters assigned to
it by the board of trustees, or which it originally determines advisable in
its own discretion. The committee of the whole may assign any matter under
its consideration to a special committee as deemed necessary and advisable.
The committee shall present a report to the board of trustees on all matters
it takes into consideration at its discretion or upon demand of the board of
trustees.



(Code 1969, Ch. 1; Code 1972, § 1-6-5; Ord. 92-18, § 1, 3-23-1992; Ord.
2010-18, § 2, 8-23-2010; Ord. 2011-09, § 2, 5-9-2011; Ord. 2015-13, § 1,
7-8-2015)



Sec. 2-86.  Special Committees:




   (a)   Established. There is established the following three-member
special committees:





      (1)   Finance and insurance – Consideration of matters of
related to finance, budget, taxes and levies thereof, revenue, debt, records
management, and insurance;





      (2)   Public utilities and infrastructure – Consideration of
matters related to public works including, but not limited to streets,
sidewalks, and public utilities;





      (3)   Public safety and human services – Consideration of
matters related to police, fire, public safety and public assistance;





      (4)   Administration, communications and recreation –
Consideration of matters related to general government, administration,
communications, community outreach, special events, and recreation;





      (5)   Economic development and business licenses –
Consideration of matters related to economic development, business
incentives, business evaluations, and business licenses; and





      (6)   Buildings, zoning and ordinances – Consideration of
matters related to buildings, zoning, permits, and legislation not specific
to another committee.





   (b)   Purpose. The special committees are established to allow a
more detailed analysis of matters under consideration without the formalities
or interruptions associated with the legislative process of assemblies of
greater size.





   (c)   Meetings. Special committee meetings shall be scheduled at the
call of the chairman, or upon the request of any two (2) members thereof by
notice to the chairman no later than sixty (60) hours in advance of such
meeting.





   (d)   Membership. Each special committee shall be made up of three
(3) members of the committee of the whole volunteering to serve in such
capacity or, if necessary, upon open nomination of the committee of the
whole. Membership in a special committee (and the chairman of each special
committee) shall be determined annually at the committee of the whole’s
second regularly scheduled meeting in June. Members of each subcommittee
shall serve as liaison to department heads corresponding to matters of their
designated concern. Notwithstanding the above, no person shall serve on more
than three (3) special committees at any one time, and no person shall serve
as chairman of more than one (1) special committee at any one time. The
chairman of committee of the whole shall be ineligible to serve on a special
committee.




   (e)   Procedure; Authority; Reporting. Each special committee shall
consider, investigate, and recommend in an advisory capacity such matters it
has been assigned by the committee of the whole, or which it originally
determines advisable in its own discretion. Each special committee shall
present a report on all matters it takes into consideration at its
discretion, or upon demand of the committee of the whole.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5; Ord. 85-6, 5-2-1985; Ord. 92-18, § 2, 3-23-1992; Ord.
2010-18, § 3, 8-23-2010; Ord. 2010-24, § 2, 11-22-2010; Ord. 2011-09, § 3,
5-9-2011; Ord. 2015-13, § 2, 7-8-2015)



Sec. 2-87.  Appointment Of Special Committees:



   Special committees may be appointed by the president for the
consideration of any particular question or matter.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Sec. 2-88.  Reports Of Committees:



   All committees to whom any matter may be referred shall report in
writing if requested by any member. Minority reports may be submitted signed
by the dissenting member or members.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Sec. 2-89.  Discharge Of Committees; Record Keeping By Clerk1:



   On acceptance of a final report from a special committee, such
committee shall stand discharged without vote unless it be otherwise ordered.
All reports made by committees or officers of the village, all resolutions
adopted, all ordinances as presented and passed, all communications,
petitions and the like received, and generally all papers presented to be
acted on, shall be filed and carefully preserved by the clerk.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



1  50 ILCS 205/1 et seq.



Sec. 2-90.  Petitions, Communications-Form; Filing:



   All petitions or communications shall be addressed to the president and
board of trustees and shall be in writing and filed with the clerk.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Sec. 2-91.  Petitions, Communications– Presentation:



   When a member wishes to present a communication, petition, order,
resolution or other original matter, he or she shall briefly state its nature
before presenting the same.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Sec. 2-92.  Addressing President, Board Without Consent:



   No person, except a member of the board, shall be permitted to address
the president or the board without consent of the president.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Sec. 2-93.  Power Of Committees To Correct Emergency Situation; Cost
Restriction:



   All standing committees shall have the power in case of emergency to
correct the cause of such emergency, the cost of which shall not exceed three
hundred dollars ($300.00).



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Sec. 2-94.  Order Of Business During Regular Meetings:



   The order of business of the board during its regular meetings shall be
conducted in generally the following format and posted in accordance with the
Illinois Open Meeting Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.), as it is amended from time
to time.



      (1)   Call to order;



      (2)   Pledge of Allegiance;



      (3)   Roll call;



      (4)   Public comment: Any individual who wishes to address the
village board must, prior to the start of the regular meeting, place his name
and address on a sign-up sheet posted in the meeting room.  Upon recognition
to speak by the village president or acting chairperson, the person shall
rise and audibly state his or her name and address.  An individual may speak
for himself or herself or as a representative of a community group on matters
listed on the board’s agenda and issues related to village business.  No
person shall speak longer than five (5) minutes unless specifically
authorized to do so by a majority vote of the board of trustees.  The
five-minute time limit will be measured by a person selected by the village
board.  One (1) hour of meeting time will be the maximum allowed for public
comment.  This time may be extended at the discretion of the village
president;



      (5)   Village president’s report;



      (6)   Village clerk’s report;



      (7)   Committee reports;



      (8)   Attorney’s report;



      (9)   Old business;



      (10)   New business;



      (11)   Correspondence;



      (12)   Executive session, if desired;



      (13)   Adjournment. 



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5; Ord. 2003-45, § 1, 12-22-2003; Ord. 2007-07, § 1,
6-11-2007)



Sec. 2-95.  Adoption of Robert’s Rules:



   Whenever a question of order not specifically covered in this division
2 shall arise, the same shall be decided in accordance with the rules or
parliamentary procedure set forth in the current edition of Robert’s Rules
of Order, Newly Revised.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5; Ord. 2005-01, § 3, 1-10-2005; Ord. 2009-26, § 2,
11-23-2009)



Sec. 2-96.  Precedence Of Motions:



   When a question is before the board, no motions shall be in order but
to adjourn; lay on the table; previous question; postpone indefinitely;
postpone to a certain time; to commit; and amend. These motions shall be
privileged and have precedence in the order named.



(Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Sec. 2-97.  Quorum Not Present; Bringing In Absent Members:



   In case of the want of a quorum at any time of the village board, a
majority of the trustees present may direct the president or presiding
officer to direct any police officer to go out and notify any and all absent
members who can be found in the village and who are not unable through
sickness to attend. After notice and request by such officer and such member
shall refuse to attend, such officer shall, without warrant, arrest such
member and bring him in.



(Code 1969, Ch. 1; Code 1972, § 1-6-5)



Secs. 2-98-2-110. Reserved:



DIVISION 3. PRESIDENT1 2



1  65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-5, 5/3.1-45-5.



Sec. 2-111.  Election; Qualifications:



   There shall be elected a president of the village, who shall hold his
or her office for four (4) years and until his or her successor is elected
and qualified. He or she shall be a citizen of the United States, a qualified
elector, and shall have resided within the corporate limits of the village at
least one (1) year next preceding the election at which he or she is a
candidate.



(Code 1972, § 1-7-1)



Sec. 2-112.  Term Of Office2:



   The president shall hold his or her office for four (4) years.



(Code 1972, § 1-7-1)



2  65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5, 5/3.1-15-5, 5/3.1-15-10.



Sec. 2-113.  Executive Duties; Compensation:



   (a)   The village president shall perform the duties and exercise
the powers conferred upon the mayor of a city.



   (b)   The compensation for the village president shall be in
accordance with section 2-34 of this chapter.



   (c)   The president may exercise the same veto powers, and with like
effect, as the mayor of a city; the board of trustees may pass ordinances
over such veto in like manner as a city council.



(Code 1972, § 1-7-3; Ord. 83-7, 5-19-1983; Ord. 88-7, 4-25-1988; Ord. 96-32,
§ 1, 9-23-1996; Ord. 2002-32, § 1, 7-22-2002; Ord. 2005-01, § 2, 1-10-2005)



Sec. 2-114.  President Pro Tempore3:



   If a temporary absence or disability of the president incapacitates him
or her from the performance of his or her duties but does not create a
vacancy in the office, the board of trustees shall elect one of its members
to act as president pro tempore. The president pro tempore, during this
absence or disability, shall perform the duties and possess all the rights
and powers of the president.



(Code 1972, § 1-7-4)



3  65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35.



Sec. 2-115.  Appointment Of Officers4:



   The president, by and with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees, shall appoint all officers of the village whose appointments are
not otherwise provided for by statute. Whenever a vacancy shall occur in any
office which by statute or ordinance the president is authorized to fill, he
or she shall, at the regular meeting of the board of trustees next occurring,
communicate to the board of trustees the name of his appointee to such
office, and pending the consent by the board of trustees as to such
appointment, he or she may designate some suitable person to discharge the
duties of the office.



(Code 1972, § 1-7-5)



4  65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50, 5/3.1-30-5.



Sec. 2-116.  Supervision Of Village Officers; Recommendations To Board Re
Village Affairs5:



   The president shall supervise the conduct of all appointed officers and
see that they faithfully and efficiently discharge the duties of their
respective offices. He or she shall inquire into all reasonable complaints
made against them and cause all their neglects or violations of duties to be
promptly corrected. He or she  shall, from time to time, give the board of
trustees such information relative to the affairs of the village as he or she
may deem proper and recommend to the board for its consideration any measure
he or she may deem expedient, tending to the well being, security and
improvement of the village.



(Code 1972, § 1-7-6)



5  65 ILCS 5/3.2-35-5.



Sec. 2-117.  Approval And Veto Of Ordinances1:



   The powers and duties of the president with respect to the approval or
veto of ordinances shall be as provided in the state statutes.



(Code 1972, § 1-7-7)



1  65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-45, 5/3.1-40-50.



Sec. 2-118.  Signing Of Licenses, Permits, Warrants, Commissions2:



   Unless another procedure authorized by law is in operation, the
president shall sign all commissions, licenses, permits and warrants granted,
issued or ordered by the board of trustees or authorized by the ordinances of
the village, except for permits provided to be issued by or under the
signature of the health officer or fire chief, and may revoke any such
licenses for the causes provided in this code.



(Code 1969, Ch. 3, Art. 2; Code 1972, § 1-7-8)



2  65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-30.



Sec. 2-119.  Release Of Prisoners:



   The president may for good and sufficient reasons release any person
imprisoned for violation of any provision of this code. The president shall
cause a proper record thereof to be made and shall report such release with
the cause therefor to the board of trustees at its first session thereafter.



(Code 1972, § 1-7-10)



Sec. 2-120.  Powers As To Litigation:



   The president shall sign in behalf of the village all instruments
necessary to the prompt prosecution or defense of any or all actions brought
by or against the village, including bonds for injunction3.



(Code 1972, § 1-7-12)



3  735 ILCS 5/11-103 et seq.



Secs. 2-121-2-135.  Reserved:



ARTICLE IV.  VILLAGE CLERK



Sec. 2-136.  Duties4:



   The village clerk shall, in addition to the duties now imposed upon
that officer by statute and by the Justice Municipal Code, perform the
following duties:



   (1)   He or she shall keep his office in the village hall for the
transaction of village business during usual daily business hours.



   (2)   He or she shall issue notices of meetings to the president and
members of the village board and, when directed by that body, to the members
of the different committees of that body and to all persons whose attendance
will be required before that body or any such committee when so directed; he
or she shall also issue and cause to be served notices of the meetings.



   (3)   He or she shall attest all the licenses granted by the
president or board of trustees under the provisions of this code.



   (4)   He or she shall without delay deliver to the officers of the
village and to the various committees all bills, resolutions, communications
and other documents referring to such officers and committees.



   (5)   He or she shall without delay deliver to the president all
ordinances or resolutions under his or her charge which may require approval
or other action by the president with all papers and information on which the
same were founded.



   (6)   He or she shall act as the Freedom of Information Officer.



(Code 1972, § 1-8-2; Ord. 2012-15, §§ 3, 4, 6-18-2012)



4  65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90.



Sec. 2-137.  Keeper Of Seal, Records1:



   The village clerk shall keep the corporate seal and affix the same to
all papers which require it. He shall keep all records and papers belonging
to the village, the custody and control of which are not given to other
officers. The clerk shall attend all meetings of the president and board of
trustees, and keep a full record of its proceedings in the journal. He shall
make proper copies of all papers duly filed in his office and make
transcripts from the journal and other records and files of his office,
certified by him under the corporate seal.



(Code 1972, § 1-8-3)



1  65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90.



Sec. 2-138.  Record, Publication Of Ordinances2:



   (a)   All ordinances passed by the president and board of trustees
shall be recorded by the village clerk in a book kept for that purpose before
the next regular meeting after they go into effect.



   (b)   If an ordinance requires publication, the clerk shall cause
the same to be duly published. The clerk shall note at the foot of the record
of each ordinance a memorandum of the date of its passage and approval or
otherwise becoming effective and, if published, the date of the publication
of such ordinances. The original shall be filed in the office of the clerk
with a certificate of publication or posting attached to the ordinance
requiring publication.



(Code 1972, § 1-8-4)



2  65 ILCS 6/1-2-5, 511-2-4.



Sec. 2-139.  Notice To Persons Elected Or Appointed:



   It shall be the duty of the village clerk, within five (5) days after
the result of an election is declared or an appointment made, to notify in
writing all persons elected or appointed to office. Unless such persons shall
respectively qualify in ten (10) days after such notice, the office shall
become and be vacant.



(Code 1972, § 1-8-5)



Sec. 2-140.  Filing Of Annual Appropriation Ordinance With County:



   The board of trustees, president and village clerk shall take all
essential steps to pass an annual appropriation ordinance in accordance with
the requirements of 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9 and the revenue code as amended from time
to time. It shall be the duty of the village clerk to file the appropriation
ordinance once passed and file an estimate, certified by the chief fiscal
officer, of revenue, by source anticipated to be received by the municipality
in the following fiscal year within thirty (30) days of the appropriation
ordinance’s adoption.



(Code 1972, § 1-8-6; Ord. 2005-01, § 4, 1-10-2005; Ord. 2012-15, § 3,
6-18-2012)



Sec. 2-141.  Yearly Estimate Of Village Expenses:



   The village clerk shall, on or before the time for making the annual
appropriation, submit to the president and board of trustees a report
estimating as nearly as may be, of monies necessary to defray the expenses of
the village during the current fiscal year. The clerk shall in such report 
class the different objects and branches of expenditure, giving as nearly as
may be the amount required for each. For the purposes of the above statement
and report, the clerk is authorized to require from each officer a statement
of the condition and expenses of the officer’s respective department or
office, with any proposed improvements and the probable expenses thereof, all
contracts made and unfinished, and the amount of any and all unexpended
appropriations of the preceding year. In such report the clerk shall give
such other information as may be deemed necessary to the end that the
president and board of trustees may fully understand the financial
necessities of the current year.



(Code 1972, § 1-8-7; Ord. 2005-01, § 5, 1-10-2005; Ord. 2012-15, § 3,
6-18-2012)



Sec. 2-142.  Receipt Of Communications To Village Or Board; Reading At Next
Board Meeting:



   All petitions, remonstrances, bids, bills or other communications
addressed to the village or the board of trustees shall be received by the
clerk and read by him or her at the board meeting next succeeding their
receipt, unless otherwise ordered by the village board.



(Code 1969, Ch. 3, Art. 3; Code 1972, § 1-8-8)



Sec. 2-143.  Compensation:



   The annual salary for the village clerk shall be twenty-four thousand
dollars ($24,000.00) payable in installments as per the regular payroll of
the village. In the event that the village clerk shall be appointed as
village collector, the village clerk shall be entitled to receive the same
benefits (such as health insurance) that are received by other full-time
employees of the village under the same conditions.



(Code 1972, § 1-8-9; Ord. 81-1, 1-8-1981; Ord. 96-28, § 1, 9-9-1996; Ord.
2002-32, § 1, 7-22-2002; Ord. 2005-01, § 2, 1-10-2005; Ord. 2012-15, §§
3, 5, 6-18-2012)



Sec. 2-144.  Deputy Clerk-Position Established1:



   The position of deputy clerk is hereby established to assist the
village clerk in the performance of his or her duties.



(Code 1972, § 1-8-10; Ord. 77-21, 5-19-1977; Ord. 2012-15, § 3, 6-18-2012)



1  65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-95.



Sec. 2-145.  Deputy Clerk-Compensation:



   The deputy village clerk shall be paid in accordance with section 2-34
of this chapter.



(Code 1972, § 1-8-11; Ord. 78-14, 4-6-1978; Ord. 2009-19, § 1, 7-27-2009;
Ord. 2012-15, § 3, 6-18-2012)



Sec. 2-146-2-160.  Reserved:



ARTICLE V.  VILLAGE ATTORNEY; VILLAGE PROSECUTOR2



2  65 ILCS 513.1-10-5.



Sec. 2-161.  Duties Of Attorney:



   The village attorney shall conduct all the law business of the village
and draw such ordinances, deeds, leases and other papers as may be required
of him or her by the president and board of trustees or any committee thereof



(Code 1972, § 1-9-2)



Sec. 2-162.  Opinions Of Attorney:



   The village attorney shall give his or her opinion in writing to the
board of trustees or any committee thereof or the president, when requested,
on legal questions arising under or concerning any provisions of this code,
and on questions and subjects in which the village shall be legally
interested.



(Code 1972, § 1-9-3)



Sec. 2-163.  Materials Turned Over To Successor Of Attorney Upon Expiration
Of Term:



   Upon the expiration of his or her term of office, the village attorney
shall forthwith turn over to his or her successor in office all dockets,
deeds, leases or other papers in his or her hands belonging to the village or
delivered to him or her by the village or any of its officers and all papers
in actions prosecuted or defended by him then pending and undetermined.



(Code 1972, § 1-9-4)



Sec. 2-164.  Compensation Of Attorney:



   The village attorney shall be paid in accordance with section 2-34 of
this chapter for legal counsel, advice, and opinions.



(Code 1969, Ch. 3, Art. 4; Code 1972, § 1-9-5; Ord. 2005-01, § 6, 1-1-2005)



Sec. 2-165.  Village Prosecutor:



   The duties of the village prosecutor shall be to represent the village
in all matters pertaining to traffic violations, code violations and
misdemeanors, other than those which the penalty provides for a jail sentence.



(Code 1972, § 1-15-3; Ord. 64-2, 1-16-1964)



Secs. 2-166-2-180.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VI.  VILLAGE TREASURER1 3



1  30 ILCS 20/1; 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40.



Sec. 2-181.  Receipt Of Money; Rendering Of Account2:



   (a)   The treasurer shall receive all money belonging to the village.



   (b)   At the end of every month, and more often if required by the
corporate authorities, the treasurer shall render an account3 under oath to
the board of trustees, showing the state of the treasury at the date of the
account, and the balance of money in the treasury. He shall accompany the
account with a statement of all money received into the treasury, and on what
account, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him. On the day he
renders an account, these warrants, with all vouchers held by him, shall be
delivered to the village clerk and filed, together with the account, in the
clerk's office. He shall return all warrants paid by him marked "paid".



(Code 1972, § 1-10-2)



2  65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40.



3  65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-45.



Sec. 2-182.  Books Of Account:



   The village treasurer shall cause to be kept books of account in such
manner as to accurately show all monies received by him, from whom, and on
what account they have been received; also all monies paid out by him and on
what account they have been paid. The books shall be kept in such manner as
to be readily understood and investigated. The books and all papers and files
of the office shall at all times be open to the examination of the president
and board of trustees or any member thereof.



(Code 1972, § 1-10-3)



Sec. 2-183.  Duties:



   The village treasurer shall keep by double entry a fully detailed
account of all village funds, general tax receipts and receipts from other
sources, also a bond account, sinking fund account and forfeit account in the
village ledger. He shall keep a special fund ledger in which all special
funds shall be kept separately by numbers and names of the special funds,
showing the total amount of each fund and installment of same to be
collected, and each account shall show the total collections and
disbursements on account of same. He shall also keep auxiliary accounts with
the village clerk, the village collector and the county collector showing all
monies received and dispersed by the village treasurer. He shall also keep a
commission account, showing the amount of commissions on any and all special
funds at the end of each quarter during the fiscal year. Each warrant, as
soon as it is issued by the clerk and signed by the president, shall be
registered by the village treasurer in the warrant account with each fund,
which shall be kept by him, showing under separate headings the dates and
amounts of payments made on the same and when canceled, and he shall, on
registering each warrant, cancel the same and mark same "Paid by Treasurer"
with the date of each payment.



(Code 1972 § 1-10-4)



Sec. 2-184.  Deposit Of Funds; Designation, Qualification Of Depositories1:



   (a)   All funds and money belonging to the village in the custody of
the village treasurer shall be kept on deposit with such banks or savings and
loan associations as shall be designated by the president and board of
trustees by ordinance, as a depository for such funds and money.



   (b)   No bank shall receive any public funds from the village unless
it has furnished the corporate authorities with copies of the last two (2)
sworn statements of resources and liabilities which the bank is required to
furnish to the commissioner of banks and trust companies or to the
comptroller of the currency. Each bank designated as a depository for public
funds shall, while acting as such depository, furnish the corporate
authorities with a copy of all statements of resources and liabilities which
it is required to furnish to the commissioner of banks and trust companies or
to the comptroller of the currency; provided, that if such funds or monies
are deposited in a bank, the amount of all such deposits not collateralized
or insured by an agency of the federal government shall not exceed seventy
five percent (75%) of the capital stock and surplus of such bank, and the
corporate authorities shall not be discharged from responsibility for any
funds or monies deposited in any bank in excess of such limitation.



   (c)   No savings and loan association shall receive public funds
from the village unless it has furnished the corporate authorities with
copies of the last two (2) sworn statements of resources and liabilities
which the savings and loan association is required to furnish to the
commissioner of savings and loan associations or the federal home loan bank.
Each savings and loan association designated as a depository for public funds
shall, while acting as such depository, furnish the corporate authorities of
a public agency with a copy of all statements of resources and liabilities
which it is required to furnish to the commissioner of savings and loan
associations or the federal home loan bank; provided, that if such funds or
monies are deposited in a savings and loan association, the amount of all
such deposits not collateralized or insured by an agency of the federal
government shall not exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the net worth of
such savings and loan association as defined by the Federal Savings and Loan
Insurance Corporation, and the corporate authorities shall not be discharged
from responsibility for any funds or monies deposited in any savings and loan
association in excess of such limitation.



   (d)   The village treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility
for all funds or money which he deposits in the banks while the funds and
money are so deposited.



   (e)   Such funds or money shall be subject to withdrawal from time
to time upon checks or combination voucher checks signed by two (2) of the
following individuals: village clerk, village bookkeeper, village finance
committee chairman, village treasurer, president of the board of trustees.



(Code 1969, Ch. 3, Art. 5; Code 1972, § 1-10-5; Ord. 2000-34, § 1,
7-24-2000)



1  30 ILCS 235/6; 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-50.



Sec. 2-185.  Position Of Bookkeeper Created; General Duties:



   There is hereby created the position of full time bookkeeper of the
village. The general duties of the full time bookkeeper shall be to
coordinate all accounts receivable, accounts payable and any and all other
accounting functions which may from time to time be directed by the
administration and finance committees of the board of trustees of the village.



(Ord. 91-30, § 1, 9-9-1991)



Sec. 2-186.  Hiring:



   The full time bookkeeper shall be hired by the president and board of
trustees voting jointly; the full time bookkeeper may be removed or
disciplined in the same manner.



(Ord. 91-30, § 1, 9-9-1991)



Sec. 2-187.  Salary; Annual Review:



   The full time bookkeeper shall receive an annual salary in accordance
with section 2-34 of this chapter. The administration and finance committees
of the board of trustees shall conduct an annual performance review of the
full time bookkeeper and any increase in annual salary will be made by
recommendation of the administration and finance committees of the board of
trustees and approved by the president and board of trustees voting jointly.



(Ord. 91-30, § 1, 9-9-1991; Ord. 2005-01, § 2, 1-10-2005)



Sec. 2-188.  Reporting:



   The full time bookkeeper shall report directly to the chairmen of the
administration and finance committees of the village board, and to the
village treasurer, or deputy village treasurer in the village treasurer's
absence. If the positions of bookkeeper and village treasurer are held by the
same person, that person shall report to the chairmen of the administration
and finance committees of the village board.



(Ord. 91-30, § 1, 9-9-1991; Ord. 91-38, § 1, 11-25-1991; Ord. 97-18, § 1,
6-9-1997; Ord. 99-13, § 3, 4-26-1999)



Sec. 2-189.  Sewer And Water Accounts:



   The village treasurer shall perform all duties in connection with the
sewer and water accounts.



(Ord. 92-17, § 1, 4-27-1992)



Sec. 2-190.  Duties As Sewer And Water Account Treasurer:



   The treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the village from
revenue from sewer and water account collections, and shall render at the end
of each month, or more often if required, a statement under oath to the board
of trustees, showing the state of the sewer and water account treasury at the
date of such account and the balance of money in the treasury. Such statement
shall set forth all the money received by him, from whom, and on what account
they shall have been received; also all monies paid out by him and for what
purpose.



(Ord. 92-17, § 2, 4-27-1992)



Sec. 2-191.  Position Of Budget Director Created; Hiring And General Duties:



   There is hereby created the position of the budget director of the
village, which position shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the
board of trustees. The general duties of the budget director shall be to:



      (1)    Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient
planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting, and other fiscal
management procedures in all municipal departments, commissions and boards.



      (2)    Compile an annual budget in accordance with section
8-2-9.3 of the Illinois municipal code.



      (3)    Examine all books and records of all municipal
departments, commissions, and boards which relate to monies received by the
municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and boards and paid out by
the municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and boards, debts and
accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the municipality, municipal
departments, commissions and boards.



      (4)    Obtain such additional information from the
municipality, municipal departments, commissions and boards as may be useful
to the budget director for purposes of compiling a municipal budget, such
information to be furnished by the municipality, municipal departments,
commissions and boards in the form required by the budget director. Any
department, commission or board which refuses to make such information as is
requested of it available to the budget director shall not be permitted to
make expenditures under any subsequent budget for the municipality until such
municipal department, commission, or board shall comply in full with the
request of the budget director.



      (5)    Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure
that no expenditures are made by the municipality, municipal departments,
commissions, or board except as authorized by the budget.



      (6)    Adhere to the statutory requirements of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.1 through section 5/8-2-9.10.



(Ord. 2003-12, § 2, 4-14-2003)



Sec. 2-192.  Compensation And Control:



   The compensation for the budget director shall be set in accordance
with section 2-34 of this chapter. The budget director shall be subject to
the control of the president and board of trustees of the village at all
times in the performance of the duties under the provisions hereof.



(Ord. 2003-12, § 2, 4-14-2003)



Secs. 2-193-2-200.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VII.  COLLECTION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



Sec. 2-201.  General Duties:



   The village shall collect all special taxes and special assessments and
shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the provisions of
this code or the statutes of the state. The village shall keep a record of
all fees or monies collected by any officer, elected official or employee of
the village.



(Code 1972, § 1-11-2; Ord. 2009-14, § 1, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 2-202.  Collection Of Delinquent Installments:



   The village shall have the power and authority to collect amounts due
on tracts and lots which have been forfeited to the state, or withdrawn from
sale, for delinquent installments of special assessments levied by this
village, together with the interest and penalties thereon, based upon an
estimate of the cost of redemption computed by the county clerk.



(Code 1972, § 1-11-3; Ord. 2009-14, § 1, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 2-203.  Payment Of Delinquent Installments; Penalties:



   In case of payment of a delinquent special assessment to the village,
the village shall collect a penalty of seven percent (7%) on the amount of
the forfeiture and on the amount of the withdrawn installment of any special
assessment, together with interest and cost to the date of withdrawal or
forfeiture, and after the first year, interest at the rate of six percent
(6%) per annum, together with any other costs, penalties and interest as
provided by law.



(Code 1972, § 1-11-4; Ord. 2009-14, § 1, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 2-204.  Issue Of Receipts; Form:



   Upon receiving payment for delinquent installments of special
assessments, interest, costs and penalties, the village shall issue to the
person paying the same a receipt of deposit for redemption, according to law,
which receipt shall be in substantially the following form:



   VILLAGE OF JUSTICE



   RECEIPT OF DEPOSIT FOR REDEMPTION



Volume _________ Page _______ Year Returned _______ Receipt Number       
       



State of Illinois   )



            ) ss



County of Cook   )



Office of the Village President



I,                   of the Village of Justice, do hereby certify
that on the     day of               ,           ,        
                                deposited in this office  
              dollars for the redemption of (describe property),
which  was withdrawn or forfeited by the Collector of said County of Cook on
the               day of                             , 
    , for the nonpayment of                        
installments of special assessment warrant, returned delinquent in      
    . You are hereby authorized and ordered to cancel from the records and
files in your office said withdrawal or forfeiture, and issue your
certificate of redemption and cancellation            day of      
              ,       .



VILLAGE OF JUSTICE



CORRECT:  By:                                          
         



        Village President/Authorized Designee



APPROVED: Note: The official records will show this land unredeemed until you
file this receipt in the County Clerk’s office for entry of redemption and
cancellation.



(Code 1972, § 1-11-5; Ord. 2009-14, §1, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 2-205.  Examination Of Papers, Books; Money Paid Over To Treasurer;
Filing Of Receipt:



   All of the papers, books, warrants and vouchers relating to the
collection of special assessments may be examined at any time by the
president or any member of the board of trustees. All receipts relating to
the collection of special assessments shall be kept in duplicate sets, one of
which shall be filed in the office of the clerk.



(Code 1972, § 1-11-6; Ord. 2009-14, § 1, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 2-206.  Delinquent List; Report To County Collector:



   (a)   It shall be the duty of the village president, by and through
his duly authorized designee, to make a report in writing to the county
collector of all the lands, town lots and real estate property on which he
has been unable to collect special assessments, with the amount of special
assessments due and unpaid thereon, together with his warrant or warrants
received by him authorizing the collection thereof. The report shall be
accompanied with the oath of the village president or his duly authorized
designee that the list is a correct return and report of the lands, town lots
and real estate property on which the special assessments levied by authority
of the village remain due and unpaid, that he is unable to collect same, or
any part thereof, and that he has given the notice required by law, that the
warrants had been received by him for collection.



   (b)   Such report shall be made as aforesaid on or before April 1 in
each year as to all special assessments, the warrant for collection of which
shall have been received by the village president or his duly authorized
designee before March 1 in each year.



(Code 1972, §§ 1-11-7, 1-11-8; Ord. 2009-14, § 1, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 2-207.  Location Of Office:



   (Rep. by Ord. 2009-14, § 1, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 2-208.  Compensation:



   (Rep. by Ord. 2009-14, § 1, 6-22-2009)



Secs. 2-209-2-225.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VIII.  VILLAGE COLLECTOR



Sec. 2-226.   Duties.



   The village collector shall, in addition to the duties now imposed upon
that officer by statute and by the Justice Municipal Code, perform the
following duties:



   (1)   He or she shall act as the office/human resources manager.



   (2)   He or she shall act as the TIF administrator.



(Ord. 71-74, 7-1-1971; Code 1972, § 1-12-2; Ord. 92-3, § 2, 2-10-1992; Ord.
2012-15, §§ 1, 6, 6-18-2012)



Sec. 2-227.   Appointment:



   The village collector shall be appointed by the village president with
the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The village clerk shall act
as and perform all duties as village collector unless and until a separate
village collector is appointed.



(Code 1972, § 1-12-3; Ord. 77-24, 5-19-1977; Ord. 2012-15, §§ 1, 8,
6-18-2012)



Sec. 2-228.   Records; Annual Report:



   The village collector shall keep a record of all fees and monies
collected by him or her or turned over to him or her by any other officer,
elected official or employee of the village. The village collector shall make
an annual report to the president and board of trustees of his or her
accounts and doings, and a full report of monies received by him or her as
such village collector, at the end of each fiscal year.



(Code 1972, § 1-12-4; Ord. 2012-15, § 1, 6-18-2012)



Sec. 2-229.   Examination Of Records; Deposit Of Collected Monies; Reports:



   All of the records kept by the village collector shall be opened to
inspection at any reasonable time by the president or any member of the board
of trustees. All monies collected by the village collector shall be deposited
in the proper bank accounts of the village and a record of such deposits
shall be kept by the village collector. If reports are ordered to be made by
the collector more often than at the end of each fiscal year, provision
therefor shall be made by resolution adopted by the president and board of
trustees, and the collector shall comply with the terms of such resolution.



(Ord. 71-14, 7-1-1971; Code 1972, § 1-12-5; Ord. 2012-15, § 1, 6-18-2012)



Sec. 2-230.   Compensation:



   The annual salary for the village collector shall be twenty-six
thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($26,250.00) payable in installments as
per the regular payroll of the village subject to modification by ordinance.



(Ord. 96-29, § 1, 9-9-1996; Ord. 2002-32, § 1, 7-22-2002; Ord. 2005-01, §
2, 1-10-2005; Ord. 2012-15, §§ 1, 7, 6-18-2012)



Secs. 2-231-2-245.  Reserved:



ARTICLE IX.  DEPARTMENT OF SPECIAL EVENTS AND PUBLIC RELATIONS



Sec. 2-246.  Department Created:



   There is hereby created the department of special events and public
relations in and for the village.



(Code 1972, § 1-14-1; Ord. 91-27, § 1, 8-12-1991)



Sec. 2-247.  Composition And Appointment:



   The department shall consist of five (5) members, all of whom shall be
residents of the village. They shall be appointed by the president and the
board of trustees, voting jointly. They shall serve during the fiscal year of
the village, or until their successors have been appointed and qualified. One
of their members shall be chosen as chairperson by the department members.



(Code 1972, § 1-14-2; Ord. 91-27, § 2, 8-12-1991)



Sec. 2-248.  Duties:



   The duties of the department of special events and public relations
shall be to coordinate any and all special events held in the village with
the persons sponsoring such events, such events having been first authorized
by the president and board of trustees, together with business firms located
in the village and inhabitants of the village, and to promote goodwill
between the village and all persons residing in or doing business in the
village and in general to promote the welfare of the village.



(Ord. 70-15, 9-3-1970; Code 1972, § 1-14-3; Ord. 91-27, § 3, 8-12-1991)



Sec. 2-249.  Control; Compensation:



   Members of the department of special events and public relations shall
be subject to the control of the president and board of trustees of the
village at all times in the performance of their duties under the provisions
hereof. The compensation of the members shall be in accordance with section
2-34 of this chapter.



(Code 1972, § 1-14-4; Ord. 84-32, 11-1-1984; Ord. 91-27, § 4, 8-12-1991)



Sec. 2-250.  Auxiliary Members:



   In the discretion of the village board, up to ten (10) auxiliary
members of the department of special events and public relations shall be
allowed. Appointment of such auxiliary members shall be by the president and
board of trustees, voting jointly.



(Ord. 91-27, § 5, 8-12-1991)



Secs. 2-251-2-265.  Reserved:



ARTICLE X.  WATER AND SEWER COLLECTOR1



1  See chapter 11 of this code.



Secs. 2-266-2-280.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XI.  BUILDING DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATORS2



2  See chapter 8; § 3-388 of this code.



Sec. 2-281.  Positions Created; General Duties:



   (a)   There is hereby created the positions of building department
administrators of the village, vested with the administration of this code
and consisting of the building commissioner, deputy building commissioner,
chief electrical inspector, chief plumbing inspector, and the chief boiler,
heating, ventilation and refrigeration inspector.



   (b)   All officers and employees of the building department shall be
under the direction and supervision of the building commissioner, and shall
perform such duties as may be required of them by the building commissioner
and by provisions of this article.



(Code 1972, § 1-22-1)



Sec. 2-282.  Building Commissioner:



   (a)   Qualifications: The building commissioner shall be the head of
the building department and may be a registered architect, registered
structural engineer, registered professional engineer, carpenter or with at
least ten (10) years' responsible experience in the construction industry or
a related field.



   (b)   Appointment: The appointment of the building commissioner
shall be by the president of the board of trustees by and with the
concurrence of the village board.



   (c)   Functions: The building commissioner shall be responsible for
maximum working efficiency of any and all inspectors, careful examination of
drawings and plans and diligent inspections of all buildings, structures and
mechanical installations. All building permits are to be written by the
building commissioner. All monies due for permits are to be collected by the
village upon issuance of permits to applicant. All issuance of village
violations shall be the responsibility of the building department inspectors.
All issuance of citations and levying of fines for building, electrical,
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, ventilation and refrigeration violations
shall be the responsibility of the building commissioner, the president of
the board of trustees, the chairman of the building department or the chief
of police.



   (d)   Term Of Office: The term of office of the building
commissioner will be for one (1) year beginning May 1 and ending April 30 of
the following year, and subject to section 2-27 of this code.



   (e)   Salary: The salary of the building commissioner shall be in
accordance with section 2-34 of this chapter.



(Code 1972, § 1-22-2; Ord. 2009-15, § 4, 6-22-2009; Ord. 2012-24, § 4,
9-24-2012)



Sec. 2-283.  Deputy Building Commissioner:



   (a)   Qualifications: The deputy building commissioner may be a
registered architect, registered structural engineer, registered professional
engineer, carpenter or with at least five (5) years' responsible experience
in the construction industry or a related field.



   (b)   Appointment: The appointment of the deputy building
commissioner shall be by the president of the board of trustees by and with
the concurrence of the village board.



   (c)   Functions: The deputy building commissioner’s duties are
such duties as may be assigned to him or her by the building commissioner and
the chairman of the building department in the event of the illness, absence
or inability of the building commissioner to act. The deputy building
commissioner is hereby authorized to perform all duties of the building
commissioner in enforcing the building code of the village and such other
provisions of this code as may be pertinent.



   (d)   Term Of Office: The term of office of the deputy building
commissioner will be for one (1) year beginning May 1 and ending April 30 of
the following year, and subject to section 2-27 of this code.



   (e)   Salary: The salary of the deputy building commissioner shall
be in accordance with section 2-34 of this chapter.



(Code 1972, § 1-22-3; Ord. 2012-24, § 5, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 2-284.  Chief Building Inspector:



   (a)   Qualifications: The chief building inspector shall have had at
least five (5) years' experience in the design and construction of buildings.



   (b)   Appointment: The appointment of the chief building inspector
shall be by the president of the board of trustees by and with the
concurrence of the village board.



   (c)   Functions: The chief building inspector shall perform all
general building inspections which are not the responsibility of other chief
inspectors established in this article. He or she shall issue violation
notices. A copy of each violation notice shall be given to the building
commissioner.



   (d)   Term Of Office: The term of office of the chief building
inspector will be for one (1) year beginning May 1 and ending April 30 of the
following year, and subject to section 2-27 of this code.



   (e)   Salary: The salary of the chief building inspector shall be in
accordance with section 2-34 of this chapter.



(Code 1972, § 1-22-4; Ord. 2012-24, § 6, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 2-285.  Chief Electrical Inspector:



   (a)   Qualifications: The chief electrical inspector shall have had
at least five (5) years' experience as a registered electrical engineer or
electrician in electrical installation work.



   (b)   Appointment: The appointment of the chief electrical inspector
shall be by the president of the board of trustees by and with the
concurrence of the village board.



   (c)   Functions: The chief electrical inspector shall be in charge
of all electrical applications. He or she shall write all electrical permits
and shall inspect all electrical installations, which include signs, electric
or nonelectric. He or she shall issue violation notices. A copy of each
violation notice shall be given to the building commissioner.



   (d)   Term Of Office: The term of office of the chief electrical
inspector shall be for one (1) year beginning May 1 and ending April 30 of
the following year, and subject to section 2-27 of this code.



   (e)   Salary: The salary of the chief electrical inspector shall be
in accordance with section 2-34 of this chapter.



(Code 1972, § 1-22-5; Ord. 2012-24, § 7, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 2-286.  Chief Plumbing Inspector:



   (a)   Qualifications: The chief plumbing inspector shall have had at
least five (5) years' experience in planning installation and be a licensed
plumber.



   (b)   Appointment: The appointment of the chief plumbing inspector
shall be by the president of the board of trustees by and with the
concurrence of the village board.



   (c)   Functions: The chief plumbing inspector shall be in charge of
all plumbing permits. He or she shall write all plumbing permits and shall
inspect all plumbing including tank and water heater installations. He or she
shall issue violation notices. A copy of each violation notice shall be given
to the building commissioner.



   (d)   Term Of Office: The term of office of the chief plumbing
inspector shall be for one (1) year beginning May 1 and ending April 30 of
the following year, and subject to section 2-27 of this code.



   (e)   Salary: The salary of the chief plumbing inspector shall be in
accordance with section 2-34 of this chapter.



(Code 1972, § 1-22-6; Ord. 2012-24, § 8, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 2-287.  Chief Boiler, Heating, Ventilation And Refrigeration Inspector:



   (a)   Qualifications: The chief boiler, heating, ventilation and
refrigeration inspector may be a registered professional engineer with at
least five (5) years' experience or a qualified mechanic with at least ten
(10) years' responsible experience in the design, installation and/or
inspection of warm air heating systems, air conditioning systems, ventilating
units, industrial sanitation ventilation installations, steam and hot water
boilers, unfired pressure vessels and refrigeration equipment.



   (b)   Appointment: The appointment of the chief boiler, heating,
ventilation and refrigeration inspector shall be by the president of the
board of trustees by and with the concurrence of the village board.



   (c)   Functions: The chief boiler, heating, ventilation and
refrigeration inspector shall inspect all old and new heating and ventilating
devices installed in the village and determine whether there is a fire hazard
or a health hazard to the inhabitants of the village. He or she shall issue
violation notices. A copy of each violation notice shall be given to the
building commissioner.



   (d)   Term Of Office: The term of office of the chief boiler,
heating, ventilation and refrigeration inspector will be for one (1) year
beginning May 1 and ending April 30 of the following year, and subject to
section 2-27 of this code.



   (e)   Salary: The salary of the chief boiler, heating, ventilation
and refrigeration inspector shall be in accordance with section 2-34 of this
chapter.



(Code 1972, § 1-22-7; Ord. 79-33, 12-6-1979; Ord. 2012-24, § 9, 9-24-2012)



Secs. 2-288-2-305.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XII.  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ATTORNEY1



1  65 ILCS 5/9-3-4.



Sec. 2-306.  Office Created:



   There is hereby created the office of special assessment attorney in
and for the village. The special assessment attorney shall have charge of the
filing of all special assessments.



(Code 1972, § 1-24-1)



Sec. 2-307.  Qualifications2:



   The special assessment attorney shall be an attorney at law duly
licensed to practice in the state by the supreme court of Illinois.



(Code 1972, § 1-24-2)



2  705 ILCS 205/1 et seq.



Sec. 2-308.  Appointment:



   The special assessment attorney shall be appointed by the president of
the village by and with the consent and approval of the board of trustees of
the village.



(Code 1972, § 1-24-3)



Sec. 2-309.  Term Of Office:



   The special assessment attorney shall hold office from May 1 of the
year of his or her appointment until April 30 of the following year, or until
his or her successor has been appointed and qualified.



(Code 1972, § 1-24-4)



Secs. 2-310-2-330.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XIII.  TREASURER, SEWER AND WATER ACCOUNTS3



3  See chapter 11, "Utilities", of this code.



Secs. 2-331-2-355.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XIV.  SANITATION AND DRAINAGE INSPECTOR4



4  See also chapter 5, "Health And Sanitation"; chapter 10, "Streets,
Sidewalks, Driveways And Parking Lots"; and chapter 11, "Utilities", of this
code.



Sec. 2-356.  Office Created:



   There is hereby created the office of sanitation and drainage inspector
for the village.



(Code 1972, § 1-28-1)



Sec. 2-357.  Appointment:



   The sanitation and drainage inspector shall be appointed by the
president of the village with the consent and approval of the board of
trustees.



(Code 1972, § 1-28-2)



Sec. 2-358.  Duties:



   The sanitation and drainage inspector shall conduct regular inspections
of the sewer and drainage facilities and shall report to the public works
director and the chairman in charge of the drainage committee, and the sewer
and water advisory committee of the board of trustees.



(Code 1972, § 1-28-3)



Sec. 2-359.  Number Of Inspectors:



   The number of persons who shall be appointed to the office of
sanitation and drainage inspector shall be determined by the president of the
village board and the board of trustees.



(Code 1972, § 1-28-5)



Sec. 2-360.  Term:



   The term of office for the sanitation and drainage inspector shall be
for one year beginning May 1 and ending April 30 of the following year.



(Code 1972, § 1-28-6)



Sec. 2-361.  Compensation:



   The compensation for the sanitation and drainage inspector shall be in
accordance with section 2-34 of this chapter.



(Code 1972, § 1-28-7; Ord. 77-29, 5-19-1977)



Secs. 2-362-2-380.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XV.  CIVIL EMERGENCIES1



1  See also chapter 4, "Fire Prevention And Protection"; chapter 9, "Police
Department"; and § 3-130, inciting riot or disturbance at place of
amusement, of this code.



Sec. 2-381.  Definitions:



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Civil Emergency:



      (1)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by
immediate power to execute by three (3) or more persons acting together
without authority of law;



      (2)    Any declaration by the federal government of the
highest threat of terrorism alert as defined by the homeland security act or
other federal act, rule or regulation, or natural disaster or manmade
calamity, including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or
explosion within the corporate limits of the village resulting in the death
or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that
extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.



   Curfew: A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the village,
excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially
designated to duty with reference to a civil emergency.



(Code 1972, § 1-19-1; Ord. 2003-07, § 1, 3-24-2003)



Sec. 2-382.  Written Declaration:



   Whenever a "civil emergency" as defined in this article exists, the
president shall declare the existence thereof by means of a written
declaration setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency.



(Code 1972, § 1-19-2)



Sec. 2-383.  Curfew:



   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the president, he may order
a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the village or to
the village as a whole, as he deems advisable, and applicable during such
hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public
safety and welfare.



(Code 1972, § 1-19-3)



Sec. 2-384.  Issuance Of Orders:



   After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the president may also, in
the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following
orders:



      (1)    Order the closing of all retail liquor stores,
including taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the
consumption of intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted;



      (2)    Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic
liquor by any wholesaler or retailer;



      (3)    Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or
giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any
container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;



      (4)    Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing,
dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character
whatsoever;



      (5)    Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for
the protection of life and property.



(Code 1972, § 1-19-4)



Sec. 2-385.  Effective Period:



   The proclamation of a civil emergency authorized in this article shall
be effective for a period of forty eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated
by a proclamation of the president indicating that the civil emergency no
longer exists. The president shall have the power to reproclaim the existence
of a civil emergency at the end of each forty eight (48) hour period during
the time the civil emergency exists.



(Code 1972, § 1-19-5)



Sec. 2-386.  Advertisement, Posting Of Proclamation:



   Upon issuing the proclamation of a civil emergency authorized in this
article, the chief of police shall notify the news media situated within the
village and shall cause three (3) copies of the proclamation declaring the
existence of the emergency to be posted at the following places within the
village: the village hall, the police station and the post office.



(Code 1972, § 1-19-6)



Sec. 2-387.  Interpretation Regarding Powers Of Police And Fire Departments:



   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to impair the
powers contained in this code giving powers to the police and fire
departments, but shall be construed together with existing provisions now in
effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the village.



(Ord. 68-18, 10-17-1968; Code 1972, § 1-19-7)



Secs. 2-388-2-400.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XVI.  TAXATION1



1  35 ILCS. See also chapter 3, "Business Regulations"; § 3-61 et seq.,
"License Fees"; § 4-18, "Fire Insurance Tax Fund", of this code.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 2-401.  Police Protection Tax2:



   An annual tax is hereby imposed for the purpose of police protection in
the village at the rate of seventy five thousandths percent (0.075%) of the
value as equalized or assessed by the state department of revenue for all
taxable property therein, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-1-3.



(Ord. 69-21, 9-4-1969; Code 1972, § 1-20-1)



2  See also chapter 9, "Police Department", of this code.



Sec. 2-402.  Fire Protection Tax3:



   An annual tax is hereby imposed for the purpose of fire protection in
the village at the rate of seventy five thousandths percent (0.075%) of the
value, as equalized or assessed by the state department of revenue, for all
taxable property therein, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-7-1 and 5/11-7-3.



(Ord. 69-22, 9-4-1969; Code 1972, § 1-21-1)



3  See also chapter 4, "Fire Prevention And Protection", of this code.



Sec. 2-403.  Use Tax1:



   A use tax shall be imposed by the village pursuant to 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.1 et seq., as amended from time to time.



(Ord. 86-39, § I, 12-15-1986; Ord. 88-20, § 1, 8-22-1988; Ord. 2005-01, §
8, 1-10-2005)



1  See also § 3-2, "License And Permit Applications", of this code.



Secs. 2-404-2-420.  Reserved:



DIVISION 2. RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX1



1  See also § 3-2, "License And Permit Applications", of this code.



Sec. 2-421.  Imposed:



   A retailers' occupation tax shall be imposed by the village pursuant to
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.1 et seq., as amended from time to
time.



(Code 1972, § 3-19-1; Ord. 2005-01, § 9, 1-10-2005)



Secs. 2-422-2-435.  Reserved:



DIVISION 3. SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX



Sec. 2-436.  Imposed:



   A service occupation tax shall be imposed by the village pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.1 et. seq., as amended from time to time.



(Code 1972, § 3-20-1; Ord. 2005-01, § 10, 1-10-2005)



Secs. 2-437-2-455.  Reserved:



DIVISION 4. TAXATION OF OCCUPATIONS OR PRIVILEGES2



2  Prior ordinance history: 1972 Code §§ 3-23-1, 3-23-2, 3-23-3, 3-23-4,
3-23-5, 3-23-6, 3-23-7, 3-23-8, 3-23-9; Ord. 86-1, 1-27-1986; Ord. 88-22,
9-12-1988.



Sec. 2-456.  Imposed:



   The corporate authorities of the village may tax the occupations or
privileges, cigarettes and motor vehicles as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-2 through 8-11-4 as amended from time to time.



(Ord. 2005-01, § 11, 1-10-2005)



Sec. 2-457.  Municipal Hotel Use Tax:



   (a)   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of
renting or leasing rooms in a hotel, as defined in § 2 Hotel Operators’
Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 145/2, within the village at a rate of five
percent (5%) of the rental or lease payment. Provided, however, the tax
imposed shall not apply to permanent residents of the hotel, to directors,
officers, agents or employees of the hotel who for, or in connection with,
the transaction of business for the hotel occupy rooms, or to that portion of
rental or lease payments paid by persons occupying an extended stay hotel
facility, as defined in Section 8-42.1 of this code, corresponding to any day
beyond the thirtieth (30th) consecutive day of that person’s stay (i.e.,
the tax shall be applicable to rental or lease payments for the privilege of
renting or leasing rooms for the first thirty (30) days of occupancy). The
tax herein imposed shall be in addition to all other taxes imposed by the
village.



   (b)   Use of Tax Proceeds: Proceeds of the tax imposed hereby shall
be used to promote tourism, conventions, and to attract non-resident
overnight visitors to the village. The proceeds of the tax imposed by this
section shall not be used to advertise for or otherwise promote new
competition in the hotel business.



   (c)   Payment and Collection: Each hotel shall collect the municipal
hotel use tax imposed by this section from the person making the rental or
lease payment at the time payment is tendered to the hotel. The hotel shall,
as trustee, remit the tax to the village as required herein. The hotel shall
file tax returns, in a form to be provided or approved by the village,
reflecting tax receipts received during each month. At the time of filing
said tax returns, the hotel shall remit to the village treasurer all tax
proceeds due for the period to which the tax return applies.



   (d)   Incidence of Tax: The incidence of the tax imposed by this
section shall be borne of the person renting or leasing rooms in the hotel.



   (e)   Tax Returns: Each hotel shall file tax returns showing tax
receipts received with respect to the hotel during each three (3) month
period ending on March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each
year, within ten (10) days after the end of the respective period, upon forms
prescribed by the village treasurer. At the time of filing, the hotel shall
tender to the village treasurer payment representing the full amount of all
tax proceeds due for the period to which the tax return applies.



   (f)   Books and Records: Every hotel shall keep complete and
accurate books and records of rental or lease charges, payments, and taxes
collected or not collected. At a minimum, the hotel shall keep books and
records containing the following information: (1) the number of rooms rented
or leased during a 24-hour period, including multiple rentals/leases of the
same room; (2) the amount of the rental or lease charges; (3) the amount of
the rental or lease payments collected; (4) the amount of taxes assessed and
collected; and (4) the actual receipts of the hotel evidencing the proof of
the aforementioned.



   (g)   Access to Books and Records: The village treasurer, auditor or
other designated representative shall have full authority and access to each
hotel’s books and records to ensure the proper administration and
collection of taxes pursuant to this section. Said authority and access shall
be granted upon forty eight (48) hours written notice. It shall be unlawful
for any person or hotel to prevent, hinder or interfere with the village
treasurer, auditor, or other designated representative in the discharge of
his/her duties in the enforcement of this section.



   (h)   Interest: Taxes not remitted by a hotel to the village in a
timely manner shall accrue interest in the amount of one percent (1%) of the
total tax not remitted per month.



   (i)   Penalty: Any person who fails or refuses to pay the tax
imposed by this section, or any hotel that fails or refuses to comply with
its obligations as set forth in this section, shall be fined seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense
shall be deemed to have been committed each day a violation occurs, exists or
continues.



   (j)   Suit for Enforcement or Collection: The village is hereby
authorized to initiate legal proceedings against any person or hotel to: 1)
enforce compliance with the provisions of this section; 2) prevent future
violations of this section; 3) collect taxes not paid or not remitted to the
village as required by this section; 4) to impose liability for fines for
violating the provisions of this section; and/or for any other reason deemed
necessary.



   (k)   Suspension/Revocation of License: It shall be cause for the
suspension and/or revocation of a hotel’s business license to violate the
provisions of this section. The village president is hereby authorized to
hear and decide charges filed against a hotel seeking the suspension and/or
revocation of its business license. Charges shall be initiated by the village
prosecutor. The charges shall identify the specific grounds that constitute
cause for the suspension/revocation. Once charges are filed, the village
president shall send written notice of the charges and a hearing date to the
prosecutor and hotel by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least
five (5) days before the date set for hearing. A party may but is not
required to be represented by an attorney. Formal rules of evidence will not
apply at the hearing, but all parties will have an opportunity to submit
evidence, question and cross-examine witnesses, and argue their case. The
village attorney shall represent the village president at the hearing and
rule on any evidentiary questions. The village president shall preside over
the hearing and render a decision on the charges. The decision shall be in
writing and delivered to the parties in open proceeding. A suspension or
revocation of a business license shall not release or discharge the hotel
from its obligations or liability under this section.



   (l)   Appeal: Any party aggrieved by the decision of the village
president in connection with charges related to the revocation/suspension of
a business license may appeal that decision to the board of trustees. The
appeal shall be filed with the village clerk no later than ten (10) days
after the village president’s decision is rendered, setting forth grounds
for the appeal, and the reason why modification or reversal of the decision
is appropriate. No new evidence shall be allowed at the hearing on appeal and
the board of trustees’ review of the village president’s decision shall
be limited to the record before the village president. The board of trustees
shall set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such
hearing shall be given to the parties as set forth in subsection (k). The
decision of the board of trustees on appeal shall be final.



(Ord. 2013-04, § 1, 3-25-2013)



Secs. 2-458-2-464.  Reserved:



DIVISION 5. MUNICIPAL ELECTRICITY TAX



(Rep. by Ord. 2005-01, § 12, 1-10-2005)



Secs. 2-465-2-472.  Reserved:



DIVISION 6. MUNICIPAL AMUSEMENT TAX3,4



3  See also § 3-121 et seq., of this code.



4  Prior ordinance history: Ord. 2000-12, § 1, 2-28-2000.



Sec. 2-473.  Title:



   This division shall be known and may be cited as the VILLAGE OF JUSTICE
AMUSEMENT TAX ORDINANCE. The tax herein imposed is in addition to all other
taxes imposed by the village of Justice, the state of Illinois or any
municipal corporation or political subdivision of any of the foregoing.



(Ord. 2000-56, § 1, 10-23-2000)



Sec. 2-474.  Definitions:



   For purposes of this division:



   Amusement: Any exhibition, performance, presentation or show for
entertainment purposes, including, but not limited to, any theatrical,
dramatic, musical or spectacular performance, promotional show, motion
picture show, flower, poultry or animal show, animal act, circus, rodeo,
athletic contest, sport, game or similar exhibition, such as boxing,
wrestling, skating, dancing, swimming, riding on animals or vehicles,
baseball, basketball, softball, soccer, football, tennis, miniature golf,
golf practice center, golf driving range, hockey, track and field games,
bowling, or billiard and pool games.



      For purposes of this division, "amusement" shall not mean any
recreational activity offered for public participation or on a membership or
other basis, including, but not limited to, carnivals, amusement park rides
and games, bowling, billiards and pool games, dancing, tennis, golf,
racquetball, swimming, weightlifting, bodybuilding or similar activities.



      For purposes of this division, "amusement" shall not mean
raffles, as defined in 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/1, as now or
hereafter amended, intertrack wagering facilities, as defined in 230 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3, as now or hereafter amended, or automatic amusement
devices.



   Automatic Amusement Devices: Any machine which upon the insertion of a
coin, slug, token, or similar object may be operated generally by any person
for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a
score, and includes, but is not limited to, such devices as jukeboxes, marble
machines, pinball machines, video games, movie or video booths or stands and
all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name by
which they may be indicated.



   Department Or Department Of Revenue: The village of Justice.



   Owner:



      (1)   With respect to the owner of a place where an amusement
is being held, any person who has an ownership or leasehold interest in a
building, structure, vehicle, boat, area or other place who presents,
conducts or operates an amusement in such place or who allows, by agreement
or otherwise, another person to present, conduct or operate an amusement in
such place;



      (2)   With respect to the owner of an amusement, any person
who has an ownership or leasehold interest in such amusement or any person
who has a proprietary interest in the amusement so as to entitle such person
to all or a portion of the proceeds, after payment of reasonable expenses,
from the operation, conduct or presentation of such amusement, excluding
proceeds from nonamusement services and from sales of tangible personal
property.



   Person: Any natural individual, firm, society, foundation, institution,
partnership, limited liability company, association, joint stock company,
joint venture, public or private corporation, receiver, executor, trustee or
other representative appointed by the order of any court, or any other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. The masculine,
feminine, singular and plural are included in any circumstance.



(Ord. 2000-56, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2001-03, § 1, 2-12-2001; Ord. 2009-14,
§ 3, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 2-475.  Tax Imposed:



   (a)   An amusement tax is imposed upon the patrons of any amusement
which takes place within the village, in an amount equal to five percent (5%)
of the admission fees or other charges paid for the privilege to enter, to
witness or to view such amusement; provided, however, that this tax shall not
be imposed upon the privilege of witnessing or participating in any stock
show or business show that is not open to the general public or, except as
limited below, be imposed upon the privilege of witnessing or participating
in any amusement sponsored or conducted by and the proceeds of which, after
payment of reasonable expenses, inure exclusively to the benefit of:



      (1)    Religious, educational and charitable institutions,
societies or organizations;



      (2)    Societies or organizations for the prevention of
cruelty to children or animals;



      (3)    Societies or organizations conducted for the sole
purpose of maintaining symphony orchestras, opera performances and artistic
presentations, including, but not limited to, musical presentations, and
receiving substantial support from voluntary contributions;



      (4)    Societies or organizations conducted and maintained for
the purpose of civic improvement;



      (5)    Fraternal organizations, legion posts, social and
political groups which conduct amusements, sponsored occasionally but not
more often than twice yearly for periods not longer than thirty (30) days;



         Provided, however, that the entities described in
subsections (a)(1) to (a)(5) of this section are not for profit institutions,
organizations, groups or societies, where no part of the net earnings inure
to the benefit of any person;



      (6)    Organizations or persons in the armed services of the
United States, or national guard organizations, reserve officers'
associations, or organizations or posts of war veterans, or auxiliary units
or societies of such posts or organizations, if such posts, organizations,
units or societies are organized in the state of Illinois, and if no part of
their earnings inure to the benefit of any person;



      (7)    Organizations or associations created and maintained
for the purpose of benefiting the members, or dependents or heirs of members,
of the police or fire departments of any political subdivision of the state
of Illinois.



   (b)   The tax imposed in subsection (a) of this section shall not
apply to or be imposed upon:



      (1)    The admission fees to witness live performances of
professional theater companies in any auditorium or theater in the village,
whose maximum seating capacity, including all balconies, is not more than
seven hundred fifty (750) persons.



         A "professional theater company", as used in this division,
is hereby defined as any society, organization, association, corporation or
entity which advances the cultural interests of the village of Justice
through the production of live theatrical and dramatic presentations of
plays, musicals or operas to a seated audience in the village.



      (2)    Initiation fees and membership dues paid to a health
club, racquetball club, tennis club or a similar club or organization, when
such club or organization is organized and operated on a membership basis and
for the recreational purposes of its members and its members' guests, shall
be exempt from the tax imposed in subsection (a) of this section. This
exemption shall not be construed to apply to any fees paid or based upon a
per event or a per admission basis.



      (3)    Fees or other charges paid by a patron for the
privilege of witnessing, viewing or participating in an amusement, solely
within the confines of such patron's home, shall be exempt from the
imposition of the tax imposed in subsection (a) of this section. For purposes
of this exemption, "home" means the permanent dwelling residence of the
patron. For patrons who live in condominium buildings, apartment buildings or
other multiple-unit structures, the individual dwelling unit the patron
occupies shall be considered the patron's home.



   (c)   (1)    In the case of any amusement for which a full
exemption from payment of the amusement tax is provided in this division,
written application for such exemption shall be filed with the village of
Justice by the person or persons who are sponsoring or conducting the
amusement or who are required to collect the tax, on forms prescribed by the
village of Justice collector, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the holding
of such amusement. This requirement shall not apply, however, if the
requirement contained in subsection (c)(2) of this section is satisfied.



      (2)    In the event that live performances are conducted by a
professional theater company in an auditorium or theater that has a maximum
seating capacity, including all balconies, of not more than seven hundred
fifty (750) persons as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the
auditorium or theater may apply to the village for an exemption not to exceed
three (3) years upon providing proof of its seating capacity. This exemption
may be renewed for additional periods, each renewal period not to exceed
three (3) years, upon a showing to the village that the maximum seating
capacity of the auditorium or theater does not exceed seven hundred fifty
(750) persons.



   (d)   For the purpose of determining the amount of the amusement tax
due under this division, admission fees or other charges shall be computed
exclusive of any federal, state or municipal taxes imposed upon the amusement
patron and any separately stated charges for nonamusement services or for
sales of tangible personal property.



   (e)   It is unlawful for any person to produce, present or conduct
any amusement, without collection of the tax, except as provided in this
division.



(Ord. 2000-56, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2009-14, § 3, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 2-476.  Registration:



   Every owner, manager or operator of an amusement or of a place where an
amusement is being held in the village, shall apply for registration as a tax
collector with the village no later than thirty (30) days after commencing
such business or thirty (30) days after the effective date hereof, whichever
occurs later. Application for registration shall be made to the village by
use of the form furnished by the village for such purpose and shall contain
such information as the village may reasonably require.



(Ord. 2000-56, § 1, 10-23-2000)



Sec. 2-477.  Collection, Payment And Accounting:



   (a)   It shall be the duty of every owner, manager or operator of an
amusement or of a place where an amusement is being held to secure from each
patron the tax imposed by this division and to remit the tax to the village
of Justice not later than the last day of each calendar month for all
admission fees or other charges received during the immediately preceding
calendar month. A verified statement of admission fees or charges in a form
prescribed by the village of Justice collector shall accompany each
remittance. Acceptance by the village of any amount tendered in payment of
the tax shall be without prejudice to any claim, demand or right on account
of any deficiency.



   (b)   Canceled admission tickets and complete and accurate records,
books and accounts in detail of all receipts shall be kept at the place of
amusement or such other place in the village as may be designated in writing
by the person liable for collection of the tax. All such books, records and
accounts shall be open to inspection by the village at all reasonable times
during business hours.



   (c)   Every owner, manager, or operator who is required to collect
the tax imposed by this division shall be considered a tax collector for the
village. All amusement taxes collected shall be held by such tax collector as
trustee for and on behalf of the village. The failure of the tax collector to
collect the tax shall not excuse or release the patron from the obligation to
pay the tax.



   (d)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, in order
to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the village, no person shall
be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, the tax imposed by this division
unless the person files a claim for refund or credit within one year after
the date on which the tax was paid or remitted to the village.



(Ord. 2000-56, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2009-14, § 3, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 2-478.  Rules And Regulations-Authorized:



   The village of Justice is authorized to adopt, promulgate and enforce
rules and regulations pertaining to the administration and enforcement of
this division.



(Ord. 2000-56, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2009-14, § 3, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 2-479.  Application Of Uniform Penalties, Interest And Procedures
Ordinance:



   Whenever not inconsistent with the provisions of this division or
whenever this division is silent, the provisions of the uniform penalties,
interest and procedures ordinance, shall apply and supplement this division.



(Ord. 2000-56, § 1, 10-23-2000)



Sec. 2-480.  Penalty:



   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this division shall
be fined up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) a day that the violation
exists and in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of
tax due.



(Ord. 2000-56, § 1, 10-23-2000)



ARTICLE XVII.  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Secs. 2-481-2-495.  Reserved:



DIVISION 2. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY AND DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY



Sec. 2-496.  Created; Purpose; Composition:



   (a)   There is hereby created the village of Justice emergency
management agency and department of homeland security (JEMA) to prevent,
minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster
caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural or
manmade disaster, in accordance with the "Illinois emergency management
agency act" 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3305/10.



   (b)   The JEMA shall consist of the JEMA coordinator (the
"coordinator") and such additional members as may be selected by the
coordinator.



(Ord. 2006-05, § 1, 2-13-2006)



Sec. 2-497.  Coordinator:



   The JEMA coordinator shall be appointed by the village president and
shall serve until removed by same. The coordinator shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration, training, and operation
of the JEMA, subject to the direction and control of the village president as
provided by statute.



   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve
as the coordinator, the village president or any person designated by him,
shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided
in this division.



(Ord. 2006-05, § 1, 2-13-2006)



Sec. 2-498.  Functions, Duties:



   The JEMA shall perform such emergency management functions within the
village as shall be prescribed in and by the state emergency operations plan
and program prepared by the governor, and such orders, rules and regulations
as may be promulgated by the governor, and in addition shall perform such
duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual
aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality, or
quasi-municipality entered into as provided in the Illinois emergency
management agency act.



(Ord. 2006-05, § 1, 2-13-2006)



Sec. 2-499.  Mobile Support Team:



   (a)   All or any members of the JEMA organization may be designated
as members of a mobile support team created by the director of the state of
Illinois emergency management agency. The leader of such mobile support team
shall be designated by the JEMA coordinator.



   (b)   Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee
or officer while serving on call to duty by the governor, or the state
director, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights,
and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is
not a paid officer or employee of the village, while so serving, shall
receive from the state reasonable compensation as provided by law.



(Ord. 2006-05, § 1, 2-13-2006)



Sec. 2-500.  Mutual Aid Agreements:



   The JEMA coordinator may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other
municipalities or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement
shall be effective until it has been approved by each of the political
subdivisions and shall be consistent with the state emergency operations plan
and the local emergency management operations plan.



(Ord. 2006-05, § 1, 2-13-2006)



Sec. 2-501.  Cooperation With State During Emergency:



   If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event
of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the
state of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other
hostile action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of
the JEMA to cooperate fully with the Illinois emergency management agency and
with the governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.



(Ord. 2006-05, § 1, 2-13-2006)



Sec. 2-502.  Compensation:



   Members of the JEMA who are paid employees or officers of the village,
if called for training by the director of the Illinois emergency management
agency, shall receive for the time spent in such training the same rate of
pay as is attached to the position held; members who are not such village
employees or officers shall receive for such training time such compensation
as may be established by the village board of trustees.



(Ord. 2006-05, § 1, 2-13-2006)



Sec. 2-503.  Reimbursement Of Expenses By State:



   The village treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund,
any reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to
training members of the JEMA, as prescribed by the Illinois emergency
management agency, compensation for services and expenses of members of a
mobile support team while serving outside the village in response to a call
by the governor or the director of the Illinois emergency management agency,
as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to
emergency services and disaster activities as provided by law.



(Ord. 2006-05, § 1, 2-13-2006)



Sec. 2-504.  Purchases, Contracts:



   (a)   The village board may, on recommendation of the JEMA
coordinator, authorize the village to enter into contracts necessary to place
the village in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from
the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the
public health and safety, protect property, and provide emergency assistance
to victims in the case of such disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster.



   (b)   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the JEMA
coordinator is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such
services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such
purposes, in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures
or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to village contracts or
obligations, as authorized by the Illinois emergency management agency act,
provided that if the village board of trustees meets at such time the
coordinator shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by
that body.



(Ord. 2006-05, § 1, 2-13-2006)



Sec. 2-505.  Oath:



   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the JEMA
organization shall, before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to an
oath, as required by law, which shall be filed with the coordinator.



(Ord. 2006-05, § 1, 2-13-2006)



Sec. 2-506.  Office:



   The village president is authorized to designate space in a village
building, or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the board of trustees for
the JEMA office.



(Ord. 2006-05, § 1, 2-13-2006)



Sec. 2-507.  Appropriations, Tax Levy For Emergency Services:



   The village board may make an appropriation for JEMA purposes in the
manner provided by law, and may levy in addition to any other taxes, a tax
for JEMA purposes only, at a rate not to exceed that provided by state
statute.



(Ord. 2006-05, § 1, 2-13-2006)



Secs. 2-508-2-525.  Reserved:



DIVISION 3. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS1



1  See also chapters 8 and 12 of this code.



Sec. 2-526.  Created; Members2:



   The zoning board of appeals hereby created shall consist of seven (7)
members to be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent
of the board of trustees to serve respectively for the following terms: one
for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one for four
(4) years, one for five (5) years, one for six (6) years and one for seven
(7) years. One member of the zoning board of appeals shall be named by the
village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees as
chairman of the  zoning board of appeals. Upon the effective date of this
division, the terms of office of the first appointees hereinbefore set forth
for the number of years specified shall run to the end of the fiscal year of
the village as applicable to the respective term. All members must be
residents of the village. The successor to each member initially appointed
shall serve a term of five (5) years.



(Code 1972, § 2-2-1; Ord. 2013-15, § 1, 10-14-2013)



2  65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5, 5/11-12-4, 5/11-13-3.



Sec. 2-527.  Removal Of Members:



   The president and the board of trustees shall have the power to remove
any member of the zoning board of appeals for cause after a public hearing.



(Code 1972, § 2-2-2; Ord. 2013-15, § 1, 10-14-2013)



Sec. 2-528.  Resignation; Filling Vacancy3:



   Any member of the  zoning board of appeals may resign from his office.
If a vacancy in office occurs by reason of death, resignation or removal from
office, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the president and board
of trustees voting jointly for the remainder of the term of the office which
has become vacant.



(Code 1972, § 2-2-3; Ord. 2013-15, § 1, 10-14-2013)



3  65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5.



Sec. 2-529.  Meetings; quorum; minutes; records:



   All meetings of the  zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call
of the chairman and at such other times as the  zoning board of appeals may
determine. The chairman or, in his or her absence, the acting chairman, shall
administer oaths and may compel the attendance of witnesses. Four (4) members
of the board shall constitute a quorum and a quorum shall be present to vote
on any matter before the board. All minutes of the board shall be open to the
public; the board shall keep minutes of the proceedings showing the vote of
each member upon every question, or if absent or failure to vote, indicating
that fact, and shall also keep records of its examination and other official
actions; every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof and
every order, requirement, decision or determination of the board shall be
filed immediately in the office of the  zoning board of appeals and shall be
public record. Any person may appear and testify at a hearing, either in
person or by duly authorized agent or attorney.



(Code 1972, § 2-2-4;  Ord. 2013-15, § 1, 10-14-2013)



Sec. 2-530.  Remuneration:



   The remuneration for members of the  zoning board of appeals shall be
at the rate of one hundred ten dollars ($110.00) per meeting, per member
present at each such meeting. The remuneration for the chairman of the 
zoning board of appeals shall be at the rate of one hundred thirty-five
dollars ($135.00) per meeting attended.



(Ord. 2012-24, § 11, 9-24-2012; Ord. 2013-15, § 1, 10-14-2013)



Secs. 2-531-2-539.   Reserved.



Sec. 2-540.  Zoning Enforcement:



   (a)   The building commissioner shall be and hereby is designated as
the enforcing officer of the zoning chapter1. In enforcing the zoning
provisions he or she shall be assisted by other officers of the village.



   (b)   Proper authorities of the village, or any person affected, may
institute any appropriate action or proceedings against a violator as
provided by statute.



(Code 1972, § 2-2-13; Ord. 83-10, 7-7-1983)



1  See Ch. 12 of this Code.



Sec. 2-541.  Notice Of Hearing; Sign Required:



   (a)   In addition to all other requirements of this code, all
applicants for a subdivision, rezoning, variance or special use are required
to post an appropriate sign on the subject property not less than fifteen
(15) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date requesting such
action by the  zoning board of appeals. The information required to be
included on such sign(s):



      (1)   Reason for hearing.



      (2)   Date and time of hearing.



      (3)   Address of property.



   (b)   The sign(s) shall be at least four feet by four feet (4' x 4')
in size. The sign(s) shall be posted at intervals of two hundred feet (200')
on the subject property, with at least one sign on each street or road
fronting property.



   (c)   The chairman of the  zoning board of appeals shall approve
all such signs, and the wording thereon, prior to the sign(s) being posted.



   (d)   The sign(s) shall remain on the property until the day after
the hearing.



(Ord. 92-39, § 1, 11-9-1992; Ord. 2013-15, § 1, 10-14-2013)



Sec. 2-542.  Additional Fees:



   All actual expenses incurred by the village in processing, reviewing
and hearing any petitions for variation, rezoning and subdivision shall be
paid by the petitioner. These shall include, but not be limited to,
engineering and legal fees.



   For petitions for subdivisions, the engineering review fees specified
in section 8-320 of this code shall control.



(Ord. 93-36, § 1, 9-27-1993)



Sec. 2-543.  Payment Of All Taxes And Fees:



   Before any application for amendment, variation or subdivision shall be
accepted by the village, the applicant must produce evidence in the form of a
paid tax bill or cancelled check that all outstanding real estate taxes have
been paid in full. No application will be accepted if any fees are due, or
bills unpaid to the village.



(Ord. 94-11, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. 2009-15, §5, 6-22-2009)



Secs. 2-544-2-555.  Reserved:



DIVISION 4. ELECTRICAL COMMISSION2,3



2  See § 8-101 et.seq. of this Code.



3  S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/11-37-2.



Sec. 2-556.  Created; Members:



   There is hereby established a commission which shall be known as the
electrical commission of the village, and which shall consist of six (6)
members. The chief electrical inspector shall be a member and the ex officio
chairman of the commission. Of the other five (5) members, one shall be a
registered professional engineer, one an electrical contractor, one a
journeyman electrician, one a representative of an inspection bureau
maintained by the fire underwriters, if such a representative resides in the
village, and if no such representative resides in the village, then the chief
of the fire department, and one a representative of an electricity supply
company. If there is no person residing in the village who is qualified under
any one of these descriptions, then the president may appoint some other
person who shall fill that position. All members of the electrical commission
shall be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the
corporate authorities. The chief electrical inspector shall serve on the
commission without additional compensation therefor. The other members shall
receive compensation in accordance with section 2-34 of this chapter.



(Code 1972, § 2-3-1)



Sec. 2-557.  Functions:



   It shall be the duty of the electrical commission to formulate and
recommend safe and practical standards and specifications for the
installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment designed to meet the
necessities and conditions that prevail in the village, to recommend
reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits by the
electrical inspection department, and to recommend reasonable fees to be paid
for inspections to be made by the electrical inspection department. The
standards and specifications, rules and regulations governing the issuance of
permit and fees so recommended shall become effective upon the passage of an
ordinance adopting the same by the village board. All such fees shall be paid
to the village treasurer.



(Code 1972, § 2-3-2)



Sec. 2-558.  Violation Of Rules, Specifications Established By Commission1:



   Any person who shall install or alter any electrical equipment after
the approval of the standards and specifications, and the fees prescribed
therefor, except such as is exempt from the provisions of this division by
the terms of article 11, division 37 of the Illinois municipal code, without
first having secured a permit, as provided for, or any person who shall
wilfully fail or refuse to comply with the rules, standards or specifications
established by the electrical commission which have been provided by the
village board shall, upon violation thereof, be fined as provided in this
code.



(Code 1969, Ch. 4, Art. 2; Code 1972, § 2-3-3)



1  65 ILCS 5/11-37-1 et seq., 5/11-37-4.



Secs. 2-559-2-575.  Reserved:



DIVISION 5. BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS2 4



2  See chapters 4 and 9 of this code.



Sec. 2-576.  Established:



   There is hereby established the board of fire and police commissioners
to act under and in accordance with article 10, division 2.1 of the Illinois
municipal code, which article is hereby adopted and made a part of this code
by reference3.



(Code 1972, § 2-4-1)



3  65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.



Sec. 2-577.  Powers; Duties:



   The powers and duties of the board of fire and police commissioners
shall be governed by the provisions of article 10, division 2.1 of the
Illinois municipal code.



(Code 1972, § 2-4-4)



Sec. 2-578.  Members:



   The board of fire and police commissioners shall consist of three (3)
members to be appointed by the president, with the consent of the board of
trustees. The term of the first member shall be one year, the second member
two (2) years, and the third member three (3) years. Each term will expire
with the end of the fiscal year. No appointment shall be made by the
president within thirty (30) days before the expiration of the president's
term of office. One member shall be a representative citizen of the employee
class, one member of the employing class and one member not identified with
either group. No person shall be appointed who holds a paid office of the
United States, this state or of any municipality, and no more than two (2)
members shall belong to the same political party.



(Code 1972, § 2-4-2)



Sec. 2-579.  Oath:



   The members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall possess
the qualifications required of other officers of the village, shall take oath
or affirmation of office and shall be subject to removal from office as
provided for other officers in this code.



(Code 1972, § 2-4-3)



Sec. 2-580.  Secretary:



   The board of fire and police commissioners may employ a secretary or
may designate one of its own members to act as such. The secretary's duties
shall be governed by article 10, division 2.1 of the Illinois municipal code.
He shall receive as his compensation in accordance with section 2-34 of this
chapter.



(Code 1972, § 2-4-5)



Sec. 2-581.  Annual Report:



   The board of fire and police commissioners shall, on or before the last
regular meeting of the village board in March of each year, make to the
president to be by him transmitted to the village board, a report of its
actions and duties, rules in force and the practical effect thereof, and may
in such report make such suggestions as the board believes will result in the
greater efficiency of the police department.



(Code 1972, § 2-4-6)



Sec. 2-582.  Appointment Of Members Of Police Department:



   The board of fire and police commissioners shall appoint all officers
and members of the police department of the village, except those
appointments which the village board of trustees may, by ordinance, otherwise
provide. The appointment of the chief of the police department shall be made
by the president and board of trustees.



(Code 1969, Ch. 4, Art. 3; Code 1972, § 2-4-7)



Sec. 2-583.  Rules And Regulations:



   For examinations, appointments, promotions, demotions, hearings,
investigations and penalties in the fire and police departments the following
rules and regulations shall apply:



   (1)    Rule 1: The term "board" as used in this section shall mean
the regularly appointed board of fire and police commissioners.



      The accepted meaning, by this board, of the term "fire
department" or "police department" includes the full membership of either
department which has gained such membership by appointment after examination
as authorized under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 10-2.1-9.



      All rules regarding the fire department will go into effect when
and if the existing department becomes eligible under the state statutes.



   (2)    Rule 2: The board of fire and police commissioners shall
appoint all officers and other members except members designated by ordinance
by the board of trustees to the fire and police departments of the village.
All appointments to each department other than that of the lowest rank shall
be from the rank next below that to which the appointment is made. The board
shall execute for delivery to each appointee a commission showing the
appropriate designation of the appointee. An entrance appointee of the lowest
rank in either department shall only receive a six (6) months' probationary
period commission. If during the probationary period the person appointed
proves in the option of the board of fire and police commissioners to be
unsuited or unqualified for the position, he will be dropped from the
service. The board may at its discretion extend the probationary period for a
term not to exceed six (6) months. If such probationary appointee is admitted
to regular service, he may receive, upon surrender to the board of his
probationary commission and the exhibition of a receipt from the village
clerk showing that he has paid into the department pension fund the required
fee for such probationary period of service, a commission showing date of
entry into regular service as that of a probationary notary; otherwise, a
regular service commission shall be dated for entry in regular service at end
of probationary period and shall not later be changed.



   (3)    Rule 3: Applicant requirements, examinations. All applicants
for a position in either the fire or police department shall be subjected to
such form of examination as may be prescribed by the board of fire and police
commissioners, such examination to be public, competitive and open to all,
subject to the limitations herein and to such reasonable limitations as may
be prescribed by the board of fire and police commissioners. The examinations
shall be practical in their character and shall relate to those matters which
will fairly test the persons examined as to their relative capacity to
discharge the duties of the positions to which they seek appointment. The
examinations shall include tests of physical qualifications and health. All
such examinations shall be conducted in whole or in part by the board of fire
and police commissioners or its authorized agents. Each applicant who desires
to submit to an examination for an entrance position in either department
shall be required to file a written application for examination and furnish
such information as may be prescribed by the board of fire and police
commissioners including, but not limited to, personal references, but
excluding information concerning political and religious opinions or
affiliations. Disqualifying factual information or personal references shall
deny the applicant the right to submit to examination. The board of fire and
police commissioners may charge each applicant a reasonable, nominal
application fee to help defray the costs of the application and testing
process. The proceeds therefrom shall be deposited in the fire and police
commission fund. Each applicant must meet the following requirements to be
eligible to take such examinations:



      a.    Each applicant must be a citizen of the United States
and able to read, write, speak and understand the English language.



      b.    Each applicant must be at least twenty one (21) years of
age and less than thirty five (35) years of age, except those who have been
previously employed as policemen in a regularly constituted police force of
any municipality, or persons eighteen (18) or twenty (20) years of age who
are eligible under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 10-2.1-6.



      c.    The height and weight of each applicant must be
proportionate.



      d.    Each applicant shall possess a valid, unrestricted
(except for the requirement of corrective eye lenses) state of Illinois
driver's license.



      e.    Each applicant shall submit, with his application, a
certified copy of the applicant's birth record and a copy of applicant's high
school diploma, or other evidence that the applicant possesses such diploma
or the equivalent of a high school education, and, if applicant has been a
member of any active military service, a copy of his discharge papers.



      f.    All such applications shall be supported by five (5)
names of persons of good character acquainted with the applicant.



      g.    Each applicant must return his fully completed
application, along with all required supporting documents, to either the
office of the village president or the village police department within the
time prescribed by the fire and police commission.



      h.    Each applicant who has returned his fully completed
application within the time specified by the commission must attend a
pretesting orientation with his spouse or financee at such time and place as
may be determined by the board of fire and police commissioners.



   State law reference-Examination of applicants, disqualifications,
removal, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 10-2.1-0.



   (4)    Rule 4: Eligible register established from entrance
examinations for lowest rank. The board of fire and police commissioners
shall prepare and keep a register of persons who are eligible. No examined
applicant who otherwise meets the requirements of these rules shall be placed
on the eligible roster unless such applicant furnishes a certificate from a
qualified physician, selected by the board, showing that his health, eyesight
and hearing are good and that he is in good physical condition and otherwise
capable of fulfilling the physical requirements of the position sought. These
persons shall take rank upon the register as candidates in the order of their
relative excellence as determined by examination, without reference to
priority of time of examination. An eligible roster book shall be kept for
this purpose and the secretary of the board shall enter therein the names of
applicants, who have made passing grades, in the order of grades received in
examination, from the highest down; and appointment, as needed to fill
vacancies, shall be made by selecting the name of the one with the highest
grade appearing on the eligible roster. When more than three (3) names are of
the same high grade at the top of the eligible register, then each name
entered thereon, in the top bracket, shall receive the same considerations,
regardless of the order the name appears on the register, and the appointment
shall be made from any name in the highest grade. Any name entered upon
either department register shall not receive consideration for appointment
after two (2) years have elapsed from and after the date of examination when
such applicant became eligible for appointment; however, any name may remain
effective on the eligible register during the two-year period regardless of
the maximum age limit. An eligible applicant may refuse one (1) offer of
appointment and retain his rights and standing on the eligible register, but
the second refusal to accept an offered appointment may be considered as
grounds for no further consideration by the board and the name may be removed
from the register, except that no member of the armed services, whose name
appears upon any eligible register within the jurisdiction of this board,
shall lose any of his rights during such absence.



   State law reference-Register of eligibles, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, §
10-2.1-14.



   (5)    Rule 5: Promotions according to merit, examination and
seniority:



      a.    The board, by its rules, shall provide for promotion in
the fire and police departments, on the basis of ascertained merit and
seniority in service and examination, and shall provide in all cases, where
it is practicable, that vacancies above the lowest rank shall be filled by
promotion.



      b.    All examinations for promotions shall be competitive
among such members of the next lower rank who desire to submit themselves to
examination. Eligible registers shall be established and maintained in a like
manner as stated in Rule 4 of these rules. All promotions shall be from the
three (3) having the highest rating, and where there are less than three (3)
names on the promotional eligible register, as originally posted, or
remaining thereon after appointments have been made therefrom, appointments
to fill existing vacancies shall be made from those names or name remaining
on the promotional register.



      c.    The method of examination and the rules governing
examinations for promotion shall be the same as provided for applicants for
original appointment, except that original appointments only shall be on
probation, as provided by the rules. The board shall strike off the names of
candidates for promotional appointment after they have remained thereon for
more than three (3) years, provided there is no vacancy existing which can be
filled from the promotional register.



      d.    A seniority credit of two (2) percent for each year, or
fraction thereof, of regular service in the department shall be added to the
examination result as well as the five (5) percent credit for military
service as defined by law. In addition, a rating determined by the board may
be added for ascertained merit, efficiency, etc.



   State law references-Veteran's and cadet's preference, Ill. Rev. Stat.
Ch. 24, § 10-2.1-8 et seq.; promotions, merit, seniority, Ill. Rev. Stat.
Ch. 24, § 10-2.1-15.



   (6)    Rule 6: Merits and demerits for department members. A merit
or demerit record shall be kept by the board and such record shall be
provided and for use of the board only. It will be compiled from reliable
information received that is either for or against the record of any member
of either department. The character of reports to be considered by the board
in determining merits or demerits may be as follows:



      For the police department:



         The manner in which arrests are made and the treatment
accorded arrested emergencies, habits, moral conduct, sobriety, alertness,
action, promptness, ordinance enforcement and observation of rules adopted by
the board of fire and police commissioners.



      For the fire department:



         Courage and judgment in emergencies. Habits, moral conduct,
sobriety, courtesy, amiability, promptness and observance of the rules
adopted by the board.



      Merits or demerits may be computed in percentages by the board at
any time and the result added or subtracted to or from the rating on the
eligible registers, thereby creating a new rating or standing on such
registers. Such demerits may be used in determining the board's decision in
demotions or discharges.



   (7)    Rule 7. Temporary appointments to village payroll service in
fire and police departments. The board may make temporary appointments in
either department to meet any exigency therein or to prevent material
impairment in either department. No temporary appointments, other than
probationary appointments, shall exceed sixty (60) days and should any
temporary appointee later receive an appointment in regular service, such
former service shall not be considered in computing time of a probationary
service. A temporary appointment may be renewed after sixty (60) days at the
discretion of the board of fire and police commissioners.



   State law reference-Temporary appointments, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, §
10-2.1-16.



   (8)    Rule 8:Investigation of charges, demotions, suspensions or
removals. Except as otherwise provided in this Code or by law, no officer or
member of the fire or police department shall be removed or discharged except
for cause, upon written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard in his
own defense. The board of fire and police commissioners shall conduct a fair
and impartial hearing of the charges, to be commenced within thirty (30) days
of the filing thereof, which hearing may be continued from time to time. In
case an officer or member is found guilty, the board may discharge him or may
suspend him without pay for not more than thirty (30) days; however, if the
board should conclude that the efficiency of the department would be better
served, it may, if the accused is a commanding officer, reduce him to the
next lowest rank within the department in which he serves, for such period of
time as is, in the opinion of the board, advisable; after such period the
board may advance him to his former rank or to any commanding rank below such
former rank, without further examination. Any officer or other member, who
has been notified by the board of charges having been filed against him, or
who has been notified by the board of his suspension or demotion, shall
immediately surrender his or her commission for custody of the board, until
his or her case has been finally closed by the board. The board may suspend
any officer or member of either department without pay, pending the hearing,
but not to exceed thirty (30) days. If the board of fire and police
commissioners determines that the charges are not sustained, the officer or
member shall be reimbursed for all wages withheld, if any. In the conduct of
the hearing, each member of the board shall have power to administer oaths
and affirmations, and the board shall have power to secure by its subpoena
both the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of books
and papers relevant to the hearing. After each investigation, when the board
has reached a conclusion, the result of the decision shall be mailed to the
defendant by the secretary of the board



   State law reference—Removal or discharge investigation of charges,
etc., Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 10-2.1-17.



   (9)    Rule 9: Residence of members, reinstated members and
temporary appointees. No officer or member of the fire or police department,
and no reinstated officer or member or temporary appointee as an officer or
member of such departments shall be other than a resident and legal voter of
the village. Failure to continuously remain either a resident or legal voter
of the village shall constitute cause for the removal or discharge of any
such officer, member or temporary appointee and shall be prima facie evidence
that such officer, member or temporary appointee has resigned from such
departments.



   State law reference—Residence of policemen and firemen, Ill. Rev.
Stat. Ch. 24, § 3-14-1.



   (10)    Miscellaneous:



      a.    Any member of either the fire department or police
department who refuses promotion or to take an examination therefor may be
demoted or removed from the service for the good of the department.



      b.    Penalties resulting in removals or loss in pay shall be
based, in all cases, upon evidence provided under oath; however, the board
shall have the power to demote any commanding officer, except the chief, to
any rank in the department in which he or she is serving if the board has
conclusive proof, in its possession, of the inefficiency or inability of such
officer to perform the duties in a satisfactory manner in the rank in which
he or she is serving. The board shall also recommend to the village trustees
the demotion of the chief if, in the board’s opinion, he or she is
inefficient or unable to perform the duties required.



      c.    When an officer is temporarily reduced in rank after
having been found guilty of charges as defined in rule 8 or has been granted
a leave of absence by the board of trustees, the officer in the next rank
below that held by the offender or absentee, as the case may be, shall be
moved up to fill such temporary vacancy but shall receive no additional pay
during such temporary occupancy. However, if a leave of absence has been
granted for an indefinite period, for enlistment or service in the armed
forces, such vacancy shall be filled, in the usual manner, with full pay as
established by the board of trustees for that rank.



      d.    All leaves of absence for members of either department
shall be authorized by board of trustees resolution or ordinance and shall be
only for such periods as shall be fixed by the board of trustees. Any member
of either department who has or may be granted leave of absence for duty in
any of the armed services of the United States will not lose his or her
rights for promotion, unless he or she should be unavailable for examinations
held for promotion into the lowest commanding rank. A commissioned commanding
officer, who has been granted leave for duty in the armed services, shall
upon his or her return from service be placed in the rank shown in his or her
commission  from the board. Upon the return of an officer on leave, as
explained in the foregoing paragraph, who has entered his or her rightful
rank, the officers displaced by such entry shall be moved to next rank below;
and the last commissioned member of the patrolman rank shall have his or her
name placed at the top of the eligible register for appointment to the first
vacancy occurring in the patrolman rank at which time he or she will be given
full credit for time served by him or her either as a regular or probationary
appointee.



      e.    The classification of commissions hereafter issued to
appointees by the board of fire and police commissioners shall be as follows:



         1.    Class A: For all members in regular service,
including commanding officers.



         2.    Class B: For probationary appointees.



         3.    Class C: For emergency or temporary appointees
attached to either department.



         4.    Class D: For special police appointments made by
the board of trustees. The holders of class D commissions granted at request
of the board of trustees shall have no standing under the fire and police
commissioner act.



            All commissions shall contain the signature of not
less than two (2) members of the board. Before any commission is delivered to
any person for whom it was issued, other than a regular member of either
department who has previously been sworn in, he or she shall take the oath of
office administered by the village clerk, and furnish such bond as may be
required by the board of trustees.



      f.    The board of fire and police commissioners, from time to
time, may make changes in these rules.



      g.    No member of the board of fire and police commissioners
shall be authorized to waive the provisions of any of these rules and
regulations or any of the fire department or police department. Any proposed
waiver of any of such rules or regulations must be passed upon by the board
at a regular or special meeting and appear in the minutes of such meeting.



   (11)   Rule 11:  Lateral hiring.



      a.   Certified employees. There shall be designated a separate
classification of probationary employees who shall be “certified.” Any
probationary employee hired shall not be classified as a “certified”
employee unless said employee has met the requirements set forth in the
following definition of “certified probationary employee.” A “certified
probationary employee” is defined as a newly hired employee with at least
twenty-four (24) months of uninterrupted service within the last forty-eight
(48) months, in a full-time capacity with one or more recognized Illinois
police agencies, and who has obtained certification through the Illinois Law
Enforcement Training and Standards Board.



      b.   Recommendation and background investigation.
Notwithstanding any other provision contained in the agreement or in the
rules and regulations of the village’s board of fire and police
commissioners (“board”), the chief of police has the authority to
recommend to the board the hiring of an officer as a “lateral transfer”
who is a certified probationary employee pursuant to the requirements of this
section (“lateral transfer”). The chief of police or his or her designee
shall conduct a background investigation of the lateral transfer. The board
shall conduct an oral interview, polygraph test and psychological evaluation
and medical evaluation of the lateral transfer. The lateral transfer shall
not be appointed as a full-time, sworn police officer of the Justice police
department (“department”) unless and until the lateral transfer completes
and passes the oral interview, background investigation, polygraph test and
psychological evaluation, and medical evaluation, and meets any and all other
criteria necessary for appointment.



      c.   Probationary period. Any lateral transfer shall be
subject to the same probationary period as any other newly hired officer as
set forth in the provisions of the agreement.



      d.   Salary and seniority. The initial compensation of a
lateral transfer shall be determined by that lateral transfer’s number of
years of experience as a sworn, full-time officer in any other recognized
Illinois police agency. A lateral transfer shall be compensated at the rate
set forth in the existing agreement for similarly experienced officers up to
five (5) years. A lateral transfer is considered a newly hired officer for
the purposes of department seniority and benefits, and shall be subject to
any and all rules, regulations, code provisions, or agreement provisions
concerning same.



(Code 1972, § 2-4-8; Ord. 85-14, 8-26-1985; Ord. 2008-26, § 1, 4-28-2008;
Ord. 2009-15, § 6, 6-22-2009)



Secs. 2-584-2-600.  Reserved:



DIVISION 6. YOUTH COMMISSION *



Sec. 2-601.  Commission Created:



   A youth commission is hereby created for the village, which commission
shall be known as "the youth commission of the village".



(Ord. 91-8, § 2, 5-28-1991)



Sec. 2-602.  Membership:



   The said commission shall consist of eleven (11) adult members, one of
which shall be chairman; eight (8) teenage members, age eleven (11) to
eighteen (18), four (4) boys and four (4) girls. All members of the
commission shall have a vote in commission matters. The village president and
chief of police shall also be ex officio members of said commission. For the
purpose of youth commission meetings, any five (5) members shall constitute a
quorum for the conduct of business.



(Ord. 91-8, § 2, 5-28-1991)



Sec. 2-603.  Appointment; qualifications.



   The members of said commission shall be appointed by the president with
the advice and consent of the village board, and one (1) of such members
shall be appointed chairman of such commission. No person shall be eligible
to be a member of said commission unless he or she shall be a resident of the
village.



(Ord. No. 91-8, § 2, 5-28-91)



Sec. 2-604.  Terms of office.



   The term of office for adult members shall be staggered:



      Five (5) members for one (1) year



      Five (5) members for two (2) years



      One (1) member for three (3) years



   The term of office for teenage members shall be for one (1) year.



(Ord. No. 91-8, § 2, 5-28-91)



Sec. 2-605.  Duties.



   The youth commission shall:



      (1)    Assist in coordinating and integrating governmental and
private plans and services affecting the welfare of children and youth in the
village.



      (2)    Assist in coordinating and integrating all plans and
services for protecting children from exposure to harmful influences and
conditions conducive to delinquency.



      (3)    Make or cause to be made studies and surveys relating
to juvenile behavior or in the interest of youth guidance.



      (4)    Request and obtain such cooperation, assistance and
data from village departments, agencies and the Illinois Department of
Correction, Juvenile Division Community Services.



      (5)    Recommend plans and methods for the improvement of
opportunities for the wholesome development of youth in Justice.



      (6)    Create subcommittees, composed of members or nonmembers
of said commission, to aid and assist in the work of the commission.



      (7)    Create a special subcommittee consisting of persons
qualified by experience and training to provide guidance and counsel to
children.



(Ord. No. 91-8, § 2, 5-28-91)



Sec. 2-606.  Reports.



   In April of each year, the youth commission shall prepare and submit to
the village board a summary report of its operations and studies during the
preceding year. The commission shall keep a written record of its proceedings.



(Ord. No. 91-8, § 2, 5-28-91)



Sec. 2-607.  Auxiliary members.



   The members of the youth commission shall screen and recommend
auxiliary members of the youth commission to the village president. Up to ten
(10) auxiliary members shall be appointed by the village president pursuant
to section 2-603. The term of such auxiliary members shall be one (1) year,
and such auxiliary members shall be part-time and not regular members of the
youth commission.



(Ord. No. 91-8, § 2, 5-28-91)



Secs. 2-608-2-620.  Reserved.



DIVISION 7. BOARD OF HEALTH*



*Cross reference–Health and sanitation, Ch. 5.
State law reference–Municipal board of health, III. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, §
11-16-1.



Sec. 2-621.  Created.



   There is hereby created the board of health for the village. The board
of health shall consist of the president, the health officer and the members
of the                          buildings, plats and zoning
committee, of the village board.



(Code 1972, § 2-6-1; Bill No. 2012-24, § 12, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 2-622.  General Duties.



   (a)   The board of health shall have the powers and perform the
duties assigned to it by statute or ordinance. It shall be the duty of the
board of health to enforce all provisions of this code which relate to public
health or relate to nuisances.



   (b)   The board of health shall make all necessary rules and
regulations for the protection of the health of the inhabitants of the
village and to guard against the spread of contagious diseases, and to
prevent by necessary rules the induction of diseases, contagious or
otherwise, within the corporate limits of the village.



(Code 1969, Ch. 5, §§ 27, 28; Code 1972, § 2-6-2)



Secs. 2-623-2-635.  Reserved.



DIVISION 8. BOARD OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS*



*Cross reference-Streets, sidewalks, driveways and parking lots, Ch. 10.
State law reference-Board of local improvements, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch, 24, §
9-2-7.



Sec. 2-636.  Members; officers.



   (a)   The board of public improvements shall consist of the
following members: the president of the village board, the village engineer,
two (2) trustees who are chairmen of the public utilities committee and the
finance committee respectively, and another trustee who shall be appointed by
the president with the advice and consent of the village board.



   (b)   The president of the village shall be the president of the
board of public improvements.



   (c)   The secretary of the board of public improvements shall be
appointed from the members of the board.



(Code 1972, § 2-7-1; Ord. 2012-24, § 13, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 2-637.  Special assessments.



   The village hereby adopts the provisions of Article 9, Chapter 24,
Illinois Municipal Code in and for local improvements to be paid in whole or
in part by special assessment.



(Code 1969, Ch. 2; Code 1972, § 2-7-2)



Secs. 2-638-2-650.  Reserved.



DIVISION 9. POLICE PENSION BOARD*



*Cross Reference-Police department, Ch. 9.
State law reference-Board of trustees of the police pension fund, Rev. Stat.
Ch. 108 1/2 § 3-128 et seq.



Sec. 2-651.  Created; composition; function.



   A police pension board is hereby created to consist of five (5)
members, a majority of whom shall be residents of the village and shall
constitute a board of trustees to administer the pension fund and to
designate the beneficiaries thereof. The board shall be known as the board of
trustees of the police pension fund of the village.



(Code 1972, § 2-9-1)



Sec. 2-652.  Appointments.



   Two (2) members of the police pension board shall be appointed by the
president of the board of trustees of the village, by and with the
concurrence of the board of trustees. The third and fourth members of the
board shall be elected from the regular police force by the active members
thereof. The fifth member shall be elected by and from among the
beneficiaries of the fund.



(Code 1972, § 2-9-2)



Sec. 2-653.  Terms of office.



   One (1) of the police pension board members appointed by the president
of the village shall serve one (1) year beginning on the second Tuesday in
May after the village comes within the provisions thereof. The other
appointed member shall serve for two (2) years beginning on the same date.
The successors to any of the appointed members of such board shall serve for
two (2) years each or until their successors are appointed and qualified. The
election provided for in this division for elected board members shall be
held biennially on the third Monday of April at such place or places in the
village and under the Australian ballot system and such other regulations as
shall be prescribed by members of the board. All members of the regular
police force shall be entitled to vote only for the police force members of
the board. All beneficiaries shall be entitled to vote only for the member
chosen from among the beneficiaries. No person shall be entitled to cast more
than one (1) ballot at such election. The members shall be elected for a term
of two (2) years, beginning on the second Tuesday of the first May after such
election. Upon the death, resignation or inability to act of any member of
the board elected under this division, his successor shall be elected at a
special election to be called by the board and conducted in the same manner.



(Code 1972, § 2-9-3)



Sec. 2-654.  Meeting rooms.



   Suitable rooms for offices and meetings of the police pension board
shall be assigned by the president and board of trustees of the village.



(Code 1972, § 2-9-4)



Sec. 2-655.  Meetings.



   (a)   The police pension board shall hold regular quarterly meetings
on the second Tuesday of July, October, January and April annually, and
special meetings as called by the president.



   (b)   At the regular July meeting the board shall select from its
members a president vice-president, secretary and assistant secretary to
serve for one (1) year and until their respective successors are elected and
qualified.



   (c)   The vice-president of the board shall perform the duties of
president during any vacancy in that office, or during such time as the
president is absent from the village, or for any other reason is disqualified
or by reason of illness or other causes is unable to perform his duties.



   (d)   The assistant secretary shall act for the secretary whenever
necessary to discharge the functions of such office.



(Code 1972, § 2-9-5)



   State law reference-Board meetings, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 108 1/2, §
3-130.



Sec. 2-656.  Powers; duties.



   (a)   The police pension board shall have the following powers and
duties:



      (1)    To control and manage, exclusively, the pension fund,
and all moneys donated, paid or assessed for the relief or pensioning of
disabled, super-annuated and retired members of the police department, their
widows, minor children and dependent parents. All such moneys shall be placed
by the treasurer of the village to the credit of the fund, subject to the
order of the board.



      (2)    To order and direct the payment of pensions and other
benefits provided by this division and to issue certificates signed by its
president and secretary to the persons entitled thereto of the amount ordered
paid to such persons from the fund, which certificates shall state the
purpose of the payment.



      (3)    To submit annually to the board of trustees at the
close of the village's fiscal year, a list of persons entitled to payments
from the fund, stating the amount of the payments, and their purpose as
ordered by the board. It shall also include items of income accrued to the
fund during such fiscal year. Such list shall be signed by the secretary and
president of the board, and attested under oath. No resolution or order for
the payment of money shall be valid unless approved by a majority of the
members of the board, and any order for such payment shall be signed by the
president and secretary of the board.



      (4)    To draw such pension funds from the treasurer or other
officials of the village, and invest any part thereof in the name of the
board of the police pension fund in interest bearing bonds or tax
anticipation warrants of the United States, of the state or of any county,
township or municipal corporation of the state, and in insured shares of
state-chartered building and loan associations and insured shares of
federal-chartered federal savings and loan associations if the shares are
insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation. All securities
shall be deposited with the treasurer of the village, and be subject to the
order of the board. Interest on such investments shall be credited to the
account of the pension fund.



      (5)    To compel witnesses to attend and testify before it,
upon all matters connected with the administration of this division, in the
manner provided by law for the taking of testimony before masters in
chancery. The president, or any member of the board, may administer oaths to
such witnesses.



      (6)    To appoint a clerk and define his duties. No person
drawing a pension under this division shall be employed by the board.



      (7)    To provide for the payment from the fund of all
necessary expenses, including clerk hire, printing and witness fees.



      (8)    To keep a public record of all its proceedings.



      (9)    To make necessary rules and regulations in conformity
with the provisions of this division, which shall be published by the board
and copies transmitted from time to time to all pensioners and contributors.



   (b)   The board shall have such further powers and duties as may be
otherwise authorized and provided for under Article 3 of Chapter 108 1/2 of
the Illinois Revised Statutes, and as from time to time as Article 3 may be
amended.



(Ord. No. 70-5, 3-26-70; Code 1972, § 2-9-6)



Secs. 2-657-2-659.  Reserved.



DIVISION 10. EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD*



*Cross reference–Emergency telephone system, 11-120 et seq.
State law reference–Emergency telephone number, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 134,
§§ 31 et seq.



Sec. 2-660.  Created; composition, appointment.



   An emergency telephone system board is hereby created consisting of
seven (7) members. They shall be residents of the village. They shall be
appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the village
board.



(Ord. No. 91-6, § 1, 5-28-91)



Sec. 2-661.  Terms of office; compensation, chairman.



   One (1) member shall serve for one (1) year, three (3) shall serve for
two (2) years, and three (3) shall serve for three (3) years. Terms shall be
drawn by lot upon the appointment of the initial seven (7) members.



   Members of the Board shall serve without compensation but shall be
reimbursed for the actual and necessary expenses.



   The successor to each member initially appointed shall serve for three
(3) years.



   One (1) member shall be named by the village president with the advice
and consent of the board of trustees as chairman of said board.



(Ord. No. 91-6, § 2, 5-28-91)



Sec. 2-662.  Powers and duties.



   The power of such board shall include, but not be limited to the
following:



      (1)    Planning a 911 system.



      (2)    Coordinating and supervising the implementation,
upgrading or maintenance of the system, including the establishment of
equipment specifications and coding systems.



      (3)   Receiving moneys from the surcharge imposed under
Ordinance 91-3 and from any other source for deposit into the emergency
telephone system fund.



      (4)   Authorizing all disbursements from the fund.



      (5)    Hiring, on a temporary basis, any staff necessary for
the implementation or upgrade of the system.



      (6)   All moneys received by a board pursuant to a surcharge
imposed shall be deposited into an emergency telephone system fund. The
treasurer of the village shall be custodian of the fund. All interest
accruing on the fund shall remain in the fund. No expenditures may be made
from such fund except upon the direction of the board by resolution passed by
a majority of all members of the board. Expenditures may be made only to pay
for the costs associated with the following:



         a.    The design of the emergency telephone system.



         b.    The coding of an initial master street address
guide data base, and update and maintenance thereof.



         c.    The repayment of any moneys advanced for the
implementation of the system.



         d.    The charges for automatic number identification
and automatic location identification equipment, and maintenance, replacement
and update thereof.



         e.    The nonrecurring charges related to installation
of the emergency telephone system and the ongoing network charges.



         f.    Other products and services necessary for the
implementation, upgrade and maintenance of the system and any other purpose
related to the operation of the system, including costs attributable directly
to the construction, leasing or maintenance of any buildings or facilities or
costs of personnel attributable directly to the operation of the system.
Costs attributable directly to the operation of an emergency telephone system
do not include the costs of public safety agency personnel who are and
equipment that is dispatched in response to an emergency call.



(Ord. 91-6, § 3, 5-28-1991)



Sec. 2-663.  Removal; Vacancy:



   The president and board of trustees shall have the power to remove any
member of the emergency telephone system board for cause after a public
hearing. Any vacancy occurring on the board shall be filled by the president,
with the advice and consent of the village board.



(Ord. 91-6, § 4, 5-28-1991)



Secs. 2-664-2-669.  Reserved:



DIVISION 11. SENIOR ADVISORY COMMITTEE



Sec. 2-670.  Created:



   There is hereby created a senior advisory committee for the village.
The duties of the committee shall include suggesting and coordinating senior
activities and programs, informing the president and board of trustees of
such activities and assisting in integrating such activities into the village
events schedule.



(Ord. 95-11, § 1, 6-12-1995)



Sec. 2-671.  Membership:



   The committee shall consist of five (5) members, one of which shall be
elected chairperson by the members. All members shall have an equal vote in
the decisions of the committee.



(Ord. 95-11, § 2, 6-12-1995)



Sec. 2-672.  Appointment; Qualifications:



   The members of the committee shall be appointed by the president with
the advice and consent of the village board. All members of the committee
must be residents of the village.



(Ord. 95-11, § 3, 6-12-1995)



Sec. 2-673.  Terms Of Office:



   The terms of office shall be one year, beginning on May 1 and ending on
April 30 of the next year.



(Ord. 95-11, § 4, 6-12-1995)



Sec. 2-674.  Reports:



   In April of each year the committee shall prepare and submit to the
village board a summary report of its operations and activities during the
preceding year.



(Ord. 95-11, § 5, 6-12-1995)



DIVISION 12. ECONOMIC PLANNING BOARD



Sec. 2-675.  Economic Planning Board Created:



   There is hereby created and established an advisory board, which shall
be known as the Economic Planning Board of the Village of Justice.



(Ord. 2013-16, § 1, 10-14-2013)



Sec. 2-676.  Duties:



   The board shall be charged with the following tasks: a) research, study
and recommend the adoption of an economic development plan to attract and
retain commercial businesses, and to otherwise promote commercial
development; b) identify and categorize business zones and real property for
future commercial development; c) identify and prioritize projects, perform
cost analysis, generate plans for implementation, and identify benefits to
the public; d) study, identify and recommend incentives that can be offered
to commercial businesses to expand their current operations or to attract new
business to the Village of Justice; e) study, identify and recommend ways to
stabilize and generate tax revenue within commercial districts; f) submit
written recommendations to the village president and board of trustees for
adoption and implementation; and, g) submit findings relative to its duties
to the president and board of trustees no fewer than two times per year at
the second village board meeting in October and April.



(Ord. 2013-16, § 1, 10-14-2013)



Sec. 2-677.  Voting Membership:



   The voting membership of the economic development board shall be
composed of five (5) public members.



(Ord. 2013-16, § 1, 10-14-2013)



Sec. 2-678.  Appointment; Term Of Members; Removal:




   (1)   The five (5) public members shall be appointed by the village
president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The public
members of the board shall be compensated at a rate of one hundred dollars
($100.00) per month for meetings held and attended. The terms of office for
the public members shall commence on the second (2nd) Monday of May, and
shall have the following terms of office:





      (a)   Three members shall serve for a one-year term.





      (b)   Two members shall serve for a two-year term.





   (2)   Members of the board shall serve until the expiration of their
terms, or as soon thereafter as their successors have been duly appointed and
qualified.





   (3)   The village of Justice, economic development director shall be
the chairman of the economic planning board. The chairman shall not receive
compensation or other benefits for his or her service. The secretary of the
economic planning board shall be appointed by the village president with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees. The secretary shall be
compensated at a rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month for meetings
held and attended.




   (4)   The village president with the advice and consent of the board
of trustees shall have the power to remove any public member of the board in
case of incompetence, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office after service
of intent to remove the public member from the board by certified mail,
return receipt requested after providing an opportunity to be heard in person
not more than ten (10) days from the date of notice. Vacancies in the board
shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become
vacant, in the manner provided in this section for the appointment of such
member.



(Ord. 2013-16, § 1, 10-14-2013; Ord. 2015-15, § 1, 9-28-2015)



Sec. 2-679.  Meetings:



   The board shall conduct its meetings upon the call of the chairman in
the Village Board Room located at 7800 Archer Road, Justice, Illinois.
Approval of any matters coming before the board shall require the affirmative
vote of the majority of members then holding office. Additional meetings may
be called at such dates, times and locations as may be approved by the board.
Meetings shall be cancelled by the call of the chairman of the board in the
absence of business coming before the board. The board shall conduct its
meetings in accordance with the Open Meeting Act. Non-voting consultants
shall not be counted for purposes of determining a quorum.



(Ord. 2013-16, § 1, 10-14-2013; Ord. 2015-15, § 2, 9-28-2015)



Sec. 2-680.  Non-Voting Ex-Officio Consultants:



   There shall be three (3) ex-officio non-voting consultants of the board
consisting of the village president, the village trustee serving as the
chairperson of the economic development and business licenses committee, and
the village trustee serving as the chairperson of the buildings, zoning and
ordinances committee, whose duties shall be to support and advise the board.
The non-voting ex-officio consultants shall attend board meetings with the
voting members of the board. Non-voting ex-officio consultants shall not
receive compensation or other benefits for his or her service.



(Ord. 2013-16, § 1, 10-14-2013; Ord. 2015-15, § 3, 9-28-2015)



Sec. 2-681.  Non-Voting Adjunct Consultants.



   There shall be adjunct non-voting consultants of the board who shall
provide professional advice, recommendations, and planning goals to the
board. The adjunct non-voting consultants shall attend board meetings with
the voting members of the board. Non-voting adjunct consultants shall not
receive compensation or other benefits for his or her service.



(Ord. 2013-16, § 1, 10-14-2013; Ord. 2015-15, § 4, 9-28-2015)



Secs. 2-682-2-699.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XVIII.  CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT



Sec. 2-700.  Purpose:



   The stated purpose of this article is to provide a fair and efficient
enforcement procedure for building code, property maintenance code, and fire
code violations, and other miscellaneous violations under this code.



   This article will set forth rules and regulations in order to create a
system to expedite the hearing, prosecution and correction of such violations.



(Ord. 96-38, § 1, 11-12-1996; Ord. 2012-24, § 14, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 2-701.  Definitions:



   As used in this article, unless the context requires otherwise:



      (1)    Code: Any Justice ordinance, law, housing or building
code that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire
prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards that are
applicable to structures in a municipality;



      (2)   Building Officers: Any full- or part-time employee whose
duties include the inspection or examination of structures and vacant lots in
the village of Justice to determine if code violations exist;



      (3)    Building Owner: The legal or beneficial owner of a
structure;



      (4)   Hearing Officer: An individual appointed by the
president, with the advice and consent of the village board, other than a
building inspector or law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:



         a.   Preside at the administrative hearings to decide if
a code violation exists;



         b.   Administer oaths;



         c.   Hear testimony and accept evidence from the
building inspector, the building or lot owner and all interested parties
relevant to the existence of a code violation;



         d.   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record
of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;



         e.   Issue and sign a written finding, decision and
order stating whether a code violation exists;



         f.   Issue subpoenas, if necessary;



         g.   Assess fines and penalties.



(Ord. 96-38, § 2, 11-12-1996)



Sec. 2-702.  Hearing Officer:



   The village president, with the advice and consent of the village
board, is hereby authorized to appoint persons to the positions set forth in
section 2-701 of this article.



(Ord. 96-38, § 3, 11-12-1996)



Sec. 2-703.  Code Hearing Department:



   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-2 (1994) the village establishes a code
hearing department. The function of the hearing department is to expedite the
prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner set forth in this
article.



(Ord. 96-38, § 4, 11-12-1996)



Sec. 2-704.  Hearing Procedures Not Exclusive:



   The village by adoption of this ordinance does not preclude itself from
using other methods to enforce the provisions of its codes.



(Ord. 96-38, § 5, 11-12-1996)



Sec. 2-705.  Instituting Code Hearing Proceedings:



   When a building inspector discovers a code violation while inspecting a
structure or vacant lot, he shall note the violation on a multiple-copy
violation notice and report form, indicating the name and address of the
owner or his or her agent, the type and nature of the violation, the date and
time the violation was observed, the names of witnesses to the violation, and
the address where the violation is observed.



   The violation report form shall be forwarded by the building inspector
to the code hearing department where a docket number shall be stamped on all
copies of the report, and a hearing date noted in the blank spaces provided
for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty
(30) days nor more than sixty (60) days after the violation is reported by
the building inspector.



   One (1) copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the
code hearing department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one copy
of the report form shall be returned to the building inspector so that he or
she may prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the
hearing on the date indicated, and one (1) copy of the report form shall be
served by first class mail on the owner, along with a summons commanding the
owner to appear at the hearing. If the owner of the structure cannot be
ascertained or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail, service may be
made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy of the violation report form
on the front door of a structure where the violation is found not less than
twenty (20) days before the hearing is scheduled. Service may also be made by
a police officer in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/1-2-11 (1994), by the village
president in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.1 (1994) or in any other manner
provided by law including those enumerated in the 735 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
(1994).



(Ord. 96-38, § 6, 11-12-1996; Ord. 2009-15, § 7, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 2-706.  Subpoenas And Defaults:



   At any time prior to the hearing date the hearing officer assigned to
hear the case may, at the request of the building inspector or the attorney
for the village, or the owner or his or her attorney, issue subpoenas
directing witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If on the
date set for hearing the owner or his or her attorney fails to appear, the
hearing officer may find the owner in default and shall proceed with the
hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.



(Ord. 96-38, § 7, 11-12-1996)



Sec. 2-707.  Continuances-Representation At Code Hearings:



   No continuance shall be authorized by the hearing officer in
proceedings under this article except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the owner. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by the
hearing officer under this article shall be given to the next regular hearing
date. The case for the village may be presented by the building inspector, by
any other employee of the village or by an attorney designated by the
village. However, in no event shall the case for the village be presented by
an employee of the code hearing department. The case for the owner may be
presented by the owner, his or her attorney, or any other agent or
representative.



(Ord. 96-38, § 8, 11-12-1996)



Sec. 2-708.  Hearing; Evidence:



   At the hearing, a hearing officer shall preside and hear testimony and
accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of a code
violation in the structure indicated. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this
article.



(Ord. 96-38, § 9, 11-12-1996)



Sec. 2-709.  Eviction Rights Of Occupants:



   No action of eviction, abatement of nuisance, forcible entry or
detainer or other similar proceeding shall be threatened or instituted
against the occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to
testify or testifies at a code violation hearing.



(Ord. 96-38, § 10, 11-12-1996)



Sec. 2-710.  Defenses Of Code Violations:



   It shall be a defense to a code violation charged under this article if
the owner, his or her attorney or any other agent or representative proves to
the hearing officer’s satisfaction that:



      (1)   The code violation alleged in the notice does not in
fact exist, or at the time of the hearing that the violation has been
remedied or removed;



      (2)   The code violation has been caused by the current
building occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to
maintain the dwelling free of such violations, the current occupants continue
to cause the violations;



      (3)   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused
entry to the owner or his or her agent to all or part of the dwelling for the
purpose of correcting the code violation.



(Ord. 96-38, § 11, 11-12-1996)



Sec. 2-711.  Findings, Decision, Order:



   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing whether
or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and
shall be designated as findings, decision and order. The findings, decision
and order shall include the hearing officer’s findings of fact, a decision
whether or not the code violation exists based on the findings of fact, and
an order, ordering the owner to correct the violation or dismissing the case,
in the event that a violation is not proved. If a code violation is proved,
the order may also impose the sanctions that are provided in the code for the
violation proved and costs not to exceed seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per
violation. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served on the
owner within five (5) days after they are issued; service shall be in the
same manner the report form and summons are served pursuant to section 2-705
of this article. Payment of any fine or penalty imposed shall be made to the
village of Justice, in care of the building department. When collected, the
fines and penalties shall be paid into the treasury of the village.



(Ord. 96-38, § 12, 11-12-1996; Ord. 2000-06, § 1, 1-10-2000; Ord. 2009-15,
§ 7, 6-22-2009; Ord. 2010-02, § 2, 2-8-2010; Ord. 2012-24, § 15, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 2-712.  Administrative Review:



   The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be
subject to review in the circuit court of Cook County and the provisions of
the administrative review law, and all amendments and modifications thereto,
and the rules adopted pursuant thereto are adopted and shall apply to and
govern every action of the judicial review of the findings, decision and
order of a hearing officer under this article.



(Ord. 96-38, § 13, 11-12-1996)



Sec. 2-713.  Judgment On Findings, Decision, Order:



   (a)   Any fine, other sanctions or costs imposed, or part of any
fine, other sanction or costs imposed remaining unpaid after the exhaustion
of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the
administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing to the village, as
such, may be collected in accordance with the applicable law.



   (b)   After expiration of the period within which judicial review
under the administrative review law may be sought for a final determination
of the code violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit
court of Cook County for the purposes of obtaining a judgment on the
findings, decision and order. The village may consolidate multiple findings,
decision and order against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement
of the action the village shall file a certified copy of the findings,
decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that
recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order were
issued in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.
(1994), and this article. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition
may be made by any method provided by section 2-203 of the code of civil
procedure1 or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided that the
total amount of the fines, other sanctions and costs imposed by the findings,
decision and order does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order
were entered in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et
seq. (1994), and this article, and that the owner had an opportunity for a
hearing under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq. (1994), and
this article and for judicial review as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq. (1994): 1) the court shall render judgment in
favor of the village and against the owner for the amount indicated in the
findings, decision and order, plus costs. Such judgment shall have the same
effect and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the
recovery of money; and 2) the court may also issue such other orders and
injunctions as are requested by the village to enforce the order of the
hearing officer to correct a code violation.



(Ord. 96-38, § 14, 11-12-1996)



1  735 ILCS 5/2-203.



Sec. 2-714.  Sanctions Applicable To Owner-Property:



   The order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the
village as a result of a finding of a code violation under this article, such
violation shall attach to the property, so that a finding of a code violation
against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the property
to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes
subject to the findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this
article.



(Ord. 96-38, § 15, 11-12-1996)



Sec. 2-715.  Civil Liability For Rentals In Excess Of Number Permitted By
Ordinance-Definitions:



   (a)   The owner of a building located in the village who directly or
indirectly has collected, or caused to be collected, rentals from an occupant
of that building during a period in which the number of apartments or family
units in that building exceeded the number permitted for that building by an
ordinance of the village, is liable to any such occupant in an amount equal
to not more than three (3) times the amount of any rentals paid by such
occupant, or in his behalf, after January 1, 1970, together with the court
costs and reasonable attorney fees. If the occupant is a recipient of public
aid under article III, IV, or VI of the "the Illinois public aid code",
approved April 11, 1967, as amended, in whose behalf vendor payment of the
rental was made by the Illinois department of public aid or a local
governmental unit, as the case may be, the liability as herein provided is to
the Illinois department of public aid or the local governmental unit making
vendor payment of the rental.



   (b)   For the purpose of this section:



      Family Unit: A room or group of rooms used or intended to be used
as a housekeeping unit of living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. The fact
that any such family unit is used or intended to be used with cooking or
eating accommodations in common with another family unit in any such building
does not affect liability hereunder.



      Owner: The legal or beneficial owner of a building.



   (c)   No liability accrues under this section until thirty (30) days
after the owner of record of a building has been notified in writing that
such owner is in violation of any such village ordinance. Such notice shall
be personally served upon such owner of record or sent by registered mail to
the last known address of such owner.



(Ord. 96-38, § 16, 11-12-1996)



Sec. 2-716.  Federal Government's Contracts-Maintenance Of
Property-Penalties:



   A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its
agencies, including, without limitation, the department of housing and urban
development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible
for maintaining the property to prevent and correct village health and safety
code violations.



(Ord. 96-38, § 17, 11-12-1996)



Secs. 2-717-2-749.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XIX.  ETHICS1



1  Prior ordinance history: Ord. 99-21, 6-28-1999.



Sec. 2-750.  Definitions:



   For purposes of this article, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:



   Campaign For Elective Office: Any activity in furtherance of an effort
to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any
individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a
political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of
presidential or vice presidential electors, but does not include activities:
1) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or
administrative action, 2) relating to collective bargaining, or 3) that are
otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.



   Candidate: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to
fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the
ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code2.



2  10 ILCS 5/1-3.



   Collective Bargaining: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in
section 3 of the Illinois public labor relations act1.



1  5 ILCS 315/3.



   Compensated Time: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
article, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
"compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on
premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the
officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of
location. "Compensatory time off" means authorized time off earned by or
awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in
excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of
his or her employment.



   Contribution: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
9-1.4 of the election code2.



2  10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.



   Employee: A person employed by the village of Justice, whether on a
full time or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are
subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the
material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an
independent contractor.



   Employer: The village of Justice.



   Gift: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan,
forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value
including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for
speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or
the official position of an officer or employee.



   Leave Of Absence: Any period during which an employee does not receive:
1) compensation for employment, 2) service credit towards pension benefits,
and 3) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.



   Officer: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office
created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity.



   Political Activity: Any activity in support of or in connection with
any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: 1) relating to the support or opposition of any
executive, legislative, or administrative action, 2) relating to collective
bargaining, or 3) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official
duties.



   Political Organization: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a
statement of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk
under section 9-3 of the election code3, but only with regard to those
activities that require filing with the state board of elections or a county
clerk.



3  10 ILCS 5/9-3.



   Prohibited Political Activity:



      (1)    Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any
political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event.



      (2)    Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited
to, the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets
for any political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.



      (3)    Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing
any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign
contribution.



      (4)    Planning, conducting, or participating in a public
opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf
of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any
referendum question.



      (5)    Surveying or gathering information from potential or
actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection
with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization
for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.



      (6)    Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any
political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.



      (7)    Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective
office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question
or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls.



      (8)    Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating,
reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective
office or for or against any referendum question.



      (9)    Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for
elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for
elective office.



      (10)    Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate
questionnaires.



      (11)    Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing
campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of
any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.



      (12)    Campaigning for any elective office or for or against
any referendum question.



      (13)    Managing or working on a campaign for elective office
or for or against any referendum question.



      (14)    Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a
political party convention.



      (15)    Participating in any recount or challenge to the
outcome of any election.



   Prohibited Source: Any person or entity who:



      (1)    Is seeking official action: a) by an officer or b) by
an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;



      (2)    Does business or seeks to do business: a) with the
officer or b) with an employee, or with the officer or another employee
directing that employee;



      (3)    Conducts activities regulated: a) by the officer or b)
by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that
employee; or



      (4)    Has interests that may be substantially affected by the
performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or
employee.



(Ord. 2004-12, § 1, 5-10-2004; Ord. 2009-11, § 2, 5-26-2009)



Sec. 2-751.  Prohibited Political Activities:



   (a)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any
prohibited political activity during any "compensated time", as defined
herein. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or
resources of the village of Justice in connection with any prohibited
political activity.



   (b)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require
any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity:
1) as part of that officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of
employment, or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation
or personal time off).



   (c)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to
participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that
officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit,
whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off,
continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be
awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or
her participation in any prohibited political activity.



   (d)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are
permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her
official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee
on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this article.



   (e)   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to
recognized merit principles of public employment or 2) in a position the
salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is
subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel
administration applicable to grant in aid programs, shall be denied or
deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an
officer of a political committee, of a political party, or of a political
organization or club.



(Ord. 2004-12, § 1, 5-10-2004; Ord. 2009-11, § 2, 5-26-2009)



Sec. 2-752.  Gift Ban:



   (a)   Solicitation Or Acceptance Of Gifts: Except as permitted by
this section, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family
member living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein
as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any
"prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by
law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a
gift that violates this subsection.



   (b)   Exceptions: Subsection (a) of this section is not applicable
to the following:



      (1)    Opportunities, benefits, and services that are
available on the same conditions as for the general public.



      (2)    Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or
her spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value.



      (3)    Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the
election code or b) activities associated with a fundraising event in support
of a political organization or candidate.



      (4)    Educational materials and missions.



      (5)    Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.



      (6)    A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to
the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle,
aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,
stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half
brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or
grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.



      (7)    Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a
personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under
the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member
and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider
the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: a) the history
of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient
of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those
individuals; b) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the
individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax
deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and c) whether to the
actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at
the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees,
or their spouses or immediate family members.



      (8)    Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars
($75.00) per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food
or refreshments are: a) consumed on the premises from which they were
purchased or prepared or b) catered. For the purposes of this section,
"catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume
which are delivered by any means.



      (9)    Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other
benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside
activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or
employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the
official position or employment of the officer or employee, and are
customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.



      (10)    Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the
purpose of this article, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an
officer or employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental
gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or
employee of another governmental entity.



      (11)    Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.



      (12)    Any item or items from any one prohibited source
during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00).



         Each of the exceptions listed in this subsection is
mutually exclusive and independent of every other.



   (c)   Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, his or her
spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or employee,
does not violate this article if the recipient promptly takes reasonable
action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the
gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt
from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of
1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.



(Ord. 2004-12, § 1, 5-10-2004; Ord. 2009-11, § 2, 5-26-2009)



Sec. 2-753.  Ethics Advisor:



   (a)   The president of the board of trustees may, at its option,
with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, designate an ethics
advisor for the village of Justice. The duties of the ethics advisor may be
delegated to an officer or employee of the village of Justice unless the
position has been created as an office by the village of Justice.



   (b)   The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and
employees of the village of Justice concerning the interpretation of and
compliance with the provisions of this article and state ethics laws. The
ethics advisor shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the
village of Justice.



(Ord. 2004-12, § 1, 5-10-2004; Ord. 2009-11, § 2, 5-26-2009)



Sec. 2-754.  Ethics Commission:



   (a)   The president and board of trustees may, at its option, create
a commission to be known as the ethics commission of the village of Justice.
The commission shall be comprised of three (3) members appointed by the
president of the board of trustees with the advice and consent of the board
of trustees. No person shall be appointed as a member of the commission who
is related, either by blood or by marriage up to the degree of first cousin,
to any elected officer of the village of Justice.



   (b)   At the first meeting of the commission, the initial appointees
shall draw lots to determine their initial terms. Two (2) commissioners shall
serve two (2) year terms, and the third commissioner shall serve a one year
term. Thereafter, all commissioners shall be appointed to two (2) year terms.
Commissioners may be reappointed to serve subsequent terms.



      At the first meeting of the commission, the commissioners shall
choose a chairperson from their number. Meetings shall be held at the call of
the chairperson or any two (2) commissioners. A quorum shall consist of two
(2) commissioners, and official action by the commission shall require the
affirmative vote of two (2) members.



   (c)   The president of the board of trustees, with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees, may remove a commissioner in case of
incompetence, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office after service on the
commissioner by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a copy of the
written charges against the commissioner and after providing an opportunity
to be heard in person or by counsel upon not less than ten (10) days' notice.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments.



   (d)   The commission shall have the following powers and duties:



      (1)    To promulgate procedures and rules governing the
performance of its duties and the exercise of its powers.



      (2)    Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint,
to investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for
disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance with subsection 2-755(c) of
this article and refer violations of section 2-751 or 2-752 of this article
to the appropriate attorney for prosecution. The commission shall, however,
act only upon the receipt of a written complaint alleging a violation of this
article and not upon its own prerogative.



      (3)    To receive information from the public pertaining to
its investigations and to require additional information and documents from
persons who may have violated the provisions of this article.



      (4)    To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the
production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the
obligation of all officers and employees of the village of Justice to
cooperate with the commission during the course of its investigations.
Failure or refusal to cooperate with requests by the commission shall
constitute grounds for discipline or discharge.



      (5) The powers and duties of the commission are limited to
matters clearly within the purview of this article.



   (e)   (1)    Complaints alleging a violation of this article
shall be filed with the ethics commission.



      (2)    Within three (3) business days after the receipt of a
complaint, the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against
him or her and a copy of the complaint. The commission shall send by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of
the complaint to the complainant within three (3) business days after receipt
by the commission. The notices to the respondent and the complainant shall
also advise them of the date, time, and place of the meeting to determine the
sufficiency of the complaint and to establish whether probable cause exists
to proceed.



      (3)    Upon not less than forty eight (48) hours' public
notice, the commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint
and, if the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this
article, to determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence
presented by the complainant, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the
public to the extent authorized by the open meetings act. The commission
shall issue notice to the complainant and the respondent of the commission's
ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, on probable
cause to proceed within seven (7) business days after receiving the complaint.



         If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation
of section 2-752 of this article and there is a determination of probable
cause, then the commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing
date scheduled within four (4) weeks after the complaint's receipt.
Alternatively, the commission may elect to notify in writing the attorney
designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and request
that the complaint be adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed not
sufficient to allege a violation or if there is no determination of probable
cause, then the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a notice to the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint,
and that notice shall be made public.



         If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation
of section 2-751 of this article, then the commission shall notify in writing
the attorney designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such
actions and shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional
documents in the custody of the commission concerning the alleged violation.



      (4)    On the scheduled date and upon at least forty eight
(48) hours' public notice of the meeting, the commission shall conduct a
hearing on the complaint and shall allow both parties the opportunity to
present testimony and evidence. The hearing may be closed to the public only
if authorized by the open meetings act.



      (5)    Within thirty (30) days after the date the hearing or
any recessed hearing is concluded, the commission shall either: a) dismiss
the complaint or b) issue a recommendation for discipline to the alleged
violator and to the village president, or impose a fine upon the violator, or
both. The particular findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline,
and any fine imposed shall be a matter of public information.



      (6)    If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent
may file a written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven
(7) business days after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or
imposition of a fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the
enforcement of the recommendation or fine. Within fourteen (14) days after
receiving the demand, the commission shall conduct a public hearing on the
complaint upon at least forty eight (48) hours' public notice of the hearing
and allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence.
Within seven (7) days thereafter, the commission shall publicly issue a final
recommendation to the alleged violator and to the village president or impose
a fine upon the violator, or both.



      (7)    If a complaint is filed during the sixty (60) days
preceding the date of any election at which the respondent is a candidate,
the commission shall render its decision as required under subsection (e)(5)
of this section within seven (7) days after the complaint is filed, and
during the seven (7) days preceding that election, the commission shall
render such decision before the date of that election, if possible.



      (8)    The commission may fine any person who intentionally
violates any provision of section 2-752 of this article in an amount of not
less than one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The commission may fine any person who
knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a violation of this article in
an amount of not less than one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more
than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The commission may recommend any
appropriate discipline up to and including discharge.



      (9)    A complaint alleging the violation of this article must
be filed within one year after the alleged violation.



(Ord. 2004-12, § 1, 5-10-2004; Ord. 2009-11, § 2, 5-26-2009)



Sec. 2-755.  Penalties:



   (a)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
2-741 of this article may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three
hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).



   (b)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
2-752 of this article is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).



   (c)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of this article to the local enforcement
authorities, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may
be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364)
days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00).



   (d)   A violation of section 2-751 of this article shall be
prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for the village of Justice by
filing in the circuit court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such
offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal
procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the
defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.



      A violation of section 2-752 of this article may be prosecuted as
a quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the village of Justice, or, if an
ethics commission has been created, by the commission through the designated
administrative procedure.



   (e)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable,
whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates
any provision of section 2-751 or 2-752 of this article is subject to
discipline or discharge.



(Ord. 2004-12, § 1, 5-10-2004; Ord. 2009-11, § 2, 5-26-2009)



Secs. 2-756-2-759.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XX.  JUSTICE PARK DEPARTMENT



Sec. 2-760.  Department Created:



   There is hereby created the Justice parks department in and for the
purchase, establishment and maintenance of municipal lands to be designated
as public parks within the village of Justice.



(Ord. 2002-43, § 1, 9-23-2002)



Sec. 2-761.  Composition:



   The village president and board of trustees may appoint a grant
counselor to assist the village of Justice in the pursuit of and
administration of grant money for its municipal parks or such other officials
as the president and board of trustees see fit. All maintenance personnel
hired for the maintenance of the public parks and municipal lands shall be
under the supervision and control of the public works director. All Justice
park nonappointed employees shall follow the rules and regulations in this
code cited for administrative employees of the village of Justice.



(Ord. 2002-43, § 1, 9-23-2002)



Sec. 2-762.  Control; Compensation:



   The compensation and makeup of the Justice parks department shall be
subject to the control of the president and board of trustees of the village
at all times in the performance of their duties under the provisions hereof.
The compensation shall be in accordance with section 2-34 of this chapter.
Acquisition, leasing, purchase or conveyance of any nature and kind of lands
in and out of the Justice park department shall be at the sole determination
of the president and the board of trustees.



(Ord. 2002-43, § 1, 9-23-2002)



ARTICLE XXI.  CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER



Sec. 2-800.  Duties And Powers:



   The code enforcement officer shall have the following powers and duties:



   (a)   The code enforcement officer shall respond to and investigate
complaints regarding certain violations of this code of other ordinances or
regulations of the village (collectively, as used in this section, the
“laws”), and he may issue citations or warning letters to offending
responsible parties as warranted.



   (b)   The laws which the code enforcement officer will be
responsible for enforcing may include, but shall not be limited to, those
pertaining to abandoned or inoperable vehicles, illegal parking of vehicles,
vehicle licensing, amusement game machine licensing, animal complaints,
garbage issues, unsightly properties, business regulations, utility
regulations, and health and sanitation violations. The code enforcement
officer may also be requested, and is authorized, to assist the building
commissioner, or his designee, from time to time at the discretion of the
building commissioner, or his designee.



   (c)   On an as-needed basis, the code enforcement officer shall meet
with owners, tenants, contractors, developers, business, representatives, and
others to review and explain the requirements of the laws and violations or
potential violations thereof in order to secure compliance with the laws, and
shall draft and distribute a variety of correspondence, memoranda, notices,
flyers, brochures, media releases, and reports relating to enforcement of the
laws and actions related thereto.



   (d)   The code enforcement officer shall keep a careful and accurate
record of all warning citations, valid citations, issued letters and such
other work product as may be generated in consequence of his/her duties. The
code enforcement officer shall provide such information as may be necessary
to support the village attorney in judicial proceedings, administrative
hearings and such other enforcement actions as may be undertaken, and shall
testify in such proceedings regarding the work product generated in
consequence of his or her duties. If such testimony is required in deposition
or in court, the code enforcement officer shall be fully prepared for such
testimony, by reviewing reports, notes and other work product and by meeting
with other village officers and representatives of the village’s legal
counsel.



   (e)   The powers and duties enumerated in this section are intended
only as illustrations of the various types of work that may be performed by
the code enforcement officer, and shall not be deemed exhaustive. The
omission of specific duties from this section does not exclude them from
those to be performed by the code enforcement officer if the work is similar
or logically related to those set forth herein.



   (f)   The code enforcement officer shall have no authority to
enforce any violations which are exclusively set forth in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes, nor any moving motor vehicle offense.



   (g)   Nothing contained herein shall preclude the individual
appointed as code enforcement officer from also performing inspection or
enforcement duties related to those codes expressly adopted by the village
elsewhere in this code, including, but not limited to, those adopted in
chapters 4, 5 and 8 hereof.  (Ord. 2009-24, §3, 11-9-2009)



 


Notes

1 
65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq., 5/2-3-8,5/3.1-45-5.

2 
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-5, 5/3.1-45-5.

3 
30 ILCS 20/1; 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40.

4 
See chapters 4 and 9 of this code.

* 
Footnote is unavailable.  Please contact city.



CHAPTER 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS 1



   Art. I.   In General, §§ 3-1–3-35



   Art. II.   Home Occupations, §§ 3-38–3-60



   Art. III.   License Fees, §§ 3-61–3-80



   Art. IV.   Alcoholic Liquor, §§ 3-81–3-120



   Art. V.   Special Events and Automatic Amusement Devices and
Electronic Games, §§ 3-121–3-174



      Div. 1.   Special Events, §§ 3-121–3-150



      Div. 2.   Automatic Amusement Devices And Electronic Games,
§§ 3-151–3-175



   Art. VI.   Cleaners And Dyers, §§ 3-176–3-205



   Art. VII.   Self-Service Laundries, §§ 3-206–3-240



   Art. VIII.   Childcare Homes, §§ 3-241–3-270



   Art. IX.   Junkyards, §§ 3-271–3-295



   Art. X.   Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers, §§ 3- 296–3-320



      Div. 1.   In General, §§ 3-296–3-301



      Div. 2.   Permit Provisions, §§ 3-302–3-313



      Div. 3.   Time, Place and Manner, §§ 3-314–3-318



   Art. XI.   Taxicabs, §§ 3-321–3-380



   Art. XII.   Scavengers, §§ 3-381–3-405



   Art. XIII.   Mobile Homes And Mobile Home Parks, §§ 3-406–3-450



   Art. XIV.   Sales On Private Residence Property, §§ 3-451–3-475



   Art. XV.   Hospitals, §§ 3-476–3-500



   Art. XVI.   Massage Parlors, §§ 3-501–3-520



   Art. XVII.   Veterinary Hospitals, §§ 3-521–3-540



   Art. XVIII.   Cable Television Franchise, §§ 3-541–3-569



   Art. XIX.   Lingerie Modeling, §§ 3-570–3-599



   Art. XX.   Firearms And Assault Weapon Control, §§ 3-600–3-609



   Art. XXI.   Adult Entertainment, §§ 3-610–3-649



   Art. XXII.   Regulation Of Tobacco Products, §§ 3-650–3-669.2



   Art. XXIII.   Trailer Beds, §§ 3-670–3-679



   Art. XXIV.   Automatic External Defibrillators, §§ 3-680–3-683



   Art. XXV.   Public Nuisance Properties, §§ 3-684–3-689



   Art. XXVI.   Precious Gems Businesses, §§ 3-690–3-710



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



Sec. 3-1.  Penalty:



   Any person who shall be convicted of violating any provision of this
article shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-17; Ord. 76-7, 5-6-1976; Ord. 2002-18, § 1, 5-28-2002)



Sec. 3-2.  License And Permit Applications1,2:



   Applications for all licenses and permits required by this code or
other ordinance shall be made in writing to the village municipal services
administrator in the absence of any provision to the contrary. Each
application shall contain: a) the name of the applicant, b) the permit or
license desired, c) the location to be used, if any, d) the time covered, and
e) the fee to be paid. Each application also shall contain the number of the
certificate of registration required under the retailers’ occupation tax
act and/or use tax act, if applicable, showing an address within the village.
Each application shall contain such additional information as may be needed
for the proper guidance of the village officials in the issuing of the
license or permit applied for.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-1; Ord. 96-3, § 1, 2-12-1996; Ord. 2009-15, § 8,
6-22-2009; Ord. 2009-27, § 2, 11-23-2009)



1 See § 2-403, "Use Tax", of this code; retailers' occupation tax, § 2-421
et seq., of this code.



2  35 ILCS 105/1 et seq., 120/1 et seq.



Sec. 3-3.  Persons Subject To License:



   Whenever in this code or other ordinance a license or permit is
required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or
establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or
occupation, any person shall be subject to the requirement if, by himself or
through an agent, employee or partner, he is held forth as being engaged in
the business, activity or occupation, or if he solicits patronage therefor,
actively or passively; or if he performs or attempts to perform any part of
such business, activity or occupation in the village. No license shall be
transferable from one individual to another without proper application and
appropriate fees paid.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-2)



Sec. 3-4.  Forms; Signatures:



   Forms for all licenses and permits and applications therefor shall be
prepared and kept on file by the municipal services administrator.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-3; Ord. 2009-15, § 8, 6-22-2009; Ord. 2009-27, § 3,
11-23-2009)



Sec. 3-5.  Investigations And Inspections:



   (a)   Upon the receipt of an application for a license, permit, or
renewal, a building and fire inspection or investigation, or any other
inspection or investigation the village board or building commissioner deems
reasonable, necessary, or appropriate, is required before issuance of such
renewal, permit or license.



   (b)   Within forty eight (48) hours of such receipt, municipal
services administrator shall refer the application to the appropriate
officials to conduct such investigation or inspection.



   (c)   The officials to whom the application has been referred shall
make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after
receiving such application or a copy thereof.



   (d)   The health officer shall make or cause to be made an
inspection regarding such permits and licenses as relates to the care and
handling of food, the prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease, and
the protection of health. The building department shall make or cause to be
made any inspections, which relate to compliance with the building code,
zoning ordinance and other related regulations. The fire inspector shall make
or cause to be made any inspection which relate to compliance of the fire
prevention and protection, life safety codes and other rules and regulations.
All other investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by
the chief of police or by some other officer designated by the village
president.



   (e)   Upon receipt of all related investigative reports, the
municipal services administrator shall forward such reports, together with
the application, to the village president and board of trustees for
evaluation and determination.



   (f)   If it shall appear to the corporate authorities that the
matters and circumstances relating to an application require further
information before a proper determination can be made, such application shall
be returned to the municipal services administrator for the inclusion of such
additional information as may be specified necessary and appropriate.



   (g)   If, after due consideration of the information contained
within the application and the related investigative reports, the corporate
authorities shall determine that the matters concerning the application are
unsatisfactory, they may disapprove such application, indicating the reasons
therefor. Thereupon, the municipal services administrator shall be directed
to promptly notify the applicant that his application is disapproved, and
that no license or permit will be issued.



   (h)   If, after due consideration of the information contained
within the application and the related investigative reports, the corporate
authorities shall determine that the application is satisfactory, they shall
approve the application. Thereupon, the municipal services administrator
shall be directed to promptly notify the applicant that his application is
approved, and the license or permit may be issued.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-4; Ord. 2002-18, § 2, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2009-15, § 8,
6-22-2009; Ord. 2009-27, § 4, 11-23-2009)



Sec. 3-6.  Fees:



   In the absence of any provision to the contrary, all fees and charges
for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application
therefor is made to the village municipal services administrator in the
amounts prescribed in the schedule set forth in section 13-1, “Rates and
Fees”, of this code. When an applicant has not engaged in the business or
activity until after the expiration of part of the current license year the
license fee shall be prorated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter
or fraction thereof during which the business or activity has been or will be
conducted. Except as otherwise provided, all license and permit fees shall
become a part of the corporate fund. In no event shall any rebate or refund
be made of any license or permit fee, or part thereof, by reason of death or
departure of the licensee or permittee; nor shall any rebate or refund be
made by reason of nonuse of the license or discontinuance of the operation or
conduct of the licensed establishment, business or activity.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-5; Ord. 2009-05, § 2, 3-9-2009; Ord. 2009-15, § 8,
6-22-2009; Ord. 2009-27, § 5, 11-23-2009)



Sec. 3-7.  Termination Of Licenses:



   (a)   All annual licenses shall be operative and the license year
for the village shall commence on January 1 of each year and shall terminate
on December 31 of the same year, where no provision to the contrary is made.



   (b)   The municipal services administrator shall notify all business
licensees of the village of the time of expiration of the license held by the
licensee, if an annual, three (3) weeks prior to the date of such expiration;
provided, however, that a failure to make such notification, or the failure
of the licensee to receive it, shall not excuse the licensee from the
obligation to obtain a new license, or a renewal thereof; nor shall it be a
defense in action based upon operation without a license.



(Code 1972, §3-1-6; Ord. 2009-05, § 3, 3-9-2009; Ord. 2009-15, § 8,
6-22-2009; Ord. 2009-27, § 6, 11-23-2009)



Sec. 3-8.  Building; Premises:



   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no
permit shall be issued for any purpose or activity, if the premises and
building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the village and the state.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-7)



Sec. 3-9.  Change Of Location:



   The location of any licensed business or occupation, or the location of
any permitted act, may be changed provided that ten (10) days’ notice
thereof is given to the village municipal services administrator in the
absence of any provision to the contrary; provided, however, that all
applicable ordinances and regulations of the village shall be complied with.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-8; Ord. 2009-15, § 8, 6-22-2009; Ord. 2009-27, § 7,
11-23-2009)



Sec. 3-10.  Separate License For Each Location:



   No license for the operation of a business or establishment in the
village shall be construed to permit the operation of a licensed business or
establishment in more than one location in the village; a separate license
shall be required for each location of a licensed establishment. For the
purposes of this section, the existence of a single location shall be
evidenced by the fact that all buildings containing the principal or
accessory uses shall be connected or shall be located on the same lot or
parcel, shall be operated and managed by the same person or owner, and shall
be an establishment with the same classification.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-9)



Sec. 3-11.  Nuisances Prohibited1:



   (a)   Generally: No business or establishment, whether or not
licensed, shall be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in
fact; and no building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises or part
thereof shall be used, kept, maintained or operated in connection with any
business or establishment so as to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be
dangerous to life or detrimental to health.



   (b)   Unsafe Or Unhealthful Business:



      (1)    No building or structure utilized, constructed or
maintained in connection with any business or occupation shall evidence an
unsanitary, unsafe or dangerous condition.



      (2)    No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatever,
which shall be dangerous or detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist
in connection with any business or occupation or be used in any work or labor
performed in the village.



   (c)   Refuse Disposal:



      (1)   Duty To Provide Refuse Containers: The occupant of every
building, structure or premises used or maintained in connection with any
business or occupation shall provide and maintain in good condition and
repair a sufficient number of refuse containers for the temporary storage of
all refuse accumulating between collections. All refuse which is placed for
collection service outside any building or structure must be kept in refuse
containers with tightly closed lids.



      (2)   Refuse Container Enclosures: Industrial and commercial
buildings must enclose the refuse containers with an opaque fence or other
structure on three sides. This enclosure must be approved by the building
commissioner and permits must be secured prior to construction. The
dimensions of the enclosure will be established by the building commissioner.
Commercially owned containers moved to or located beyond the restricted areas
will be ticketed and removed by the village. The ticket may be issued to both
the owner of the container and the property owner. Containers may be
retrieved during normal business hours after payment of the ticket fine and a
removal fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). Fees may be increased for large
containers, such as roll off boxes, if extra time or labor is needed, and
will be set by the public works director at an hourly rate per worker.



      (3)   Refuse Removal: It shall be the duty of the occupant of
every building, structure or premises used or maintained in connection with
any business or occupation to cause to be removed at his own cost and expense
at least once each week all refuse produced therein.



      (4)   Removal Of Restaurant Garbage: Every person owning or
controlling any hotel, restaurant, café or retail food establishment shall
cause all garbage to be placed in sanitary refuse containers and shall cause
all substances deposited in such containers to be removed daily from his
premises and to be disposed of at his own expense.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-10; Ord. 2009-27, § 8, 11-23-2009)



1  See chapter 5, "Health And Sanitation", of this code; chapter 8,
"Planning And Development", of this code.



Sec. 3-12.  Working Conditions:



   (a)   Health Requirements: No owner, lessee, manager or
superintendent of any store, factory, workshop or other place where persons
are employed shall cause or permit such place, or any room or part thereof,
to be overcrowded or inadequate or faulty with respect to light, ventilation,
heat or cleanliness.



   (b)   Sanitation: All such places of employment shall be kept in a
clean condition, free from the effluvium of a sewer, drain, privy, stable or
other nuisance; also as far as practicable such premises shall be free from
all gases, vapors, dust or other impurities generated by manufacturing
processes or otherwise which are injurious to health. Sufficient washroom
facilities for male and female employees shall be provided and such
facilities shall be properly ventilated.



   (c)   Heat Required:



      (1)   It shall be the duty of every person owning or
controlling the heating plant which furnishes heat to any factory or workshop
to maintain a temperature within such factory or workshop of not less than
sixty five  degrees Fahrenheit (65°F) without such undue restriction of
ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions therein;
provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to any factory or
workshop where business conducted therein is of such a nature that a higher
or lower temperature than sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65°F) is necessary
or expedient for the work or manufacturing processes of such business.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating
any apartment building, commercial building, factory, or other structure of
any kind or description in which persons reside or are employed, to maintain
a minimum temperature of less than sixty five (65) degrees Fahrenheit in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.



   (d)   Inspection: The health officer or an inspector designated by
the building commissioner shall have the right and duty to inspect the
premises for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the provisions of
this section are being complied with from time to time.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-11; Ord. 2009-05, § 4, 3-9-2009)



Sec. 3-13.  Certificate Of Building Inspection:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is the purchaser of a
commercial property or unit to occupy the same until a certificate of
building inspection without any deficiencies has been issued for the subject
premises, within the prior three (3) months. This section shall apply to the
sale of the entire building.



   (b)   At the time of inspection, the owner must provide the building
commissioner a copy of all paid bills showing no arrearages, including sewer,
water and garbage bills. No certificate shall be issued until all such bills
have been paid.



   (c)   For purposes of this section, the following words shall have
the meanings set forth below:



   Lease And Rental Contract: The transfer of occupancy rights in real
property for consideration even if no written agreement is entered into.



   Owner: The titleholder of the real property, including, but not limited
to, the beneficiaries of a land trust, all partners in a partnership, the
officers of a corporation or any agent thereof, and the owner of shares in a
cooperative association.



   Sale: The transfer for consideration of the title to real estate and
includes the purchase of the share in a cooperative association or a
corporation.



   (d)   All applications for a certificate of building inspection
shall be made on such forms as prescribed by the building commissioner. The
building commissioner shall issue a report within ten (10) days after gaining
access to the subject property, whether by consent or by warrant, and after
the payment of the applicable inspection fees.



   (e)   The building commissioner may order additional inspections,
including, but not limited to, structure, drainage, plumbing, electrical,
health and fire protection and prevention. Each such inspection will be made
after payment of a fee as set forth in section 13-1 of this code, for each
inspection. All deficiencies shall be noted on the report.



   (f)   All deficiencies shall be corrected prior to the issuance of
the certificate of inspection and any new business taking occupancy.



   (g)   Upon all inspections being passed, the building commissioner
shall issue a certificate of inspection.



   (h)   Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect any
property, no entry or inspection shall be made without procurement of a
warrant from the circuit court of the county. The court may consider any of
the following factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in
its decision as to whether a warrant shall be issued:



      (1)   Eyewitness account of violation;



      (2)   Citizen complaints;



      (3)   Tenant complaints;



      (4)   Plain view violations;



      (5)   Violations apparent from village records;



      (6)   Property deterioration;



      (7)   Age of property;



      (8)   Nature of alleged violation;



      (9)   Similar properties in the area;



      (10)   Documented violations of similar properties in the area;



      (11)   Passage of time since last inspection;



      (12)   Previous violation on the property.



   Cause for issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist in light of
reasonable legislative and administrative standards which show that there is
a reason to believe that a condition of nonconformity exists with respect to
a particular property in violation of a village ordinance.



   (i)   All violations existing on the property run with the land
irrespective of the failure to act of a previous owner or tenant.



   (j)   The village does not guarantee the condition of the subject
property and is not responsible for any claims arising out of the subject
property or the condition thereof. The village does not warrant that all
deficiencies are listed in a certificate of inspection and does not warrant
anything as to the condition of the property or the habitability thereof.



   (k)   Ordinance 2002-18 codified as this section, shall be recorded
with the Cook County recorder of deeds in order that the requirement of a
certificate of housing inspection shall appear as a restriction on all title
commitments issued on all property located within the village, and no closing
shall take place without such certificate.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-12; Ord. 2002-18, § 3, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2007-29, § 1,
11-12-2007; Ord. 2009-27, § 9, 11-23-2009)



Sec. 3-14.  Suspension, Revocation Of License Or Permit:



   (a)   The Village President is authorized to summarily close any
business or establishment, whether or not licensed, whose operations
constitute a clear and present danger to the public health, safety and
welfare. The Village President shall provide a post-closure hearing,
affording the licensee, permittee or interested party the opportunity to
contest the summary closure.



   (b)   The Village President is authorized to suspend, revoke or
refuse to renew a license or permit for just cause. Just cause includes, but
is not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement
contained in the application for the license or permit;



      (2)   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of any
Illinois statute or regulation, federal statute or regulation, Cook County
ordinance, or provision of the Village Code of the Village of Justice
relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or
permit or the premises occupied;



      (3)   A criminal conviction or violation of the Village Code
of the Village of Justice by the licensee or permittee which indicates the
inability to operate a safe, honest and legitimate business operation;



      (4)   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine,
fee or penalty owed to the Village.



      (5)   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any
interference with a duly authorized Village officer or employee while in the
performance of his duties in making such inspections, as provided in section
3-13.



The Village President is also authorized to impose a fine, not to exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) in addition to ordering the suspension,
revocation or non-renewal of the license or permit.



For purposes of this section, a licensee or permittee shall include its
shareholders, employees and partners.



   (c)   Any suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of a license or
permit shall not preclude the prosecution or imposition of any other
penalties provided for the violation of the provisions of the Village Code of
the Village of Justice.



   (d)   Except as provided for in subsection (a), the licensee or
permittee shall be afforded written notice of the charges and a hearing
before the Village President prior to the suspension, revocation or
non-renewal of the license or permit at issue. All parties shall have the
right to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The parties may submit
a proposed finding of fact and decision at the conclusion of the hearing. No
continuances shall be granted except for good cause. The Village President is
authorized to make a ruling immediately upon the conclusion of the hearing,
with a written decision to follow.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-13; Ord. 2013-14, § 1 (part), 9-9-2013)



Sec. 3-15.  Appeals:



   The decision of the Village President is subject to judicial review by
common law certiorari.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-14; Ord. 2009-15, § 8, 6-22-2009; Ord. 2013-14, § 1
(part), 9-9-2013)



Sec. 3-16. License To Be Posted:



   It shall be the duty of every person conducting a licensed business in
the village to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises
used for such business at all times.



(Code 1972, § 3-1-15)



Sec. 3-17.  Payment Of All Taxes And Fees:



   Before any license or permit shall be accepted by the municipal
services administrator, the applicant must produce evidence in the form of a
paid tax bill or cancelled check that all outstanding real estate taxes have
been paid in full. No application will be accepted if any fees are due, or
bills unpaid to the village.



(Ord. No. 94-13, § 1, 6-27-94)



Sec. 3-18.  Business Rental/Lease Agreements:



   Any building owner of a business establishment, who wishes to rent or
lease any portion of their building to a business tenant shall have a written
lease agreement which, at a minimum, includes the following information:



   (a)   Terms And Conditions:



      (1)   The landlord/building owner and tenant may include in a
rental or lease agreement terms and conditions not prohibited by this article
and other rules of law, including rent, term of the agreement and other
provisions governing the rights and obligations of the parties.



      (2)   All rental or lease agreements between
landlords/building owners and tenants must be in writing, dated and signed by
both parties with signed copies provided to both at the time of signing.



      (3)   The lease shall inform the tenant that the interior of
the unit may be subject to regular inspection and/or investigation by the
village of complaints of violations for compliance with village codes to
ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the public.



      (4)   The landlord/building owner shall place in the agreement
a section which states, that it shall be the tenants obligation to obtain a
business license from the village of Justice prior to the commencement of any
business activity under said rental or lease agreement.



   (b)   Prohibited Provisions: Except as otherwise provided by this
article, no rental or lease agreement may provide that the tenant or the
landlord/building owner agrees to waiver or to forego rights or remedies
under this article.



(Ord. 2009-05, § 5, 3-9-2009; Ord. 2009-27, § 9, 11-23-2009)



Secs. 3-19-3-35.  Reserved:



ARTICLE II. HOME OCCUPATIONS1 2



1  See Chapter 12 of this Code.



Sec. 3-36.  Definition; Revocable Use:



   (a)   As used in this article, “home occupation” means an
accessory use conducted completely within a dwelling unit in an R-1, R-2,
R-2A, R-3 and R-5 zoning classification. The occupation shall be carried on
by any member of the immediate family residing on the premises, clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes.
Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the area of the dwelling unit
shall be devoted to the home occupation.



   (b)   Home occupations in such residential districts shall be
considered as a revocable special use. A homeowner who wishes to conduct
business in a multi- family or rental unit, must have a letter of approval
from the landlord, manager, or provide proof of ownership. When such
occupation impinges on the rights and privileges of surrounding neighbors,
the use shall be revoked by the village board.



(Ord. No. 87-32, § 1, 11-23-1987; Ord. 2009-05, § 6, 3-9-2009)



Sec. 3-37.  General Regulations:



   (a)   Signs. There shall be no signs of any type, advertising
methods or displays or activities to indicate from the exterior that the
building is being used, in part, for any purpose other than that of a
dwelling.



   (b)   Sales. No substantial amount of stock-in-trade shall be kept
on the premises. No commodities shall be sold on the premises except
preordered merchandise. Such merchandise shall be limited to specialty goods
only and shall not include general merchandise.



   (c)   Equipment. No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be used
or stored except such as is permissible for domestic or household purposes,
except that small business office equipment is permissible such as
typewriters, calculators, etc.



   (d)   Advertising. Media advertising shall be limited to name,
occupational specialty, an office mail drop or post office box or telephone
number and shall specify that personal contact is by appointment only. The
address of the dwelling unit shall not be used in any advertising.



   (e)   Conduct of business. All activities, including storage, shall
be conducted completely within the dwelling unit or accessory structure and
in no case shall there be visible outside storage of goods, supplies or
equipment.



   (f)   Noise, odors, smoke, etc. There shall be no perceptible noise,
odor, smoke, electrical interference or vibration emanating from the
structure in which the home occupation functions.



   (g)   Vehicle permitted. There shall be not more than one truck on
the premises, which shall not exceed a three-quarters (3/4) ton capacity,
parked behind the building line.



   (h)   Professional and religious. A professional person may use his
residence for consultations, emergency treatment, or the performance of
religious rites but not for the general practice of his profession.



(Ord. No. 87-32, § 1, 11-23-1987)



Sec. 3-38.  Permitted Uses:



   Permitted home occupations are limited to the following list of
occupations:



   (1)   Beauty shops and barbershops, with not more than one operator,
who shall be a resident of the dwelling unit in which the home occupation is
permitted.



   (2)   Babysitting services, provided that no more than six (6)
children are cared for at any one time. The maximum of children includes the
natural or adopted children of the person operating the babysitting service
who reside at the dwelling unit.



   (3)   Instruction or tutoring in music, dance, homecrafts and the
arts and sciences, provided that the total class size does not exceed four
(4) students at any one time.



   (4)   Offices for architects, brokers, engineers, insurance agents,
lawyers, real estate agents, accountants, bookkeepers, teachers, urban
planners, consultants, election and political campaigns, editors, reporters,
publishers, contract management, landscape design, building tradesmen,
building contractors, housecleaning services, surveyors, landscapers, tour
brokers, travel agents and stamp and coin dealers.



      (a)   If the home occupation is a building tradesman or
building contractor, and work is to be performed outside of the home within
the village limits, in addition to the home occupant license, the home
occupant licensee must obtain a work permit in accordance with section 8-45
of this code.



   (5)   Offices for medical and dental practitioners, marriage
counselors, family counselors and psychologists.



   (6)   Offices for duly ordained leaders of religious and/or
spiritual communities.



   (7)   Offices for salesmen, sales representatives or
manufacturer’s representatives, provided that no wholesale or retail
transactions shall be made on the premises except through telephone,
telegraph or mail communication.



   (8)   Repair services (not including retail sales, and provided
further that no repair of motor vehicles shall be permitted), catering
services, chauffeur services, cartography services, vending machine services,
typing services, strike-on or phototype typesetting services, rubber stamp
making services, upholstering services, locksmith services and taxidermists.



   (9)   Studios for artists, authors, composers, photographers,
sculptors, dress designers and needleworkers.



   (10)   Work rooms of dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors.



   (11)   Work rooms for home crafts, such as model making, doll
repair, rug weaving, lapidary work and cabinet carving, provided that no
machinery or equipment shall be used or employed other than that which would
customarily be used in connection with a hobby or avocation.



(Ord. 87-32, § 1, 11-23-1987; Ord. 2009-05, § 7, 3-9-2009)



Sec. 3-39.  Special Uses:



   Any occupation not listed in this article may be considered by the
board upon special request by the homeowner or occupant of the premises. It
shall be solely and exclusively within the discretion of the board to grant
or deny such use, taking into consideration the various factors specified
herein.



(Ord. 87-32, § 1, 11-23-1987)



Sec. 3-40.  Presumptions:



   Any of the following facts shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption
that a home occupation is being conducted at or from any residential premises:



      (1)    Advertising or notices of any type whatsoever which
indicate that the address of any business or occupation is located at any
premises in any residence district.



      (2)    Advertising or notices of any type whatsoever which
indicate that the telephone number of any business or occupation is for a
phone located at any premises in any residence district.



      (3)    Utility bills for any business or occupation which
indicate that the service address for any such business or occupation is
located at any premises in any residence district.



      (4)    Reports, returns or other documents required to be
filed with any governmental body which indicate that the address of any
business or occupation is located at any premises in any residential district.



      (5)    Letterheads, invoices, statements of account, estimates
or any other documentation which indicates that a business or occupation is
located at any premises in any residence district.



      (6)    That any United States mail, parcel service or other
carrier's deliveries or pick ups for any business or occupation are made at
or from any premises located in any residence district.



(Ord. 87-32, § 1, 11-23-1987)



Sec. 3-41.  Registration Fee:



   (a)   A fee as set forth in section 13-1 of this code is set to
register home occupations as defined in section 3-36 of this article.



   (b)   The following information shall be provided the municipal
services administrator upon such registration, as a condition of doing
business within the village:



      (1)    The name of the owner, owners, or principal
shareholders;



      (2)    The addresses of offices located within the corporate
boundaries of the village;



      (3)    A brief description of the nature of the business
conducted;



      (4)   Such other information as may be required by the board
for the protection of the public health, safety or welfare of the patrons of
such business, their employees and the general public;



      (5)   Home occupation licenses in multiple-family or rental
units must have a letter of approval from the landlord and/or manager or have
proof of ownership.



   (c)   The provisions of section 3-7 of this chapter shall apply to
such registration.



(Code 1972; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2009-15, § 9, 6-22-2009; Ord.
2009-27, § 11, 11-23-2009; Ord. 2012-24, § 16, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-42.   Payment Of Fees Due The Village:



   Before any home occupation license application or permit shall be
accepted by the municipal services administrator, the applicant must produce
evidence that all outstanding fees; sewer and garbage bills; or other debts
owed to the village of Justice are paid in full.



(Ord. 2012-24, § 17, 9-24-2012)



Secs. 3-43-3-60.   Reserved:



ARTICLE III.  LICENSE FEES1



1  See §§ 1-8, 2-181, 2-226, 2-401 of this code.



Sec. 3-61.  Schedule Of License Fees:



   Certain license fees are specified in section 13-1, "Rates And Fees",
of this code.



(Code 1972, §§ 3-1A-1, 3-18-1, 3-18-2; Ord. 76-7, 5-6-1976; Ord. 78-57,
10-19-1978; Ord. 87-2, 2-23-1987; Ord. 95-27, § 1, 11-13-1995; Ord. 97-6, §
4, 3-10-1997; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2008-10, § 5, 3-10-2008)



Sec. 3-62.  Miscellaneous Businesses:



(Rep. by Ord. 97-6, § 4, 3-10-1997)



Sec. 3-63.  Inspection Fees:



   (a)   New Licenses: The fees to be charged for inspections for each
building department agent, fire inspector, and if food is sold on the
premises, the health officer shall be at the rates prescribed in the schedule
set forth in section 13-1, “Rates and Fees”, of this code for each
inspection and an administration fee as set forth in section 13-1, “Rates
and Fees”. This fee is non-refundable and will not be returned if the
application for license is not approved or if withdrawn by the applicant.



   (b)   Existing Businesses: Before the renewal of any business
license, all premises shall be re-inspected by building department agents as
deemed necessary by the building commissioner. The Fire Inspector shall also
make an annual inspection. In addition, if food is sold on the premises, the
health officer shall also make an inspection. Inspection fees, and any
necessary re-inspection fees, shall be at a rate prescribed in the schedule
set forth in section 13-1, “Rates and Fees”, of this code. All business
license applications shall be accompanied by the inspection fee plus the
license fee as listed in this code, prior to approval by the village board.



   (c)   Additional Inspections: If additional inspections are
required, the municipal services administrator shall collect such amounts
from the applicant prior to the issuance of the business license.



   (d)   Penalty: Any person who requires a village registration
license and is delinquent in paying the yearly inspection fees shall be
charged a penalty in the amount prescribed in the schedule set forth in
section 13-1, “Rates and Fees”, of this code for each month such
inspection fees remain unpaid.



(Code 1972, § 3-1A-3; Ord. 85-24, 12-9-1985; Ord. 91-14, § 1, 6-10-1991;
Ord. 92-14, §§ 1, 2, 3-23-1992; Ord. 2009-05, § 8, 3-9-2009; Ord. 2009-15,
§ 10, 6-22-2009; Ord. 2009-27, § 12, 11-23-2009)



Sec. 3-64.  Delinquent Fees:



   (a)   Any person who is delinquent in his or her business license
fee shall be charged a one hundred dollar ($100.00) penalty for each and
every month such fee remains delinquent.



   (b)   Any person who is delinquent in their home occupation license
fee shall be charged a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) penalty for each and every
month such fee remains delinquent.



   (c)   All penalties must be paid before any license shall be granted.



(Ord. 88-17, § 1, 7-25-1988; Ord. 2012-24, § 18, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-65.  License Fees-Modular Units; Temporary Structures:



   If occupancy of a temporary structure is allowed by action of the
village board, in addition to other fees, a yearly license fee of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year is hereby established for all
businesses operating out of modular units, trailers, or temporary structures.
This fee shall be effective for the license year beginning on May 1, 1997.



(Ord. 97-9, § 1, 3-24-1997)



Sec. 3-66.   Raffles:



   (a)   License Required: No person may conduct any raffle except in
compliance with the provisions of this section after obtaining a license from
the village.



   (b)   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the definitions set
forth in the Raffles Act (230 ILCS 15/0.01, et seq.) shall apply.



   (c)   Applications for License:



      (1)   Licenses may be issued to bona fide nonprofit business,
religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans'
organizations which have been in existence continuously for a period of five
(5) years immediately before making application for a license and which have
had during that entire five- (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged
in carrying out their objectives; or to a non-profit fundraising organization
that the licensing authority determines is organized for the sole purpose of
providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of
individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness,
disability, accident or disaster.



      (2)   The applicant must specify the area or areas within the
village in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period
during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination
of winning chances, and the location or locations at which winning chances
will be determined.



      (3)   The license application shall be on a form prescribed by
the village and must contain a sworn statement of the presiding officer and
the secretary of their organization that the organization is qualified to
hold a license under the provisions of this section.



      (4)   A license shall be valid only for the specified number
of raffles during a period not to exceed one year.



   (d)   License Fees:



      (1)   The license fee for each raffle conducted under the
terms of this section shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per event.



      (2)   License fees may be waived by the village president.



   (e)   License Issue Restrictions: No such license shall be issued to:



      (1)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony.



      (2)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or
gambling promoter.



      (3)   Any person who is not of good moral character.



      (4)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in
subsections (1), (2) or (3) above has a proprietary, equitable or credit
interest, or in which such a person is active or employed.



      (5)   Any organization in which a person in subsections (1),
(2) or (3) of this section is an officer, director of employee, whether
compensated or not.



      (6)   Any organization in which a person defined in
subsections (1), (2) or (3) above is to participate in the management or
operation of a raffle as defined in this section.



   (f)   Conduct of Raffles: The conducting of raffles is subject to
the following restrictions:



      (1)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to
conduct that game.



      (2)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring
organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.



      (3)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle.



      (4)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the
winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also
licensed under this section.



      (5)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the
area specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at
those locations specified on the licenses.



      (6)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may
participate in the conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age
of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being
determined only when accompanied, by his or her parent or guardian.



   (g)   Raffles Manager, Bond: All operation of and the conduct of
raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated
by the organization. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of an
amount determined by the village clerk in favor of the organization
conditioned upon his or her honesty in the performance of his or her duties.
Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the
licensing authority not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation.
The village clerk may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver
provision in the license issued to an organization under this section
provided that a unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization
has approved the waiver of the raffles manager's bond.



   (h)   Records:



      (1)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and
chances shall keep the records of its gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are
determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or
occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the
amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for
the deductions, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be
itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.



      (2)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs
shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo
gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit
organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization
shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross
receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not
be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.



      (3)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall
report within seven (7) days after determination of the winners to the
village and to its membership, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds
from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in
this section.



      (4)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for
three (3) years and organizations shall make available their records relating
to operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.



   (i)   Additional Restrictions:



      (1)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes and merchandise
awarded by a licensee in a single raffle should not exceed two hundred
thousand dollars ($200,000.00).



      (2)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded in a
single raffle should not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).



      (3)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle
chance issued or sold shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).



      (4)   The maximum period for which chances may be issued or
sold is nine (9) months.



   (j)   Penalty: Failure to obtain a license and comply with the
regulations as prescribed in this section shall result in a fine of not less
than twenty-five ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for any one offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be held to have
been committed each day any person continues to violate any of the provisions
hereof. Other penalties may exist under state law 230 ILCS 15/7. (Ord.
2014-11, § 1, 8-25-2014)



Secs. 3-67-3-80.  Reserved:



ARTICLE IV.  ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR1,2



1 See §§ 7-24 and 7-261 of this Code.



2  235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq., 5/4-1.



Sec. 3-81.  Definitions3:



   Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in
this article shall be construed according to the definitions given below:



   Alcoholic Liquor: Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume,
which is fit for beverage purposes.



   Club: A corporation organized under laws of this state not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than
the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by
its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or by
using a building, or space in a building, of such extent and character as may
be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and
accommodations of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and
adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a
sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and
serving food and meals for its members and their guests; provided, that such
club files with the village president at the time of its application for a
license under this chapter two (2) copies of a list of names and residences
of its members, and similarly files within ten (10) days of the election of
any additional member his name and address, and provided further that its
affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive
committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting, and
that no member or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or
directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation
any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or
the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount
of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members
or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general
revenue of the club.



   Hotel: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually
served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay
to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent, or residential, in
which twenty-five (25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations
of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms where meals are
served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being
conducted in the same building or buildings in connection therewith and such
building or buildings, structure or structures being provided with adequate
and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.



   Restaurant: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are
actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space
being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment
and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of
employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.



   Retail Sale: The sale for use or consumption, and not for resale.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-1)



3  235 ILCS 5/1-3 et seq.



Sec. 3-82.  License-Required:



   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the village
any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license, or in
violation of the terms of such license. The president and board of trustees
will name an approved course of alcohol addiction and awareness from time to
time to be required under various sections of this Code.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-2; Ord. 92-13, § 3, 3-23-92)



Sec. 3-83.  License - Application:



   (a)   Applications for licenses under this article shall be made to
the village president in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual,
or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by
oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following information and statements:



      (1)   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case
of an individual; in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to
share in the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation for profit, or
a club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized,
the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority in
interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one (1) person or his
or her nominees, the name and address of such person;



      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of
birth and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her
naturalization;



      (3)   The character of business of the applicant and, in case
of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed;



      (4)   The length of time that the applicant has been in
business of that character or, in the case of a corporation, the date on
which its charter was issued;



      (5)   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at
the time application is made;



      (6)   The location and description of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated under such license;



      (7)   A statement whether applicant has made similar
application for a similar other license on premises other than described in
this application and the disposition of such application;



      (8)   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a
felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter
or thing contained in this chapter, laws of this state or the provisions of
this code;



      (9)   Whether a previous license by any state, or subdivision
thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons
therefor;



      (10)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of
the laws of the state or of the United States, or any provisions of this code
in the conduct of his or her place of business.



   (b)   At the time of filing of an application for a new liquor
license the applicant shall tender to the village a non-refundable
application processing fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for a new liquor license.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-3; Ord. 2014-13, § 1, 10-13- 2014)



Sec. 3-84.  Restriction on license issuance.



   No retail alcoholic liquor dealer's license shall be issued to:



      (1)    A person who is not a resident of the village;



      (2)    A person who is not of good character and reputation in
the community in which he resides;



      (3)    A person who is not a citizen of the United States;



      (4)    A person who has been convicted of a felony under the
laws of the state;



      (5)    A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of
or is keeping a house of ill fame;



      (6)    A person who has been convicted of pandering or other
crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;



      (7)    A person whose license issued under this chapter has
been revoked for cause;



      (8)    A person who at the time of application for renewal of
any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a
first application;



      (9)    A copartnership, unless all of the members of such
copartnership shall be qualified to obtain a license;



      (10)    A corporation, if any officer, manager or director
thereof or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than
five (5) percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to
receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and
residence within the political subdivision;



      (11)    A person whose place of business is conducted by a
manager or agent unless such manager or agent possesses the same
qualifications required of the licensee;



      (12)    A person who has been convicted of a violation of any
federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of
alcoholic liquor, subsequent to the passage of this chapter, or shall have
forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation;



      (13)    A person who does not own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued;



      (14)    Any law enforcing public official, and president of
the village board of trustees, or any president or member of a county board;
and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or
indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor;



      (15)    Any person not eligible for a state retail liquor
dealer's license.



      (16)    All retail liquor licensees must have attended and
passed a course on alcohol addiction and awareness before a license is issued
or renewed. Proof of completion must be furnished at the time of application.
A certificate of completion must be displayed with the liquor license as
required by 3-16 of this municipal Code.



         If the licensee is a corporation, the manager or person in
charge of the operation of the establishment must comply with these
requirements.



         Failure to comply with these requirements will result in a
nonissuance of the liquor license.



(Code 1969, Ch. 11, Art. 2; Code 1972, § 3-2-4; Ord. No. 92-13, § 1,
3-23-92)



Sec. 3-85.  Annual fee.



   The annual fee for a license under this article shall be as set forth
in the fee schedule in article III of this chapter.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-5; Ord. No. 78-57, 10-19-78)



Sec. 3-86.  Duration of license; fee proration policy.



   Each license under this article shall terminate on April 30 next
following its issuance. This fee is not to be prorated if the license is
issued during the fiscal year, and no part thereof is to be refunded if the
license is revoked by the liquor commissioner, or if it is not used by the
owner for the entire year.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-6)



   State law reference-Duration of state licenses, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 43,
§ 117.



Sec. 3-87.  Disposition Of Fees:



   All fees shall be paid to the president at the time application is made
pursuant to this article, and shall be forthwith turned over to the
treasurer. If the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to
the applicant; if the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in
the general corporate fund or in such other fund as shall have been
designated by the board of trustees by proper action.



(Code 1969, Ch. 11, Art. 2; Code 1972, § 3-2-7)



Sec. 3-88.  Number Of Licenses:



   The number of licenses issued to persons for the sale of alcoholic
liquor by the village shall be limited to:



      Class A shall have a maximum of eleven (11);



      Class B shall have a maximum of three (3);



      Class C shall have a maximum of zero (0);



      Class D shall have a maximum of zero (0);



      Class E shall have a maximum of seven (7);



      Class F shall have a maximum of four (4);



      Class G shall have a maximum of two (2) per day; and



      Class H shall have a maximum of two (2).



(Code 1972, § 3-2-8; Ord. 87-1, § 1, 1-12-1987; Ord. 92-13, § 4,
3-23-1992; Ord. 92-27, § 1, 6-22-1992; Ord. 98-46, § 1, 12-14-1998; Ord.
2000-17, § 1, 3-27-2000; Ord. 2002-30, § 1, 7-22-2002; Ord. 2005-03, § 2,
1-24-2005; Ord. 2005-23, § 2, 11-14-2005; Ord. 2008-03, § 2, 2-11-2008;
Ord. 2009-23, § 1, 10-26-2009; Ord. 2013-08, § 1, 6-10-2013; Ord. 2014-07,
§ 1, 5-12-2014; Ord. 2014-14, § 1, 10-14-2014; Ord. 2016-16, § 1, 5-9-2016)



Sec. 3-89.  License Restrictions:



   Every person engaged in the retail sale or distribution of alcoholic
liquor shall pay an annual fee, as set forth in § 13-1 of the Justice
Municipal Code, according to the specified classification of licenses as
follows:



   (1)   Class A license shall authorize the retail sale or
distribution, but not consumption, of alcoholic liquor in its original
packaging on the premises specified (e.g., drugstores, chain food stores,
grocery stores, liquor store).



   (2)   Class B license shall authorize the retail sale or
distribution of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the licensed premises,
as well in its original packaging for consumption off-site, but not where
prepared food is sold.



   (3)   Class E license shall authorize the retail sale or
distribution of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the license premises
where prepared food is sold (e.g., hotels, motels, restaurants, banquet
halls). All such alcoholic liquors shall be served from a service bar/public
bar, and such bar shall be available for use by the public.



   (4)   Class F license shall authorize the retail sale or
distribution of beer and wine, only, for consumption on the licensed premises
where prepared food is sold, but only in the area where food is consumed by
patrons.



   (5)   Class G license permits clubs, churches, lodges and fraternal
organizations to sell or give away alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
licensed premises for a period not to exceed twelve (12) hours. A Class G
license    shall be limited to specific events such as dances, dinners,
receptions, or other public entertainment.



   (6)   Class H license shall authorize the distribution of beer or
wine only for tasting (no retail sale) on the licensed premises in
conjunction with tours of the licensed premises, and the retail sale or
distribution, but not consumption, of beer or wine only, in its original
packaging on the premises specified. To qualify for a Class H license, the
licensed premises must be listed on a current and valid Manufacturer’s
license issued by the Illinois Liquor Commission, as follows:



      Class 3 - Brewer; Class 4 - First Class Wine Manufacturer; Class
5 - Second Class Wine Manufacturer; Class 6 - First Class Winemaker; Class 7
- Second Class Winemaker; or Class 8 -Limited Wine Manufacturer.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-8A; Ord. 78-57, 10-19-1978; Ord. 87-1, § 2, 1-12-1987;
Ord. 91-7, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-1991; Ord. 92-13, § 4, 3-23-1992; Ord. 98-12, §
2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2000-17, § 1, 3-27-2000; Ord. 2008-03, § 3, 2-11-2008;
Ord. 2012-22, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2013-08, § 2, 6-10-2013; Ord. 2014-07,
§ 2, 5- 12-2014)



Sec. 3-90.  Records:



   The president shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all
such licenses issued by him or her, and shall furnish the chief of police
with a copy thereof; upon the issuance of any new license, or the revocation
of any old license, the president shall give written notice of such action to
each of these officers within forty-eight (48) hours of such action.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-9; Ord. 2009-15, § 11, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-91.  Transfer Of License:



   (a)   A license issued under this article shall be purely a personal
privilege, good for not to exceed one (1) year after issuance, unless sooner
revoked as provided in this article, and shall not constitute property, nor
shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be
alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being
encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of
testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the
licensee; provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of any
deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee,
when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the
business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under order of the
appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or
insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such
insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but not longer
than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such
licensee.



   (b)   Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration
thereof, provided he or she is then qualified to receive a license and the
premises for which such renewal license is sought is suitable for such
purpose, and provided further that the renewal privilege herein provided for
shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the
president from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within his or
her jurisdiction.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-10)



Sec. 3-92.  Change Of Location:



   A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only in the premises described in the application and license. Any
application for a change of location must comply and must be accompanied by
the necessary documents to establish compliance with the requirements of
section 3-97 of this article.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-11)



Sec. 3-93.  Peddling:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the village.



   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). A separate and distinct offense shall be held to have been
committed each day any person continues to violate any of the provisions
hereof.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-12; Ord. 2012-24, § 19, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-94.  Sanitary Conditions1,2:



   (a)   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or
for the storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the provisions
of this code regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or
sale of food for human consumption.



   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00. A separate and distinct offense shall be held to have been
committed each day any person continues to violate any of the provisions
hereof.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-13; Ord. 2012-24, § 20, 9-24-2012)



1  See chapter 5 of this code.



2  410 ILCS 620/1 et seq.



Sec. 3-95.  Employees:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a
carrier of, any contagious, infectious or venereal disease, and it shall be
unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such
disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the
handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor.



   (b)   As to class A (retail package good sales), class A-1 (retail
package good sales, beer and wine only), class D (restaurant with a service
bar) and class F (restaurant) licenses, at least one (1) person on duty
during the hours of retail liquor sales must have attended and passed a
course on alcohol addiction and awareness. A certificate of completion must
be displayed with the liquor license as required by section 3-16 of this
chapter.



   (c)   As to class B and E licenses (retail consumption without
prepared food), all persons serving alcoholic liquor for consumption must
have attended and passed a course on alcohol addiction and awareness. A
certificate of completion must be displayed with the liquor license as
required by section 3-16 of this chapter.



   (d)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate and distinct offense shall be
held to have been committed each day any person continues to violate any of
the provisions hereof.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-14; Ord. 92-13, § 2, 3-23-1992; Ord. 2008-03, § 4,
2-11-2008; Ord. 2012-24, § 21, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-96.  Reserved:



Sec. 3-97.  Location Restrictions3:



   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within one hundred (100) feet of any church, school, hospital, home
for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives, husbands or
children; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering
restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops
or other places where alcoholic liquors are sold but is not the principal
business carried on, if such place of business so exempted shall have been
established for such purposes prior to the taking effect of this article.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-16; Ord. 91-41, § 1, 12-9-1991; Ord. 2008-03, § 5,
2-11-2008)



3  See chapter 12 of this code.



Sec. 3-98.  Employment Of Minors; Sale To Minors, Unfit Persons:



   (a)   No retail liquor dealer shall employ any minor as a servant or
clerk in his or her place of business, nor shall in any manner sell, give or
deliver any intoxicating liquors or beverages whatever to any minor or any
insane, distracted or intoxicated person, or person in the habit of getting
intoxicated, to be or remain or loiter in or about his or her place of
business.



   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate and distinct offense shall be held to
have been committed each day any person continues to violate any of the
provisions hereof.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-17; Ord. 2012-24, § 22, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-99.  Drunkenness, Gambling On Or Adjacent To Premises:



   (a)   No retail liquor dealer shall by himself or herself, servant
or clerk, allow drunkenness or permit any person to drink to excess, or
suffer or permit any species of gambling in his or her premises, or in any
part thereof or in any place adjacent thereto under his or her control except
as provided in sections 3-66 and 3-107.



   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate and distinct offense shall be held to
have been committed each day any person continues to violate any of the
provisions hereof.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-18; Ord. 2012-16, § 1, 6-11-2012; Ord. 2012-24, § 23,
9-24-2012; Ord. 2014-11, § 2, 8-25- 2014)



Sec. 3-100.  Loud Noises, Disturbances:



   (a)   No retailer of liquor licensed under the provisions of this
article shall suffer any loud or boisterous talking, or obscene or profane
language, quarreling, singing, fighting or other disturbances of persons
passing along any street or public square in the vicinity thereof, or to the
disturbances of the peace and quiet of persons doing business or residing in
the neighborhood thereof.



   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). A separate and distinct offense shall be held to have been
committed each day any person continues to violate any of the provisions
hereof.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-19; Ord. 2012-24, § 24, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-101.  Closing Hours1:



   (a)   A licensee shall only be permitted to sell, offer for sale,
give away, or allow to be consumed (as the license permits), alcoholic
liquors on the licensed premises between the following hours of each day of
the week:



 


Sunday 7:00 A.M.— Monday 2:00 A.M.



Monday 7:00 A.M. — Tuesday 2:00 A.M.


Tuesday 7:00 A.M. — Wednesday 2:00 A.M.


Wednesday 7:00 A.M. — Thursday 2:00 A.M.


Thursday 7:00 A.M. — Friday 2:00 A.M.


Friday 7:00 A.M. — Saturday 2:00 A.M.


Saturday 7:00 A.M. — Sunday 2:00 A.M.



 



   (b)   It shall be unlawful to keep open for business, or to admit
the public into or on, any premises where alcoholic liquor is sold during the
hours when the sale of alcoholic liquor is prohibited; provided, that in the
case of restaurants, clubs, hotels, and businesses operating themselves
primarily as gas stations, such establishments may be kept open during such
hours, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold, offered for sale, given away, or
consumed by the public during such hours.



   (c)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00).



(Code 1969, Ch. 11, Art. 2; Code 1972, § 3-2-20; Ord. 2008-03, § 6,
2-11-2008; Ord. 2012-22, § 2, 8-13-2012l; Ord. 2012-24, § 25, 9-24-2012)



1  235 ILCS 5/6-14.



Sec. 3-102.  Unobstructed View From Street; Lighting:



   (a)   In the premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption upon the premises is licensed, other than as a restaurant, hotel
or club, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be
permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor
inside such premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of
such licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk.



   (b)   All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon the
premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light
or artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises
shall be clearly visible.



   (c)   In case the view into any such licensed premises required by
the foregoing provisions shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee or by him
or her wilfully suffered to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then
such license shall be subject to revocation in the manner herein provided. In
order to enforce the provisions of this section, the president shall have the
right to require the filing with him or her of plans, drawings and
photographs showing the clearance of the view as above required.



   (d)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate and distinct offense shall be held to
have been committed each day any person continues to violate any of the
provisions hereof.



(Code 1972, § 3-2-22; Ord. 2012-24, § 26, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-103.  Adherence To Regulations:



   The president may revoke any retail liquor dealer's license1 for any
violation of any provision of this article, or for any violation of any state
law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor. All licensees and
distributors of alcoholic liquor are subject to such regulations as the local
liquor control commissioner2 may impose.



(Code 1969, Ch. 11, Art. 2; Code 1972, § 3-2-23)



1  235 ILCS 5/4-4, 5/7-5.



2 235 ILCS 5/4-2 et seq.



Sec. 3-104.  Local Liquor Control Commissioner:



   The village president is hereby designated as the local liquor control
commissioner. The village president may appoint a person or persons to assist
him or her in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties of
such position, pursuant to 235 ILCS 5/4-2.



(Ord. 96-34, § 1, 10-14-1996)



Sec. 3-105.  Compensation:



   The compensation for the position of local liquor control commissioner
shall be in accordance with section 2-34 of this code.



(Ord. 96-33, § 1, 9-23-1996; Ord. 2002-30, § 2, 7-22-2002; Ord. 2005-01, §
2, 1-10-2005)



Sec. 3-106.  Beer Gardens:



   Any establishment with a liquor license that serves alcoholic beverages
may permit an outside, open area for patrons to sit down and drink alcoholic
beverages purchased inside the establishment. The following provisions must
be followed:



      (1)    To ensure adequate safety and control, access in and
out of the beer garden must be restricted and permitted only from: a) the
interior of the premises, or b) a monitored entrance into the beer garden
from outside the premises.



      (2)    An emergency exit must be present at all times in the
beer garden and the emergency exit must be either electronically or manually
monitored to assure no unauthorized entrances or exits.



      (3)    Only alcoholic beverages sold inside the premises may
be consumed in the beer garden.



      (4)    Application for a beer garden and proof of compliance
with sections 3-96 and 3-97 of this article must be presented to the village
of Justice board of trustees for final approval. In addition, it shall be
unlawful to sell, offer for sale, or consume at any outdoor beer garden, any
alcoholic liquor within the village unless at least two-thirds (2/3) of the
residential property owners along the frontage feet and along the street(s)
adjacent to the place of business requesting a beer garden, for a distance of
two hundred feet (200') in each direction from the entrance of the business
requesting a beer garden, shall file with the local liquor control
commissioner, or licensing officer, written consent to the use of an outdoor
beer garden. Distances across streets and alleys shall be counted as twice
its width.



(Ord. 2001-29, § 1, 7-23-2001)



Sec. 3-107.   Video Gaming:



   (a)   The definitions of the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et
seq., are incorporated and adoption into this section by reference.



   (b)   The following activities or forms of gambling are allowed
provided all applicable licenses are obtained: (i) the keeping, possession,
ownership, use or playing of a video gaming terminal in a licensed
establishment, licensed truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal
establishment or licensed veterans establishment, which is licensed by the
Board to conduct or allow such specific activities under the Video Gaming
Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.



   (c)   The annual license fee for each licensed establishment,
licensed truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal establishment or
licensed veterans establishment shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).



   (d)   The annual license fee for each video gaming terminal shall be
twenty-five dollars ($25.00).



(Ord. 2012-16, § 2, 6-11-2012)



Secs. 3-108–3-120. Reserved:



ARTICLE V.  SPECIAL EVENTS AND AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND ELECTRONIC
GAMES 1,2



1  See also §§ 2-473 et seq., and 7-205 of this code.



2 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1, 5/11-42-5; 720 ILCS 530/1; 820 ILCS 205/8.1 et seq.



DIVISION 1. SPECIAL EVENTS



Sec. 3-121.  Application Of Provisions:



   The provisions of this article, except as to licenses and fees, shall
apply to all special events including, but not limited to, public shows,
theatricals, circuses, fairs, festivals, carnivals, runs, parades, block
parties, concerts, musical entertainment performances, car shows, fire works
exhibitions, temporary food service establishments, and other amusements in
the village,' whether specifically licensed under other provisions of this
code or not.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-122.  Adoption Of Regulation:



   Regulations of the Illinois Office of State Fire Marshall, Fire
Investigation Act, 425 ILCS 25/9; Title 41 Illinois Administrative Code, Part
107 Outdoor Stages;. Illinois Department of Transportation, Parade and Street
Closure Permit Act; Illinois Department of Public Health, Food Service
Sanitation Code, Title 77 Illinois Administrative Code, Section 750 and the
Illinois Plumbing Code, Title 77 Illinois Administrative Code, Section 890;
Illinois Department of Labor, Carnival and Amusement Rides Safety Act, 430
ILCS 85/2-2, Title 56 Illinois Administrative Code, Section 6000; and the
Cook County Bureau of Administration, Highway Department, Parade and Street
Closure Permit Act; are hereby adopted with regard only to special events
held within village limits.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-123.  Definitions:



   The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter
and as used elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown herein:



   Beer Garden: An outside, open area for patrons of a licensed
establishment, to sit down and drink alcoholic beverages purchased inside,
where access in and out of the beer garden is restricted and permitted only
from the interior of the premises, or by a monitored entrance into the beer
garden from outside the premises. Only alcoholic beverages sold inside the
premises may be consumed in the beer garden.



   Building Inspection: A review of all stage, platform, tent, canopy, and
other temporary installations associated with the special event, and all
other building inspections not specifically provided for herein, by the
village building inspector.



   Canopy: A structure, enclosure or shelter constructed of fabric or
pliable materials supported by any manner, except by air or the contents it
protects, and is open without sidewalls or drops on seventy-five percent 
(75%) or more of the perimeter.



   Carnival: An enterprise which offers amusement or entertainment to the
public by means of one (1) or more amusement attractions or. amusement rides
as defined by the Illinois Department of Labor, Carnival and Amusement Rides
Safety Act (the Act) [430 ILCS 85/2-2]. No amusement ride or attraction shall
be operated for public use at a carnival or fair/ festival in the State of
Illinois without a permit having been issued by the Director of the Illinois
Department of Labor to the owner of such equipment. Annual inspections are
required of an amusement ride or amusement attraction and are performed by
the Director or the Director’s designee.



   Dangerous Acts: Any act which endangers the public health or results in
discomfort to the public. Discharging fireworks without a license and
supervision of the fire chief or his or her designee is considered a
Dangerous Act.



   Electrical Inspection: A review of temporary electrical installations,
underground or overhead wires and apparatus, generator connections, and all
other electrical inspections not specifically provide for herein, by the
village electrical inspector.



   Fireworks Exhibitions: A public exhibition of fireworks and
pyrotechnics for which a license is granted by the village board and are
subject to the supervision of the fire chief or of some person designated by
him or her.



   Health Inspection: A review of all temporary food service
establishments and all other health inspections not specifically provided for
herein, by the village health inspector.



   Liquor License, Temporary Event: A special event liquor license issued
by the liquor commissioner for the sale or distribution of beer and wine only
consistent with section 3-101 of the Justice Municipal Code,



   Noise: A boisterous nature, that disturbs or destroys the peace of the
neighborhood in which a building or



premises is situated; the operation or playing of a phonograph, radio,
loudspeaker, musical instruments (band) or other device or instrument whereby
sound is amplified, during the hours from seven o’clock (7:00) P.M. to
seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. of the next following day, in such manner or with
such volume that the sound caused thereby is audible to human beings beyond a
distance of four hundred feet (400') and beyond the premises whereon the same
is operated or played.



   Outdoor Stage: A stage with surface areas greater than one thousand
five hundred square feet (1,500 ft2) erected or constructed outside of a
building or otherwise located so as to be exposed to the effects of wind and
weather.



   Platform: A raised area used for entertainment, deliberation, worship,
amusement, ceremonies or similar uses. Platforms do not incorporate any
overhead lighting, hanging curtains, drops, hanging scenery or other overhead
stage effects or equipment. Raised areas used for seating, tables, lectures,
presentations, boxing and wrestling rings, theaters-in-the-round and similar
uses are examples of Platforms as long as there is no overhead lighting,
hanging curtains, drops, hanging scenery or other overhead stage effects.



   Plumbing Inspection: Review of all temporary potable water connections,
meters, and backflow devices, locations of temporary toilet and hand washing
facilities and all other plumbing inspections not specifically provided for
herein, by the village plumbing inspector,



   Potable Water: Water which is fit for consumption by humans and other
animals, also known as drinking water based on its intended use. Water shall
be obtained for an Illinois Environmental Protection Agency approved and
regulated system or from another source approved by the village health
inspector. Devices shall be provided to protect against back flow and back
siphonage to protect the water supply and shall be constructed in accordance
with the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890).



   Security Personnel: Any personnel, being a minimum of twenty-one (21)
years of age, performing armed or unarmed security, crowd control, traffic
control or other types of security at and during special events.



   Special Event: A unique event such as but not limited to public shows,
theatricals, circuses, fairs, festivals, carnivals, runs, parades, block
parties, concerts, musical entertainment performances, car shows, fire works
exhibitions, temporary food service events, and other amusements in the
village, held at a particular location.



   Stage: means a space used for entertainment, deliberation, worship,
amusement, ceremonies or similar uses utilizing overhead lighting, hanging
curtains, drops, hanging speakers, hanging scrims, hanging scenery or other
overhead stage effects or equipment. These rules are applicable to outdoor
stages with surface areas greater than one thousand five hundred square feet
(1,500 ft2).



   Temporary Food Service Establishment: Any food service establishment,
that operates at a fixed location for a period of time not to exceed fourteen
(14) consecutive days in conjunction with a single special event or
celebration.



   Tent: A structure, enclosure or shelter constructed of fabric or
pliable material supported by any manner except by air or the contents that
it protects.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-124.  Special Event License:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any special event
within the limits of the village of Justice, which is open to the public,
without having first secured a license therefor.



   (b)   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the municipal
services administrator. All information as requested in the application shall
be provided, including but not limited to, the name of the sponsor; type of
event; date and times of the event; name, address, phone number of the
contact person; the address of the event; a signature of a responsible party;
description of the event and a list and description of amenities including a
list of all temporary food service establishments.



   (c)   All completed applications, with the appropriate documentation
and fees attached, shall be filed in the office of the municipal services
administrator,



no later than three (3) weeks prior to the event. Late entries shall be
handled on a case by case basis. The village president’s approval or denial
shall be final.



   (d)   The municipal services administrator shall notify the village
president, board of trustees, and all appropriate department heads upon
receiving a completed special events application.



   (e)   The license fee shall be as set forth in section 13-1 of this
code. License fees, can be exempt for operators who have Illinois not for
profit status and are using the event for fundraising. A license must still
be obtained and all regulations set forth in this code complied with. Final
determination for waiving of any special event license fees shall be made by
the village president.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-125.  Special Events On Public Streets:



   No license shall be granted for any special event or other amusement to
be given on any public street or sidewalk or in such a place that the only
main accommodation for the public or audience will be in a public place,
except on order of the village board.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-126.  Special Event Amenities:



   Special events may include certain amenities including, but not limited
to, beer gardens and liquor consumption; booths, canopies, tents, outdoor
stages, and platforms; carnival games and amusement rides; electrical
generation; fireworks exhibitions; garbage dumpsters; parking; provisions for
providing potable water, portable toilets and hand wash stations; security;
signage; street closures; and temporary food service establishments.



   (a)   Amenities Subject To Special Licensing And Permits:



      (1)   Beer gardens and liquor consumption at special events
require a special event liquor license from the liquor commissioner prior to
any event taking place.



      (2)   Carnival games and amusement rides are subject to
Illinois Department of Labor, Carnival and Amusement Rides Safety Act, 430
ILCS 85/2-2, Title 56 Illinois Administrative Code, Section 6000. Said rides
require a special village permit, which application shall be accompanied with
a copy of the vendor’s contract, certificate of insurance, and inspection
certification from the Illinois Department of Labor. Fees shall be as set
forth in section 13-1 of this code and shall be paid by the special event
operator.



      (3)   Fireworks exhibitions may only be held upon issuance of
a license by the village board. Such exhibitions shall only be given subject
to the supervision of the fire chief having jurisdiction, or of some person
designated by him or her, in accordance with section 4-119 of this code. Fees
shall be as set forth in section 13-1 of this code and shall be paid by the
special event operator.



      (4)   Parades and street closures require a special permit
issued by resolution of the board of trustees. Any parades or street/lane
closures upon a street or road under the jurisdiction of the State of
Illinois shall have a permit issued by the Illinois Department of
Transportation. Any parades or street/lane closures upon a street or road
under the jurisdiction of Cook County shall have a permit issued by the Cook
County Department of Highways. Any parades or street/lane closures upon a
street or road under the jurisdiction of the village of Justice shall have a
permit issued by the village board of trustees. A copy of the parade permit
application and street closure and detour route will be attached to the
special event application. Fees shall be as set forth in section 13-1 of this
code and shall be paid by the special event operator.



      (5)   Event signage, also known as temporary signs under
section 8-171 of this code, may only be posted on private property unless
authorized by the village board of trustees. Temporary signs include signs
which contain information, which is not of a permanent nature. Such signs
include, but are not limited to, political signs, garage sale signs, real
estate signs, portable signs, and banner signs. Temporary signs may not be
posted at any time on the state or county rights-of-way, including Archer
Road, 79th Street, 87th Street, 88th Avenue, and Roberts Road within the
village of Justice. All signs posted without a permit will be removed without
notice by the village of Justice code enforcement department. A permit is
required for all special event portable signs, unless waived by the village
president. Permit fees are set forth in section 13-1 of this code and shall
be paid by the special event operator. All special event signage will be
removed within two (2) days of the end of the special event by the event
operator.



      (6)   Temporary food service establishments shall be licensed
in accordance with section 5-61 through 5-63 of this code. A complete
application shall be submitted for each food vendor associated with the event
along with the special event application.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-127.  Special Event Inspections:



   (a)   It shall be the duty of the building commissioner or his or
her designee to see that special events with all amenities, are inspected by
the appropriate village inspector(s). Amenities subject to village inspection
include but arc not limited to the following:



      (1)   Booths, canopies, tents, outdoor stages and platforms
shall be inspected by a village building inspector prior to their use at any
special event. Inspections shall be made in accordance with regulations of
the Illinois Office of State Fire Marshal, Fire Investigation Act, 425 ILCS
25/9, Title 41 Illinois Administrative Code, Part 107 Outdoor Stages and the
International Building Code as adopted by the village in this code.
Inspection fees are set forth in section 13-1 of this code and shall be paid
by the special event operator.



      (2)   Electrical generation from any source at a special
event, shall be inspected by a village electrical inspector prior to the use
of temporary electrical installations, underground or overhead wires and
apparatus, generator connections, and all other electric related issues not
specifically provide for herein, according to the City of Chicago Electrical
Code as adopted by the village in this code. Inspection fees are set forth in
section 1.3-1 of this code and shall be paid by the special event operator.



      (3)   Temporary potable water connections, meters, and
backflow devices; locations of temporary toilet and hand washing facilities;
and all other plumbing related issues shall be inspected by a village
plumbing inspector prior to their use at any special event. Inspections shall
be made in accordance with the City of Chicago Plumbing Code as adopted by
the village in this code. Inspection fees are set forth in section 13-1 of
this code and shall be paid by the special event operator.



      (4)   Temporary food service establishments and all other
health and sanitation related issues shall be inspected by the village health
inspector, each and every day the event is in operation. Temporary food
service establishment booths not staffed by a certified food supervisor that
are able to prove their identity, will be closed. Inspections shall be in
accordance section 5-62 of this code. Inspection fees are set forth in
section 13-1 of this code and shall be paid by the special event operator.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-128.  Conduct Of Audience; Overcrowding:



   (a)   The audience of any special event must be orderly and quiet at
all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person attending such special
event to create a disturbance in the audience.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to
witness any such special event as to create a dangerous condition because of
fire or other risks.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-129.  Indecent Shows:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to present, exhibit, conduct or
take part in any indecent show, theatrical, play, motion picture exhibition
or other form of public amusement or show.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-130.  Inciting Riot Or Disturbance:



   It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any
kind which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or
disturbance.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-131.  Penalty:



   Any person violating any provision of this division shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). A separate and distinct offense shall be held to have been
committed each day any person continues to violate any of the provisions
hereof.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Secs. 3-132–3-150.   Reserved:



DIVISION 2. AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND ELECTRONIC GAMES



Sec. 3-151.  Definitions:



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Amusement Devices And/Or Electronic Games: Any machine not requiring a
federal or state gambling stamp which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug,
token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for the use as
a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It
shall include, but not be limited to, such devices as jukeboxes, any form of
electronic games played with electrically operated devices upon a table or
board having holes, pockets, cups or electrically activated devices that are
actuated by any object or electrical contacts, electrical impulse and/or
cathode-type games, and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto
under whatever name by which they may be indicated.



   Flipper Ball Games: Any amusement device which moves a ball by use of a
form of flipper propellant which scores points as it rolls down or across
surfaces among pins and targets.



   Juke Box: any instrument containing one or more phonograph record,
compact discs, or DVDs operated by means of tokens or coins.



   Pinball Games; Any amusement device in which a ball propelled by a
plunger scores points as it rolls down or across a slanting surface among
pins and targets.



   Slot Machine: Any device not a gambling device, operated by means of
tokens or coins, which shows pictures, numbers or symbols, singly or in
combinations, as a result of operations.



   Table Games: Any device, whether controlled by skill or chance, for the
operation of a game, pastime or contest by the manipulation of a marble,
sphere or of objects or figures, or by controlling the movements of the same
or setting them in motion by mechanical means.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-152.  Table Games:



   It shall be unlawful to maintain or expose for public use any table
games, or amusement devices operated with a token or coin or for the use of
which a fee is charged, without first obtaining a license therefore. License
fees are set forth in section 13-1 of this code.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-153.  Slot Machines:



   It shall be unlawful to maintain or expose for public use any slot
machine, operated with a slug or coin, for the use or operation of which a
fee is charged, without having first obtained a license therefore. License
fees are set forth in section 13-1 of this code.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-154.  Jukeboxes:



   It shall be unlawful to maintain or expose for public use any
phonograph, compact disc player, or DVD player, operated with a token or
coin, without first obtaining a license therefore. License fees are set forth
in section 13-1 of this code.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-155.  License Required:



   (a)   No person shall own, place, keep, maintain, operate or permit
any electronic game or automatic amusement device in any building or place
within the village for use by the public without there first having been
obtained a license for each such device, and such license will be issued only
to those who operate a business within the village, licensed by the village
or state, and who will use such game or device as a subordinate part of such
primary business.



   (b)   No license shall be issued for any electronic game or
automatic amusement device if the premises and primary license of the
applicant do not fully comply first with the requirements of this code.



   (c)   A license shall not be transferable from person to person, nor
place to place, and shall be usable only at the place and by the licensee
designated in the license.



   (d)   No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of any
automatic amusement device at any place or in any manner which will disturb
the peace and quiet of persons outside the licensed premises.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-156.  Specific Regulations:



   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division:



      (1)   Any place of business, or any place of any character of
public resort, may have the number of machines as determined by the authority
having jurisdiction (AHJ). The AHJ shall make a determination based upon the
square footage and maximum occupancy of the location, and the safety, health
and welfare of the community.



      (2)   Adult supervision (minimum twenty-one (21) years of age)
shall be maintained on business premises during times amusement devices and
games are in operation,



   (b)   Any person or corporation violating this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate and distinct offense shall be held to
have been committed each day any person continues to violate any of the
provisions hereof.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-157.  Applicability Of Other Provisions:



   Automatic amusement devices and electronic games shall be subject to
the provisions of this division and other applicable codes and ordinance
provisions of the village.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-158.  Amusement And Vending Operator’s License:



   (a)   No person shall own, place, keep, maintain, operate or permit
any location containing amusement devices and/or electronic games without
having obtained a license. Licenses may not be transferred to other machines.
The license fee will be as set forth in section 13-1 of this code per year,
in addition to the established fee per device.



   (b)   No person shall allow unlicensed operators and/or machines in
the place of business.



   (c)   Any person or corporation violating this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate and distinct offense shall be held to
have been committed each day any person continues to violate any of the
provisions hereof.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-159.   Video Arcades:



   (a)   No person shall own, place, keep, maintain, operate or permit
any business conducted strictly for the purposes of automatic amusement
devices and electronic games without having obtained a license. A Video
Arcade is defined as a business in which more than fifty percent (50%) of the
gross revenues are obtained from automatic amusement devices and electronic
games.



   (b)   The license fee for a video arcade shall be as set forth in
section 13-1 of this code per year, in addition to other license fees as
required by this code.



   (c)   No more than three (3) video arcade licenses shall be issued
by the village.



   (d)   Hours of operation are not limited, but the licensee shall be
responsible for the curfew hours of minors in his or her establishment.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 3-160.   Businesses Utilizing Coin-Operated Equipment:



   (a)   All businesses utilizing coin-operated equipment shall be
required to post prominently in the business establishment the name and phone
number of a person to contact in the event of a customer losing money or
receiving inadequate service from the coin-operated equipment.



   (b)   Any owner of such establishment shall make arrangements so
that the above phone number is manned during the hours of the business. Any
such complaint or inquiry shall result in timely response from the license
holder.



(Ord. 2012-25, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Secs. 3-161–3-175.   Reserved:



ARTICLE VI.  CLEANERS AND DYERS1



1  65 ILCS 5/11-42-8.



Sec. 3-176.  Definitions:



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Cleaning And Dyeing Establishment: Any place or vehicle where the
service of dry cleaning, wet cleaning as a process incidental to dry
cleaning, dyeing, spotting or finishing any fabric is rendered for hire, or
is sold, resold or offered for sale or resale.



   Cleaning Plant: Any cleaning and dyeing establishment equipped to
perform dry cleaning.



   Dry Cleaning: The process of cleaning fabrics by immersion and
agitation, or by immersion only, in volatile solvents, including, but not by
way of limitation, solvents of petroleum distillate type, the coal tar
distillate type, and the chlorinated hydrocarbon type, and processes
incidental thereto, including, but without limitation, spotting, cleaning,
wet cleaning and finishing.



   Fabric: Any article of wearing apparel, household furnishing, rugs,
textiles, fur and leather.



   Finishing: The process of pressing and/or reshaping any fabric, which
is designed to restore as nearly as possible the shape, dimension and contour
of such fabric.



   Proprietor: Any person by and/or for whom a cleaning plant is operated.



   Retail Outlet: Any cleaning and dyeing establishment located within the
village where dry cleaning is sold, solicited or offered for sale, directly
to the retail customer, and also includes any automobile, truck or other
vehicle operated within the village from which dry cleaning is sold,
solicited or offered for sale, directly to the retail consumer.



   Retailer: Any person or member of the cleaning and dyeing trade by or
for whom a retail outlet is operated.



   Spotting: The process designed to remove spots or stains which remain
in a fabric after it has been subjected to the other processes of dry
cleaning.



(Code 1972, § 3-4-1)



Sec. 3-177.  Violation:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, manage or operate any
cleaning and dyeing establishment, cleaning plant or retail outlet within the
village, for which a certificate of inspection has not been issued, or upon
which a certificate of inspection has been revoked or suspended, during time
of suspension, or any employee of any such person employed in the operation,
management or maintenance of any such establishment, plant or outlet to
assist or aid therein. It shall further be unlawful to wilfully make any
false statement in connection with any application for a certificate of
inspection or petition for rehearing, and any proprietor or retailer who
shall represent any fabric as dry-cleaned or finished dry-cleaned, which does
not comply with the requirements of this article and the provisions of this
code, shall be subject to penalty as provided in this code.



(Code 1969, Ch. 11, Art. 4; Code 1972, § 3-4-12)



Sec. 3-178.  Inspection; Certificate:



   To promote and protect the public health of the village and to remove
and prevent fire hazards, every cleaning and dyeing establishment, cleaning
plant and retail outlet located within the village and every cleaning and
dyeing establishment, which is not located within the village but has a
retail outlet operating in the village shall be regularly inspected and shall
obtain a certificate of inspection as hereinafter provided.



(Code 1972, § 3-4-2)



Sec. 3-179.  Sanitation1:



   Every building or premises used or occupied by a cleaning and dyeing
establishment, cleaning plant or retail outlet located within the village or
used or occupied by a cleaning and dyeing plant not located in the village
but which has a retail outlet in the village shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition as to its floors, side walls, ceilings, woodwork and
fixtures and as to the tools, machinery, equipment and storage facilities
used and kept in any such building or premises. At regular intervals and at
such other times as may be deemed necessary and as shall be specified by the
health officer, the floors, side walls, ceilings, woodwork and fixtures of
any such building and premises and the tools, machinery, equipment and
storage facilities used or kept thereon shall be washed or sprayed with a
disinfectant in solution or other liquid form or vapor approved by the health
officer.



(Code 1972, § 3-4-3)



1 See Ch. 5 of this Code.



Sec. 3-180.  Employment Of Diseased Persons:



   No person affected or afflicted with tuberculosis or any other
infectious or communicable disease shall be employed in any dry-cleaning
establishment, cleaning plant or retail outlet located within the village, or
in any cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant which is not
located in the village but which has a retail outlet therein. The health
officer of the village may require each employee of such cleaning and dyeing
plant, cleaning plant or retail outlet to be examined by a licensed and
practicing physician and may require any proprietor or retailer to file in
the office of the health officer a certificate of health and freedom from
tuberculosis or other infectious or communicable disease for each person
employed by him as such proprietor or retailer, which certificate shall be
signed by a licensed and practicing physician.



(Code 1972, § 3-4-4)



Sec. 3-181.  Restrictions:



   (a)   No finished or unfinished dry cleaning sold, solicited or
offered for sale within the village shall show, upon the dry-cleaned fabric
being rerinsed in water-white solvent (one gallon to one pound of garment
weight), sufficient dirt or soil residue or other foreign deposits sufficient
to darken dry solvent below fifteen (15) saybelt chorometer.



   (b)   Finished dry cleaning sold, solicited or offered for sale
within the village shall be free from solvent and chemical odors.



   (c)   No chemical or other substance which is poisonous, injurious
or unwholesome to human beings and which is not essential to the service or
process of dry cleaning, dyeing, spotting or finishing shall be used in
rendering any such service or performing any such process in any cleaning and
dyeing plant located within the village or in any cleaning and dyeing plant
or cleaning plant which is not located within the village but has a retail
outlet within the village.



   (d)   In case any such chemical or other substance which is
poisonous, injurious or unwholesome to human beings is used by any such
cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant in rendering any such
service or performing any such process essential thereto, then such chemical
or other substance shall be completely removed from the fabric drycleaned,
dyed or spotted or finished or such chemical or other substance shall be
completely and entirely neutralized and rendered harmless and innoxious to
human beings before such fabric is permitted to leave such establishment or
plant for delivery to the person entitled to the possession thereof upon
completion of the process.



(Code 1972, § 3-4-5)



Sec. 3-182.  Inspection For Fire Hazards:



   The chief of the fire department of the village shall have the right to
enter any building or premises situated within the village and used or
occupied by any cleaning and dyeing establishment, cleaning plant or retail
outlet in order to examine same and to determine whether or not such building
and premises, or any material, article or fabric drycleaned, dyed, spotted or
finished as received, used, kept, maintained or stored in such building or
premises, conforms to the fire hazard regulations within the village.



(Code 1972, § 3-4-6)



   Cross reference-Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 4.



Sec. 3-183.  Application; Certificate Of Inspection:



   (a)   Every proprietor or retailer of a cleaning and dyeing
establishment or cleaning plant located within the village and of each
cleaning and dyeing establishment and cleaning plant which is not located
within the village but which has a retail outlet in the village shall make
written application in duplicate to the village clerk for the issuance to
applicant of a certificate of inspection.



   (b)   In the case of cleaning and dyeing establishments and cleaning
plants located within the village, one (1) copy of the application shall be
delivered to the health officer and the other copy shall be delivered to the
chief of the fire department of the village. Within fifteen (15) days after
the filing of the application the health officer and the chief of the fire
department shall cause an inspection to be made of the building and premises
on which such cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant is located,
together with the floors, sidewalls, ceilings, woodwork and fixtures of any
such building or premises and the tools, machinery, equipment and storage
facilities used or kept thereon, and of any delivery trucks to and from such
cleaning and dyeing establishment, cleaning plant or retail outlet operated
in conjunction therewith. The health officer may require health certificates
to be filed for each employee of the applicant within fifteen (15) days after
such application is filed or at any time thereafter, and the health officer
may also require that any such employee be examined by a competent licensed
physician practicing within the village. Upon their respective inspections
being completed, the health officer and chief of the fire department shall
determine whether such establishment, plant or outlet mentioned in such
application and examined by them is used, maintained and operated in
conformity with the provisions of this article and in case their
determination is in the negative shall deny the application. In case the
health officer and chief of the fire department are not able to agree, they
shall submit the facts disclosed by their respective investigations to the
board of trustees, which body, upon being fully advised, shall decide whether
or not such application shall be allowed or denied.



   (c)   In the case of cleaning and dyeing establishments or cleaning
plants which are not located within the village, but which have a retail
outlet located therein, one (1) copy of the application shall be delivered to
the health officer. Within fifteen (15) days after filing of the application,
the health officer shall make or cause to be made an inspection of the
building or premises on which such cleaning and dyeing establishment or
cleaning plant is located, together with the floors, sidewalls, ceilings,
woodwork and fixtures of any such building or premises and the tools,
machinery, equipment and storage facilities used or kept thereon and may
cause an inspection to be made of any delivering of fabrics to and from any
such establishment or plant and retail outlet located within the village and
operated in conjunction therewith. The health officer may require health
certificates to be filed for each person employed by the applicant in such
establishment or plant and in any such retail outlet located within the
village within fifteen (15) days after any such application is filed or at
any time thereafter and may require that any such employee be examined by a
competent licensed and practicing physician. Upon the completion of such
inspection, the health officer shall determine whether such establishment or
plant, or outlet mentioned in such application and examined by him is used,
maintained and operated in conformity with the provisions of this article and
in case his determination is in the affirmative shall allow such application,
and in case his determination is in the negative shall deny such application.
Any such applicant whose application is denied may take an appeal from the
decision of the health officer to the village board.



   (d)   In case of retail outlets not situated in the same building or
premises with a cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant an
inspection made under the direction of the health officer and the chief of
the fire department for the purpose of determining whether same is used,
maintained and operated in conformity with the provisions of this article,
and a certificate of inspection shall issue upon the same conditions and in
the same manner as prescribed above for cleaning and dyeing establishments
and cleaning plants located within the village and the procedure upon an
application for such a certificate shall be in all respects the same as in
the case of such establishments or plants. Retail outlets situated on the
same premises as a cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant shall
be inspected at the same time and in the same manner as such establishment or
plant. Where several cleaning and dyeing establishments or cleaning plants
and/or retail outlets are operated by a single proprietor or in conjunction
with each other, a single application may be filed for certificate of
inspection for each such establishment, plant or retail outlet.



   (e)   All certificates of inspection shall be signed by the
president of the village.



   (f)   An applicant, if he so requests, shall be personally heard by
the officials or representatives of the village who are required to pass upon
his application, prior to the determination thereof, and upon appeal if he so
requests an applicant shall be heard by the village board prior to its
determination of his appeal.



   (g)   In case any application is denied either by the official or
officials to whom the same is presented in accordance with the provisions
hereof, or by the village board upon appeal thereto, the applicant whose
application is so denied may file a new application provided that such
application is accompanied with a statement under oath that the facts which
caused the denial of the previous application no longer exist.



(Code 1972, § 3-4-7; Ord. 2009-15, § 14, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-184.  Inspection Fees:



   (a)   At the time of filing an application for a certificate of
inspection for any cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant as
provided in section 3-183 and annually thereafter, the applicant shall pay to
the village an inspection fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the
inspection of any cleaning plant as defined in this article.



   (b)   An additional inspection fee shall be charged or paid for the
inspection of or issuance of a certificate of inspection for any retail
outlet situated in the same building or on the same premises as a cleaning
and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant in conjunction with which it is
operated. The inspection fee for any such retail outlet operated in
conjunction with such establishment or plant and not situated in the same
building or on the same premises shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per
outlet, and for the purpose of this section, each automobile, truck or other
vehicle operated within the village from which any cleaning is sold,
solicited or offered for sale directly to the retail consumer, shall be
subject to inspection and to the inspection fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00)
as herein provided.



(Code 1972, § 3-4-8; Ord. 2009-15, § 14, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-185.  Term Of Certificate:



   Each certificate shall expire the last day of April next following the
date on which same is issued and application for renewal thereof shall be
filed on or before the first Monday of the month during which it will expire.
An inspection fee shall be paid to the village in the same amount as in the
case of the application for the issuance of the original certificate at the
time of the filing of an application for renewal. Upon the filing of an
application for renewal of a certificate and payment of the inspection fee,
such application shall beinvestigated and the establishment, plant or outlet,
and persons employed therein shall be inspected and investigated and the
procedure on such application for renewal shall be in all things the same as
in the case of the application for the original certificate and the
termination thereof.



(Code 1972, § 3-4-9; Ord. 2009-15, § 14, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-186.  Certificate Of Retail Outlet:



   A certificate of inspection shall not be issued to or for any retail
outlet until and unless each cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning
plant for which it is a retail outlet has been issued a certificate of
inspection, and revocation, suspension or expiration of the certificate of
inspection of any cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant shall
automatically act as a revocation, suspension or expiration respectively of
the certificate of inspection of each retail outlet located within the
village and for which it is a retail outlet.



(Code 1972, § 3-4-10)



Sec. 3-187.  Periodic Inspection; Revocation, Suspension:



   (a)   The health officer shall cause periodic investigations and
inspections to be made of cleaning and dyeing establishments, cleaning plants
and retail outlets for which certificates of inspection have been issued.



   (b)   Violation of any provision of this article shall be cause for
revocation or suspension of a certificate of inspection. Upon notice and
public hearing the health officer may revoke any certificate of inspection
heretofore issued or may suspend same for a period of not more than thirty
(30) days. An approval may be taken to the village board, from any decision
rendered by the health officer under the provisions of this section.



(Code 1972, § 3-4-11)



Secs. 3-188-3-205.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VII. SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES1



1  State law reference-Municipal regulation of laundries, Ill. Rev. Stat.
Ch. 24, § 11-42-8.



Sec. 3-206.  Definition:



   The term "self-service laundry" as used in this article shall mean any
establishment in which coin-operated facilities are available for washing
clothes or for drying clothes, or both, and which is open and available to
the general public for use.



(Code 1972, § 3-16-1)



Sec. 3-207.  License Required:



   It shall be unlawful to establish or operate any self-service laundry
in the village without first having secured a license therefor as herein
provided. Application for such license shall comply with the general
provisions relating to applications for licenses and permits.



(Code 1972, § 3-16-2)



Sec. 3-208.  Hours Of Operation:



   It shall be unlawful to keep any self-service laundry establishment
licensed in this article open for business between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. unless there is an adult attendant in charge of the premises
during such hours.



(Ord. No. 61-12, 10-5-61; Code 1972, § 3-16-4)



Secs. 3-209-3-240.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VIII. CHILD CARE HOMES1



1  State law reference-Child Care Act of 1969, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 23, §
2211 et seq.



Sec. 3-241.  Definition:



   As used in this article, the word "home" is hereby defined to mean any
institution, place or family used for the reception or care of three (3) or
more infants or children apart from their parents either permanently or for
any period of the day. A "home" is further defined to mean any institution
used for the reception or care of persons who are dependent or not capable of
properly caring for themselves, and shall be understood to include homes for
the aged or infirm, orphan asylums, half-orphan asylums, refuges,
convalescents and shelters.



(Code 1972, § 3-10-1)



Sec. 3-242.  Violations:



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
fined as provided in this code; in the event of a conviction of any such
person for a violation relating to the safety and accommodation of inmates,
it shall be the duty of the health officer, and he is hereby authorized and
empowered to close such home and cause its vacation pending the repairs,
alterations or additions necessary to make it safe and proper for the
occupancy of its inmates, and to make it comply with the terms of this
article.



(Code 1969, Ch. 11, Art. 11; Code 1972, § 3-10-13)



Sec. 3-243.  License-Required:



   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the regularly
constituted authorities of the United States, the county, the village or any
association or institution for the care of children which has been
accredited, certified or licensed by the state pursuant to an act of the
legislature, to regulate the treatment and control of dependent, neglected
and delinquent children, to conduct or operate any home within the village,
without first obtaining a license therefor.



(Code 1972, § 3-10-2)



Sec. 3-244.  Same-Application:



   (a)   An application for a license under this article shall be made
in conformity with the general requirements of this code relating to
applications for licenses. The applicant shall also file an application with
the board of health and shall state the location or proposed location of the
home, the purpose for which it is to be conducted, the accommodations for the
inmates thereof, the nature and kind of case, instruction or benefits given
or proposed to be given therein, the names and addresses of the officials or
board of officials conducting, managing or maintaining the home, the name of
the superintendent or person in charge of the home, the name and address of
the chief physician, surgeon or attending physician or surgeon, or the names
and addresses of the board of physicians or surgeons attending therein if
there is such a board.



   (b)   The health officer, upon presentation of such application,
shall make or cause to be made strict inquiry into the facts set out in such
application, to determine whether such home is or is intended to be so
conducted as to afford proper accommodations for the care of the persons
received or proposed to be received therein, and that the officials or board
of officials or intended officials thereof give or are under agreement
thereafter to give such care, instruction or benefits as does or will render
them or him if there is only one (1) personally responsible for the care,
instruction or benefits given or to be given to all inmates therein, that the
superintendent or person in charge thereof is a person of good moral
character and has sufficient knowledge, experience and ability to properly
conduct such home, and that such home complies or is intended to comply with
all laws, provisions of this code, and rules and requirements which shall be
in force concerning the management and control of such homes.



(Code 1972, § 3-10-3)



Sec. 3-245.  License Fee Exemption:



   (a)   Homes which are operated without a charge being made for the
care of inmates shall be exempt from the payment of a license fee. Operators
of such homes shall apply for the license, which application shall be
accompanied by an affidavit stating that no charge is made for the care of
inmates.



   (b)   After investigation by the health officer and upon his
recommendation any home that is not operated for gain, but where a charge is
made for the care of patients, shall be exempt from payment of the annual
license fee provided. Such exemption shall continue only for the duration of
the license period.



(Code 1972, § 3-10-4)



Sec. 3-246.  Frontage Consents:



   (a)   No village license shall be issued to any person to operate or
conduct a home in any block in which two-thirds of the buildings fronting on
both sides of the street on or along which the proposed home may face are
devoted exclusively to residence purposes, unless the owners of a majority of
the frontage in such block and the owners of a majority of the frontage on
the opposite side of the street on or along which the building faces, consent
in writing to the operation or conducting of any such home in such block;
provided, however, that no new frontage consents shall be required if such
home has heretofore been licensed by the village as a hospital, home or
nursery at the present location.



   (b)   Such written consents of the majority of such property owners
shall be filed with the health officer before a license shall be issued for
the operating or conducting of any such home.



(Code 1972, § 3-10-5)



Sec. 3-247.  Building requirements.



   The building used as a home shall comply with the building provisions
and the fire regulations of the village.



(Code 1972, § 3-10-6)



Sec. 3-248.  Sanitation, living conditions.



   (a)   Every home shall comply with the requirements in the building
provisions of this Code relating to ventilation, floor space per patient,
exits, fire escapes and stairways.



   (b)   Each ward or wing in such home shall have running water
furnished in one (1) or more places either in the ward or convenient thereto
so that the same may be adequate and convenient to occupants thereof. The
plumbing, water closets, bathrooms and other sanitary appliances and
equipment shall be constructed in accordance with the building provisions of
this Code relating thereto. The floor of the cellar or basement in any
building used as a home shall be properly cemented so as to be watertight.



   (c)   All homes, including the culinary department, dining rooms,
laundry, laboratory, morgue and postmortem rooms connected with the same,
shall be equipped from April 15 to November 15 with doors, screens and other
appliances necessary for the exclusion of flies.



(Code 1972, § 3-10-7)



   Cross reference-Health and sanitation, Ch. 5.



Sec. 3-249.  Isolation rooms for diseased persons, temporary care of the
dead.



   (a)   Each home building shall be provided with a suitable room or
rooms, approved by the health officer, to be used for the isolation of cases
of contagious, infectious, epidemic or communicable diseases that may be
found in the home, until such time as the persons suffering from such
contagious diseases shall be removed in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the health officer. The room or rooms thus provided for the
isolation of contagious disease cases shall have separate toilet facilities
and a stationary washstand with a supply of running water.



   (b)   There shall be provided, also, in each such building a
suitable room or rooms approved by the board of health for the proper care of
the dead pending their removal.



(Code 1972, § 3-10-8)



Sec. 3-250.  Removal of the dead.



   No person acting as superintendent or manager, or who is otherwise in
charge or control of any home, nor any person connected with any home in any
capacity whatsoever as nurse, physician or attendant shall order, permit or
allow the body of any inmate or person who has been under care in such home,
and who shall have died therein, to be removed from such home at any time
within twenty-four (24) hours after the hour of death, unless the removal of
such body has been authorized in writing by some member of the immediate
family of such deceased person or by some other person legally authorized to
order or permit such a removal; and no such body shall be removed otherwise
than in accordance with the provisions of this Code concerning the removal of
dead bodies; provided, that no body shall be kept at any home longer than
thirty-six (36) hours after death without permission from the health officer.



(Code 1972, § 3-10-9)



   State law references-Coroner inquests, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 31, § 10 et
seq.; sudden infant death syndrome, autopsy, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 31, § 10.2a.



Sec. 3-251.  Records.



   (a)   Every home shall keep a complete record of all inmates
admitted to the institution, which record shall show the name, address, age,
sex, marital status and the date of admission and discharge or disposition of
each inmate of such home. In the case of infants or children, the records
shall show the name and address of the person from whom received, so far as
can be ascertained, the name, address, nationality, religion and occupation
of the parents of such infant or child, and the reason for its being brought
to such home.



   (b)   In the case of the discharge or disposition of any infant or
child or other dependent person from such home, the record shall show the
name and address of the person or institution to whom or to which such inmate
was given or delivered, and a statement as to whether or not such person to
whom such child was given was the parent or guardian, or had legally adopted
such infant or child.



   (c)   Such records shall be open at all times to the inspection of
the health officer or his duly authorized representatives.



(Code 1972, § 3-10-10)



   State law reference-Records kept by child care facilities, Ill. Rev.
Stat. Ch. 23, § 2225.



Sec. 3-252.  Reports.



   (a)   It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating
any home within the village to make a report to the health officer daily by
telephone and by mail of all epidemic, communicable or contagious diseases.
Such daily reports shall contain the names and residences of all persons
suffering from any of these diseases, together with such other information as
may be required by the board of health or shall be of use in aiding the board
of health in stamping out the diseases.



   (b)   It shall be the further duty of all such persons conducting or
operating a home to report to the health officer within twenty-four (24)
hours after the disposition, other than by death or discharge in the custody
of a parent, of any infant or child born in or admitted to such home, which
report shall give the name, age and sex of the child thus disposed of, the
name and address of the mother, if known, the name and address of the father,
if known, and the name and address of the person or institution to whom or to
which such child was given or delivered, and a statement as to whether the
person to whom such child was given was the parent or guardian or had legally
adopted such infant or child.



   (c)   It shall be the further duty of all such persons to make
reports to the health officer on or before the fifth day of each calendar
month, showing a complete record of such home during the preceding month,
including the names and addresses of inmates dying during the month, the
cause of each death, and such other information as may be specified by the
board of health, or necessary to an intelligent supervision of the
establishment.



   (d)   All reports required under this section shall be made in full
upon forms furnished for that purpose by the health officer, and shall be
signed by the chief physician, superintendent or officer in charge of such
home.



(Code 1972, § 3-10-11)



Sec. 3-253.  Inspections.



   Every home shall at all times be open to inspection by the health
officer and the commissioner of buildings whenever and as often as they shall
deem proper.



(Code 1972, § 3-10-12)



Secs. 3-254-3-270.  Reserved.



ARTICLE IX. JUNKYARDS1



1  Cross references-Health and sanitation, Ch. 5; abandoned vehicles, §
6-41 et seq.; ratproofing, § 7-226 et seq.
State law references-Junk dealer purchasing from minor, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch.
23, §§ 2366, 2367; municipal powers as to places of business of dealers in
junk, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-42-3; junkyards and scrap processing
facilities near certain highways, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 121, § 461 et seq.;
Copper Purchase Registration Law, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 121 1/2, § 321 et seq.



Sec. 3-271.  Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Junk means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper,
trash, rubber debris, waste, or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or
parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous
material.



   Junkyard 1: Any building where junk is bought, sold, bartered or
exchanged, either at wholesale or retail, or any building where junk is
collected, received, stored or held in possession for resale, barter or
exchange, either at wholesale or retail, or any building where junk is held
for the convenience of the owner of the junk.



(Code 1972, § 3-11-1)



1 415 ILCS 95/2.



Sec. 3-272.  Waiting Period Prior To Disposal Of Items:



   No junkyard shall resell, smelt, vulcanize or change the identity of
any article it has received by purchase or otherwise, until at least five (5)
days after such article was received, unless the junk is held for the
convenience of the owner of the junk.



(Code 1972, § 3-11-2)



Sec. 3-273.  Dealers Acting As Pawnbrokers2:



   No junk dealer shall receive any article in pledge or pawn, nor shall
any such dealer loan or advance any sums of money on the security of any
article or thing.



(Code 1972, § 3-11-3)



2  205 ILCS 510/1.



Sec. 3-274.  Purchases From Minors3:



   No dealer in junk shall receive by purchase or otherwise any article or
thing from any minor.



(Code 1972, § 3-11-4)



3  720 ILCS 345/1; 65 ILCS 5/11-42-3.



Sec. 3-275.  Stolen Property4:



   Persons dealing in junk will refrain from purchasing any article or
thing suspected of being stolen or known by



such dealer to be stolen. Every junk dealer who shall receive or be in
possession of any goods, articles, things or junk which may have been stolen
shall forthwith on demand exhibit the same to any member of the department of
police or to any member of the board of trustees, and if any such articles or
things are suspected by the dealer of having been stolen, and such suspicion
originated after such article or thing was in the possession of the dealer,
he or she will notify the department of police immediately.



(Code 1972, § 3-11-5)



4  720 ILCS 5/15-6, 5/16-1.



Sec. 3-276.  Inspections:



   The places of business of any junk dealer shall be open for inspection
by the police department during reasonable hours. Whenever any owner or agent
of the owner, by written sworn statement filed with the chief of police or
any member of the board of trustees, states that he or she has reason to
believe that certain stolen goods or things specifically described in such
sworn statement are in the possession of the junk dealer, any member of the
police department shall have the right to inspect the premises of the
wholesale junk dealer at a reasonable hour and view all junk which has been
purchased, received, collected or stored in the premises occupied by such
business.



(Code 1972, § 3-11-6)



Sec. 3-277.  License Required; Fee:



   No person shall engage in the business of junkyard until a license is
first obtained from the village board. All applications shall be addressed to
the board of trustees and the location of such junkyard approved by the
board. The fee for such license shall be as set forth in section 13-1 of this
code.



(Code 1969, Ch. 11, Art. 12; Code 1972, § 3-11-8; Ord. 98-12, § 2,
3-23-1998)



Sec. 3-278.  Revocation Of License:



   The license of any junk dealer convicted of receiving stolen property
shall be revoked by the president and board of trustees immediately after
such conviction. If any officer, stockholder or employee of a corporation
licensed to deal in junk is convicted of receiving stolen property, the
license of such corporation will be revoked immediately unless such
corporation shows satisfactory evidence to the president and board of
trustees that such person has disposed of his or her entire interest in such
corporation and has completely severed his or her connection with such
corporation. No person or corporation whose license is revoked under this
section will again receive a license to deal in junk for one (1) year after
conviction of receiving stolen property, and then only upon the approval of
the president and board of trustees.



(Code 1972, § 3-11-7)



Secs. 3-279-3-295.  Reserved:



ARTICLE X.  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS



DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL



Sec. 3-296.  Introduction:



   This article establishes regulations governing the activities of
peddlers, solicitors and canvassers, which typically involve a single person,
or a group of persons working in tandem, attempting make random but
individualized personal contact with another at a home, commercial
establishment or a public place. The regulations codified herein are the
by-product of the village's efforts to constitutionally harmonize the
interests of all parties engaged in or affected by peddler, solicitor and
canvasser activities. The village approached the subject-matter with a
balanced design, taking into consideration both the significant interests of
government and the rights of individuals to publicly express themselves in a
variety of ways. The objective was to create a scheme that limited the role
of government to those instances deemed necessary to protect its interests,
thereby entrusting to those targeted by speech with the primary
responsibility of electing when and how they will participate in, or be the
recipient of, any particular message. The village implemented four (4)
governmentally-directed proscriptions expedient to this objective: (i) it
removed discretion from decision-makers charged with administering the
process; (ii) it codified clear and unambiguous provisions that were not
susceptible to capricious interpretation; (iii) it eliminated any need to
inquire into the content of any message associated with an activity; and (iv)
it mandated alternative opportunities for communication be made available
when the primary method was unlawful or unavailable.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-297.  Definitions:



   The following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, when
used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Canvasser means any person who attempts to make personal contact of
another, but excluding focused picketing of any sort, for the primary purpose
of (1) attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion,
philosophy, ideology, political party, issue, candidate, event, idea or other
matter, even if incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts
contributions for or against such cause, and/or (2) distributes a handbill,
flyer, pamphlet, or any other type of literature, advertising a
non-commercial event, service or ideal. A canvasser shall also include any
person who seeks charitable contributions for a patriotic, philanthropic,
religious, social, health, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, cultural
or fraternal cause or ideology.



   Canvassing Activities means the actions of a canvasser, excepting those
conducted on the premises of the canvasser.



   Contributions mean and include alms, money, subscriptions, property, or
any other types of donations.



   Corporate Authorities means the mayor and board of trustees of the
Village of Justice.



   Mayor means the mayor/village president of the Village or his or her
designee.



   Peddler means any person who, not having been invited by another,
carries or transports goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any
nature and offers the same for sale (except on premises where that person is
employed or resides). A Peddler shall also include any person who solicits
orders and, as a separate transaction, makes a subsequent delivery to a
purchaser.



   Peddling Activities means the actions of a peddler.



   Person means any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society
or other organization.



   Peace Officer means a duly appointed police officer of the Village of
Justice.



   Solicitor means any person who, not having been invited by another
(except on premises where that person is employed or resides), takes or
attempts to take orders for the sale of goods, merchandise, wares, or other
personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services
performed in the future. A solicitor shall also include any person who
distributes handbills and flyers advertising a commercial event or service.



   Soliciting Activities means the actions of a solicitor.



   Street means any public street, highway or other thoroughfare primarily
intended for use by motor vehicles. Street shall mean the entire area between
a curb-cut, including but not limited to any and all medians and crosswalks.



   Street Solicitation means the act of soliciting, peddling or canvassing
in and on streets within the corporate limits of the Village of Justice.



   Village means the Village of Justice.



   Village Clerk means the village clerk of the Village of Justice or his
or her designee.



   Village Official means an appointed official of the Village of Justice
including any duly appointed peace officer, code-enforcement officer or
department head.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-298.  Purpose:



   The regulations codified in this article are intended to:



      (1)   Preserve the peace, tranquility and privacy of the home,
and certain other environments where individuals may be captive or
particularly sensitive to unwanted intrusion;



      (2)   Deter and mitigate unsolicited and unwanted intrusions
to personal space and property;



      (3)   Detect and prevent crime;



      (4)   Prevent damage or destruction of property;



      (5)   Preserve public funds;



      (6)   Conserve the condition of the environment;



      (7)   Prevent visual blight;



      (8)   Reduce distractions to those using the streets;



      (9)   Enable the free and efficient flow of pedestrian and
vehicle traffic; and



      (10)   Protect the health, safety and welfare of all persons
affected by this article.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-299.  Standards of Administration and Enforcement:



   The following provisions are intended to serve as a guideline to
village officials charged with administering or enforcing the provisions of
this article.



      (1)   A village official shall seek clarification from his or
her immediate supervisor if he or she is uncertain as to how or if a certain
provision of this article should be interpreted or enforced. If uncertainty
remains after attempts for clarification have been made, the village official
shall interpret the specific provision at issue in a manner that is least
intrusive to the right to engage in the questioned activity.



      (2)   A village official shall seek acceptable alternatives
when the provisions of this article prohibit an activity from taking place at
a specific time or place, or in the manner requested or proposed.



      (3)   A village official shall not be concerned with the
substance of the content of any particular message to be conveyed through an
activity governed by this article. This does not mean, however, that a
cursory examination would be improper when making a determination as to how
to characterize the activities in question.



      (4)   A village official shall attempt to use, when reasonable
under the circumstances, an escalating response approach to obtain compliance
with the provisions of this article. A village official shall: (i) inform an
individual of his or her non-compliance; (ii) seek voluntary acquiescence to
an alternative; (iii) seek voluntary cessation of the activities; (iv) direct
that the specific activity be stopped, and a warn that a failure to obey may
result in the issuance of a citation or arrest; (iv) issue a citation; and,
(v) make an arrest. A village official should never feel an obligation to
strictly adhere to an escalating response approach when circumstances dictate
that such an approach would be unreasonable, futile, or endanger the safety
of any person or property.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-300.  Penalties:



   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this article
shall be fined not less two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each violation or day
said violation is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-301.  Administration:



   Violations of this article may be administered by any means authorized
by the village code of the Village of Justice, including administrative
adjudication, and by any other means permitted by law. Nothing in this
article shall be interpreted to limit the actions or remedies available to
the village.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



DIVISION 2. PERMIT PROVISIONS



Sec. 3-302.  Permit Requirements:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling or
solicitation activities within the village without first obtaining a permit
issued by the village clerk.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-303.  Permit Application:



   Any person desirous of engaging in peddling or solicitation activities
in the village shall file with the village clerk an application in writing,
on a form to be furnished by the village clerk, which shall consist of the
following information:



      (1)   Name, address, age and telephone number of the
applicant, which shall be confirmed through the applicant's driver's license
or state identification card, articles of incorporation, or other legally
recognized form of identification;



      (2)   A brief description of the business or activity;



      (3)   If acting as an employee of an employer, the name,
address and telephone number of the employer; or if acting as an agent, the
name, address and telephone number of the principal who is being represented,
with credentials in writing establishing the relationship and the authority
of the employee or agent to act for the employer or principal, as the case
may be;



      (4)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted or pleaded guilty to a felony or misdemeanor, the nature of the
offense, and the date of the conviction or plea;



      (5)   A statement as to whether the applicant has had a permit
denied, suspended or revoked for noncompliance with this article in the past;



      (6)   Proof of possession of any license or permit which,
under federal, state or local law, the applicant is required to have in order
to conduct the proposed business, or which, under any such law, would exempt
the applicant from the licensing requirements of this article; and



      (7)   Two (2) photographs of the applicant which shall have
been taken within sixty (60) days immediately preceding the date of filing of
the application. The photographs shall be of a size common to a passport.



(Ord. 2014- 15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-304.  Permit Fees:



   At the time the application is filed with the village clerk, the
applicant shall pay a fee to cover the cost of processing the application and
investigating the facts stated therein. The application fee shall be twenty
dollars ($20.00) and the permit fee shall be five dollars ($5.00) for each
solicitor and peddler.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-305.   Application Review and Issuance of Permit:



   (a)   Upon receipt of an application, the village clerk shall review
the application to determine if all of the information required by this
article is present. If the application has listed all of the information
necessary, and there exists no reason to deny the permit for the reasons set
forth in section 3-306, the village clerk shall issue the permit to the
applicant.



   (b)   Any permit issued pursuant to this article shall contain the
name, address and photograph of the permittee, the name of any employer or
principal, the class of permit issued, the date of issuance and the date of
expiration. The permit shall also contain a permit number (which shall be a
number matching a number listed on the application).



   (c)   The village clerk shall complete an application review and
advise an applicant of his or her decision within seventy-two (72) hours of
receipt of the application, excepting weekends and holidays. An applicant may
obtain his or her permit from village hall once advised that a decision to
grant the permit has been issued by the village clerk.



   (d)   If, upon the expiration of the seventy-two (72) hour review
period, the village clerk has not advised an applicant of his or her decision
to grant or deny a permit, an applicant may request, and the village clerk
shall be obligated to issue, a temporary permit.



   (e)   An applicant may commence activities under a temporary permit
once issued. If further review identifies a basis for which a permit should
be denied, an applicant shall be immediately notified by telephone that the
temporary permit is revoked and his or her application has been denied. If no
basis exists to deny a permit, the village clerk shall issue the permit upon
the applicant's return of the temporary permit. The temporary permit shall
expire two (2) days after the applicant is notified that a permit has been
issued. In no event shall an application review take longer than seven (7)
business days. At the expiration of seven (7) business days, and provided no
oral decision has been made concerning the issuance of the permit, the
applicant may request, and the village clerk shall be obligated to issue a
permit to the applicant. Once issued, the permit shall only be subject to
suspension or revocation as provided by sections 3-308 and 3-309 of this
article.



   (f)   The village clerk shall notify the applicant of his or her
decision to grant or deny a permit by the telephone number listed on the
application. The village clerk shall orally advise the applicant of the basis
for the denial.



   (g)   If an application is incomplete, the village clerk shall allow
the applicant an opportunity to provide the information necessary for his or
her review.



   (h)   In the case of a denial, the village clerk shall issue a
written decision advising the applicant why the permit was denied. The
written decision shall be mailed to the applicant via U.S. Mail at the
address contained on the application. The written decision shall be
postmarked no later than three (3) business days subsequent to the expiration
of the seventy-two (72) hour review period, or the oral advisement of a
denial of a permit, whichever is later.



   (i)   A denial of a permit may be appealed in the manner provided in
section 3-310 of this article.



   (j)   A record of all permits issued and denied pursuant to this
article shall be maintained by the village clerk for a period of two (2)
years.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-306.   Permit Denial:



   The village clerk may deny a permit for any of the following reasons,
which shall be noted in writing on the application:



      (1)   An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified
information on the application;



      (2)   The applicant has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a
felony or misdemeanor involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled
substances, crimes of dishonesty (e.g. theft, fraud, deceit,
misrepresentation, etc.), or any violent acts against persons or property,
within the five (5) years preceding the date of application;



      (3)   The applicant's refusal or failure to provide proof of
authority to act on behalf of an employer or principal;



      (4)   The applicant's denial of a permit issued under this
article within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does
show that the basis for the previous denial no longer exists.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-307.   Permit Expiration:



   Permits for solicitation and peddling activities shall expire one (1)
year from the date of issuance, but shall not permit the applicant to engage
in street solicitation activities.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-308.   Permit Suspension and Revocation:



   (a)   Any permit issued under this article may be suspended or
revoked by the village clerk after notice and a hearing for any basis
identified in section 3-309 of this article. Notice and a hearing prior to a
suspension or revocation shall not be given if village clerk determines that
an immediate suspension or revocation is necessary due to an unreasonable
risk posed to the public health, safety or welfare. In such cases, a
post-deprivation hearing will be provided. The suspension or revocation of a
permit by the village clerk may be appealed in the manner provided in section
3-310 of this article.



   (b)   In the case of a pre-deprivation hearing, the village clerk
shall provide notice to the permittee via U.S. Mail setting forth the time
and place of the hearing. The notice shall consist of the charges for which
the permit's suspension or revocation is being considered. The notice shall
contain the date(s) on which any charge is alleged to have occurred along
with the name(s) of any witness(es) that will testify at the hearing. Any
written or tangible evidence of the occurrence shall be identified in the
notice. A hearing pursuant to this section shall occur no earlier than seven
(7) days nor later than fourteen (14) days from the date the notice of
hearing is postmarked. The permittee shall be responsible for obtaining a
court reporter in order to preserve the record for appeal. After the hearing,
the village clerk shall orally advise the permittee of his or her decision to
suspend or revoke a permit under this article and the reasons therefor. If
the decision is to suspend or revoke, said suspension/revocation shall take
effect immediately. The village clerk shall issue a written decision setting
forth his or her decision and the basis for the ruling. The written decision
shall be mailed to the permittee via U.S. Mail at the address contained in
the application. The written decision shall be postmarked no later than three
(3) business days subsequent to the hearing.



   (c)   In the case of a post-deprivation hearing, the village clerk
shall provide oral and written notice to the permittee via U.S. Mail setting
forth the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall consist of the
charges for which the permit's suspension or revocation is being considered.
The notice shall contain the date(s) on which any charge is alleged to have
occurred along with the name(s) of any witness(es) that will testify at the
hearing. Any written or tangible evidence of the occurrence shall be
identified in the notice. A hearing pursuant to this section shall occur no
later than three (3) business days after the village clerk has suspended or
revoked the permit. The permittee shall be responsible for obtaining a court
reporter in order to preserve the record for appeal. After the hearing, the
Village Clerk shall orally advise the permittee of his or her decision to
reinstate the permit, or sustain the suspension or revocation of the permit,
and the reasons therefor. If the decision is to sustain the suspension or
revocation, said suspension/revocation shall continue in full force and
effect. The Village Clerk shall issue a written decision setting forth his or
her decision and the basis for the ruling. The written decision shall be made
available for pick-up and mailed to the permittee via U.S. Mail at the
address contained in the application, no later than two (2) business days
subsequent to the hearing.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-309.   Basis for Suspension or Revocation:



   Any permit may be suspended or revoked for the following reasons:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in
an application;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the
permittee in the course of conducting solicitation or peddling activities;



      (3)   Conducting peddling or solicitation activities contrary
to the provisions contained in the permit or this article;



      (4)   A conviction of any crime which would otherwise be a
basis for denying a permit application; or



      (5)   Conducting peddling or solicitation activities in such a
manner so as to create a public nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace,
or endanger the health, safety or welfare of the public.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10- 13-2014)



Sec. 3-310.   Appeals:



   Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the village clerk to
deny, suspend or revoke a permit under this article shall have the right to
appeal such decision as follows: (a) to the mayor; (b) to the corporate
authorities; or (c) to a court of competent jurisdiction. This section is
designed to provide three (3) separate and distinct means of effectuating
review. Exhaustion of remedies before one shall not preclude review by
another. Provided, however, once a method of review has been selected, the
election shall be exclusive and final, and the remedy shall be exhausted
before any further appeal may be initiated, unless otherwise provided by law.



      (1)   Appeals to Mayor:



         a.   Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of
the village clerk to deny, suspend or revoke a permit under this article may
appeal such decision to the mayor. An appeal to the mayor shall be filed
within fourteen (14) days from the date on which the village clerk's decision
has been mailed to the applicant/permittee. The date of filing shall be
measured from the date on which the written decision was postmarked. In the
event the village clerk fails to issue a written decision, the appellant
shall have seventeen (17) calendar days from the date on which he or she was
orally informed of the village clerk's decision to deny, suspend or revoke a
permit to appeal that decision.



         b.   An appeal shall be perfected by filing a written
statement with the village clerk setting forth the grounds for the appeal. If
a written decision was provided to the appellant from the village clerk, a
copy of that decision shall be attached to the appellant's written statement.
In the event that no written decision was provided, an applicant must set
forth the basis for the village clerk's action as was transmitted orally.
After the receipt of said appeal, the village clerk shall schedule the appeal
with the mayor.



         c.   A hearing shall be set by the mayor no later than
five (5) business days from the date on which an appeal is received. Notice
of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the appellant both by
telephone and by an alternative convenient to the applicant (i.e., e-mail,
facsimile, personal delivery) as provided on the person's application. An
appellant shall be given notice of the hearing at least one (1) business day
before the hearing.



         d.   The village clerk's decision to deny, suspend or
revoke a permit shall be presumed valid.



         e.   A hearing before the mayor shall be de novo. An
applicant may be represented by an attorney, issue subpoenas, and present
documentary evidence and witness testimony. An applicant shall have the right
to cross-examine witness testifying in opposition to his or her case. The
formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing.



         f.   A court reporter will be provided by the village in
order to preserve the record for appeal.



         g.   The mayor's decision to affirm or reverse the
decision of the village clerk shall be limited to the facts presented at the
hearing. The decision to affirm or reverse the village clerk's decision must
be based upon the reasons contained in this article but may not be limited to
the reason stated by the village clerk.



         h.   A decision to affirm or reverse a decision of the
village clerk shall be made by the mayor orally at the conclusion of the
hearing. A written decision setting forth the mayor's findings of fact and
determination shall be issued within two (2) business days of the hearing.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the mayor may appeal that decision to a
court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law. The time period by which
an applicant has the right to appeal the decision of the mayor shall begin to
run upon receipt of the written decision but not later than three (3) days
after the written decision is post-marked.



      (2)   Appeals to Corporate Authorities:



         a.   Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of
the village clerk to deny, suspend or revoke a permit under this article
appeal such decision to the corporate authorities. An appeal to the corporate
authorities shall be filed within fourteen (14) days from the date on which
the village clerk's decision has been mailed to the applicant/permittee. The
date of filing shall be measured from the date on which the written decision
was postmarked. In the event the village clerk fails to issue a written
decision, the appellant shall have seventeen (17) days from the date on which
he or she was orally informed of the village clerk's decision to deny,
suspend or revoke a permit to appeal that decision.



         b.   An appeal shall be perfected by filing a written
statement with the village clerk setting forth the grounds for the appeal. If
a written decision was provided to the appellant from the village clerk, a
copy of that decision shall be attached to the appellant's written statement.
In the event that no written decision was provided, an applicant must set
forth the basis for the village clerk's action as was transmitted orally.
After the receipt of said appeal, the village clerk shall schedule the appeal
for the next regularly scheduled meeting of the corporate authorities.
Provided, however, if said appeal is received within ninety-six (96) hours of
a regularly scheduled meeting, said appeal shall be heard at the following
regularly scheduled meeting.



         c.   A hearing shall be set no later than thirty (30)
days from the date on which an appeal is received. Notice of the time and
place of the hearing shall be given to the appellant both by telephone and
via U.S. Mail at the address provided on the person's application. An
appellant shall be given notice of the hearing at least five (5) days before
the hearing.



         d.   The village clerk's decision to deny, suspend or
revoke a permit shall be presumed valid.



         e.   A hearing before the corporate authorities shall be
de novo. An applicant may be represented by an attorney, issue subpoenas, and
present documentary evidence and witness testimony. An applicant shall have
the right to cross-examine witness testifying in opposition to his or her
case. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing.



         f.   A court reporter will be provided by the village in
order to preserve the record for appeal.



         g.   The corporate authorities decision to affirm or
reverse the decision of the village clerk shall be limited to the facts
presented to it at the hearing. The decision to affirm or reverse the village
clerk's decision must be based upon the reasons contained in this article but
may not be limited to the reason stated by the village clerk.



         h.   A decision to affirm or reverse a decision of the
village clerk shall be made by a majority vote of the corporate authorities
present at the meeting. A written decision setting forth the corporate
authorities' findings of fact and determination shall be issued within five
(5) days of the hearing. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the corporate
authorities may appeal that decision to a court of competent jurisdiction as
provided by law. The time period by which an applicant has the right to
appeal the decision of the corporate authorities shall begin to run upon
receipt of the written decision but not later than three (3) days after the
written decision is post-marked.



      (3)   Appeals to Judiciary: Any person aggrieved by the action
or decision of the village clerk to deny, suspend or revoke a permit under
this article may appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction as
provided by law.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13- 2014)



Sec. 3-311.  Exemptions:



   Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the application of this
division shall cite to the village clerk the legal authority under which the
exemption is claimed and shall present to the village clerk proof of
qualification for such exemption.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-312.  Transfer of Permits:



   No permit issued to any one (1) person shall be transferable to another
regardless of affiliation.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-313.  Canvassers:



   Canvassers shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this
article, but shall be subject to all other time, place and manner regulations.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



DIVISION 3. TIME, PLACE AND MANNER



Sec. 3-314.  Carrying of Permits:



   (a)   Every person required to obtain a permit under this article
shall carry that permit on himself or herself at all times while engaging in
activities so permitted.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or display a
permit issued to another person while engaging in activities governed by this
article.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-315.  Entry and Staying Upon Private Premises Unlawful:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser
to enter upon any private premises in the village which has posted at the
entry to the premises, or at the entry to the principal building on the
premises, a sign bearing the words "No Trespassers," "No Peddlers" or "No
Solicitors," or words of similar import.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser
to remain on any private premises once requested to leave by an owner or
occupant. Once requested to leave, a solicitor, peddler or canvasser shall be
obligated to do so immediately and peacefully.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-316.  Permitted Hours:



   (a)   Permitted hours for canvassing activities, peddling
activities, and soliciting activities upon residential property are Monday
through Sunday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.



   (b)   Permitted hours for canvassing activities, peddling
activities, and soliciting activities upon commercial and public property,
other than streets, are Monday through Saturday between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and on Sunday from 9:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m.



   (c)   No person shall engage in solicitation activities, peddling
activities, or canvassing activities other than during permitted hours.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13- 2014)



Sec. 3-317.  Handbills, Flyers and Other Materials:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser
to leave a handbill, flyer or other material upon any private premises where
the owner or occupants have posted at the entry to the premises, or at the
entry to the principal building on the premises, a sign bearing the words "No
Trespassers," "No Peddlers" or "No Solicitors," or words of similar import.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser
leave a handbill, flyer or other material upon any private premises which is
not securely attached thereto. Provided, however, it shall be unlawful to
damage any property in an attempt to securely attach any handbill, flyer, or
other material to a premises.



   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser
to leave a handbill, flyer or other material upon any private premises
without the owner's express permission which is temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant in any of the following circumstances: (i) it is
apparent that such property is unoccupied or vacant; or (ii) a distribution
from any date prior has not been removed.



   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser
to leave a handbill, flier, or other material upon any sidewalk, crosswalk,
curb or curbstone, flagstone or any other portion or part of any public way
or public place, or any lamppost, electric light, sign, hydrant, mailbox,
tree, or upon the piers, columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other
parts of any public bridge or viaduct, or other public structure or building.



   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser
to leave a handbill, flier or other material upon any automobile or other
vehicle that is parked upon any street, public parking lot, or commercial
parking lot, without the express consent of the owner of the vehicle, and
when acting with the consent of the owner, upon any automobile in a manner
that is not securely attached thereto.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-318.  Street Solicitation:



   Street solicitation is not permitted in or on any street in the village.



(Ord. 2014-15, § 1, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 3-319–3-320.   Reserved:



ARTICLE XI.  TAXICABS1,2



1  Cross reference-Motor Vehicles And Traffic, Ch. 6.



2  State law references-Municipal powers as to runners for cabs, 65 ILCS
5/11-42-4; municipal powers as to hackmen, cabmen, etc., 65 ILCS 5/11-42-6;
taxicab registration plates, 625 ILCS 5/3-412(e), 5/3-611.



Sec. 3-321.  License Required:



   A license shall be required to operate taxicabs or other public
vehicles to occupy cabstands and to pick up and discharge passengers within
the village. It shall be unlawful to operate a public vehicle as aforesaid
without a license. The term “public vehicle” when used in this chapter
shall be construed to include and to mean any taxicab, bus, automobile or
other similar vehicle used in the business of carrying persons for hire upon
the public streets of the village. Any vehicle to be licensed hereunder must
be equipped with a meter in good working order to record the amount to be
charged on each trip, which amount shall be shown in figures visible to the
passenger.



(Ord. 96-19, § 1, 7-8-1996)



Sec. 3-322.  Number, Term Of Licenses:



   (a)   Number Of Licenses:



      (1)   The number of licenses shall be determined by the
village board from time to time, based on the public convenience and
necessity; the village shall issue licenses to qualified applicants provided,
however, that the number of outstanding valid licenses shall not exceed the
number authorized by the village board.



      (2)   Licenses to operate taxicabs or other public vehicles
are not assignable.



      (3)   Licenses may be issued to one (1) or more qualified
taxicab companies approved by the village board. Each taxicab must be
licensed.



   (b)   License Term: Licenses shall be issued annually for a period
of the year, beginning on May 1 of each year.



(Ord. 96-19, § 2, 7-8-1996; Ord. 2009-15, § 15, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-323.  License Fees:



   The license fees specified in subsection 3-61 (85) of this chapter are
hereby enacted and adapted. Upon payment of this fee, a sticker will be
issued by the village for each taxicab. The sticker must be affixed on the
inside of the vehicle upon which licenses are authorized.



(Ord. 96-19, § 3, 7-8-1996; Ord. 2009-15, § 15, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-324.  Qualifications:



   License qualifications shall include safe, clean and sanitary equipment
with brakes, lights and turning signals all in good operating condition. All
taxicab vehicles licensed hereunder shall have passed a safety check at a
safety lane inspection service that has been licensed by the Secretary of
State of the State of Illinois. Passage of said safety inspection shall be
certified by said safety lane inspection service. Said safety check shall be
required for all vehicles licensed hereunder, twice a year at six (6) month
intervals. Licensees shall provide adequate insurance coverage and an
operating rate schedule approved by the village board and shall prominently
display such rate schedule in each of their licensed vehicles.



   Adequate Insurance Coverage as used herein shall mean that the licensee
will maintain and keep on deposit in with the village evidence of public
liability insurance covering any liability arising out of the ownership,
maintenance, use or operation by the licensee of any public vehicle within
the village, with limits of not less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for personal injury, including death to any one (1) person, not
less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury, including
death, in any one (1) accident, and limits of not less than twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for property damage in any one (1) accident.



(Ord. 96-19, § 4, 7-8-1996; Ord. 2009-15, § 15, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-325.  License Revocation:



   The licensee shall maintain the license standards of this chapter for
cab service after the licenses are issued. Failure to do so shall constitute
a violation of this chapter punishable by fine as provided in this code or by
revocation of license or both.



(Ord. 96-19, § 5, 7-8-1996)



Sec. 3-326.  Appeals:



   License revocations may be appealed to the village president and board
of trustees in writing, within ten (10) days after the receipt of the
revocation notice. After suitable inquiry, the village board may sustain or
reverse the revocation.



(Ord. 96-19, § 6, 7-8-1996)



Secs. 3-327-3-380.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XII.  SCAVENGERS1,2



1  Cross references-Health And Sanitation, Ch. 5; Landfills, § 5-241 et seq.



2  State law references-Municipal powers as to disposal of refuse, 65 ILCS
5/11-19-1 et seq.; Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.



Sec. 3-381.  Definition:



   As used in this article, the term Scavenger means any person engaged in
the removal and disposal of table refuse or animal and vegetable matter
usually known as garbage, from hotels, restaurants, cafes, boardinghouses and
other places not otherwise provided for by the village; or the removal and
disposal of ashes and cinders; or the removal of offal, contents of catch
basins, sewers and privy vaults; or the removal and disposal of manure, swill
or any animal or vegetable refuse and wastes, including decaying animal
matter and fish from commission houses and other places where such decaying
animal matter and fish may accumulate.



(Code 1972, § 3-14-1)



Sec. 3-382.  License-Required; Exceptions:



   No person shall engage in the business of private scavenger or shall be
permitted to remove and dispose of swill, offal, table refuse usually known
as garbage, or any other matter enumerated in section 3-381 of this article,
without first having obtained a license to do so; provided, however, that no
license shall be required of any person for the removal of manure from his
own premises; and provided further, that any person desiring to gather,
remove or dispose of garbage, decaying animal matter, and fish, swill or
other such animal or vegetable refuse and wastes from his own premises
without the aid of a licensed private scavenger may do so only upon the
written permission of the building commissioner or health officer, and then
only in the manner specified in such permit.



(Code 1972, § 3-14-2)



Sec. 3-383.  License Required; Application:



   (a)   An application for a private scavenger's license shall be made
in conformity with the general requirements of this code relating to
applications for licenses. The applicant shall also state the number of
vehicles which he intends to operate or use in such business and what method
of disposal and the place thereof are proposed by the applicant.



   (b)   Applications for new licenses shall be approved by both the
building commissioner and the health officer, with respect to health,
sanitation and safety provisions of this code. Applications for renewal of
licenses shall be accompanied by an inspection approval certificate for each
piece of equipment from the building commissioner and the health officer,
dated not earlier than sixty (60) days preceding the date of application.



   (c)   All private scavengers shall be required to replace old
equipment as it becomes unsuitable for the purpose for which it was
originally intended, with modern enclosed vehicles of a type acceptable to
the building commissioner and health officer.



(Code 1972, § 3-14-3)



Sec. 3-384.  License Required; Display:



   Each person licensed as a private scavenger shall receive from the
village, at the time the license is issued, a copy of his license and a copy
for each vehicle used in the conduct of the business so licensed. Upon demand
by the building commissioner, health officer or police officers of the
village, the driver of the vehicle shall display his license.



(Code 1972, § 3-14-4; Ord. 2009-15, § 16, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-385.  Dumping In Village:



   The offensive matters described in this article shall under no
circumstances be disposed of in any public dump or public place within the
village, nor in any manner or place other than is prescribed by the health
officer.



(Code 1972, § 3-14-5)



Sec. 3-386.  Removal By Village:



   Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict with any
provision of this code concerning the removal and disposal of dirt, filth,
litter, garbage, ashes, manure, offal, swill, dead animals and other material
from the public ways by the village through its contractors or otherwise.



(Code 1972, § 3-14-6)



Sec. 3-387.  Manner Of Removing Waste:



   It shall be the duty of every contractor, scavenger and person, his
agents and employees, who have contracted or undertaken to remove any
diseased or dead animal, offal, rubbish, garbage, dirt, street sweepings or
other filthy, offensive or noxious substance, or is engaged about any such
removal or in the loading or unloading of any such substance, to do the same
with dispatch and in every particular in a manner as cleanly and free from
offense and with as little danger and prejudice to life and health as
possible.



(Code 1972, § 3-14-7)



Sec. 3-388.  Enforcement:



   The building commissioner and health officer shall enforce the
provisions of this article and shall issue such reasonable orders in
connection with the carrying on of the business of a licensed scavenger as it
deems necessary to protect the health of the public. It shall be the duty of
such licensed scavengers to comply with such orders and to perform the work
required of them in such a way that no nuisance will be created thereby.



(Code 1972, § 3-14-8)



Sec. 3-389.  Violation:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of
this article or the rules of the building commissioner or the health officer
concerning the business of scavengers.



(Code 1969, Ch. 11, Art. 15; Code 1972, § 3-14-9)



Secs. 3-390-3-405.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XIII.  MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS



Sec. 3-406.  Title:



   This comprehensive amendment shall be known and cited as the VILLAGE OF
JUSTICE MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARK ORDINANCE OF 2005.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-407.  Purpose:



   This comprehensive amendment to the village of Justice mobile homes and
mobile home park ordinance is adopted pursuant to the following purposes:



   That rising costs in the building construction field seriously impeded
the building of new housing, particularly for moderate and low income
citizens. That the existing housing stock is continuously depleted through
demolition resulting from aging buildings, urban renewal, highway
construction and other necessary public improvements. That advances in the
construction of mobile homes has significantly increased the importance of
this mode of housing. That through proper regulation and licensing mobile
homes can contribute to the quality housing of citizens:



      (1)    To promote public health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience and general welfare;



      (2)    To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and
other hazards;



      (3)    To provide for moderate and low income housing;



      (4)    To increase the quality of housing for village of
Justice residents;



      (5)    To establish new penalties for violations of this
article.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-408.  Definitions:



   Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and phrases
set forth below inclusive, shall have the meanings set forth in this article.
Additionally, words and phrases not defined in this article shall have the
meaning indicated by common dictionary definition.



   Dependent Mobile Home: A mobile home which does not have a toilet and
bath or shower facilities.



   Front: The end of the mobile or manufactured home to which the hitch is
or was attached and used for towing or for delivery to the site. When a
mobile home is placed in a mobile home park and the hitch is removed, the
village of Justice shall make a determination as to what constitutes the
front.



   Independent Mobile Home: A mobile home which has a self-contained
toilet and bath or shower facilities.



   License: Mobile home park operator's license.



   Manufactured Home Accessory Buildings Or Structures: An assembly of
materials forming a construction for use which contributes to the comfort,
convenience or necessity of the principal building or structure served,
including, among other things, awnings, cabanas, garages, storage structures,
sheds, decks, carports, fences, windbreaks, porches or other like
appurtenances.



   Manufactured Home And Mobile Home: A structure designed for permanent
habitation, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling
mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty feet (40') or more in
length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square
feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, with wheels, tongue, lug
bolts and hitch permanently removed, when connected to the required
utilities, including plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical
systems. Any structure defined in this article as a "mobile home" shall also
be considered a "manufactured home". For purposes of this article, the terms
"mobile home" and "manufactured home" are used interchangeably.



   Manufactured Home Community And Mobile Home Park: A tract of land or
two (2) or more contiguous tracts of land that contain sites with the
necessary utilities for five (5) or more independent manufactured homes for
permanent habitation either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall
include any building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for
use as a part of the equipment of such manufactured home community. Separate
ownership of contiguous tracts of land shall not preclude the tracts of land
from common licensure as a manufactured home community if they are maintained
and operated jointly. Neither an immobilized manufactured home nor a
motorized recreational vehicle shall be construed as being part of a
manufactured home community. Any community defined in this article as a
"mobile home park" shall also be considered a "manufactured home community".
For the purposes of this article the terms "mobile home park", and
"manufactured home community", are used interchangeably.



   Permanent Habitation: A period of one or more months.



   School District: Any district created or operated under the provisions
of the school code, approved May 1, 1945, as amended.



   Site: The lot on which the mobile home is located for permanent
habitation.



   Village: The village of Justice, Illinois.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-409.  License:



   No person, firm or corporation shall maintain, conduct, or operate a
mobile home park without first obtaining an annual license from the village
of Justice. "Conduct or operate a mobile home park" as used in this article
shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, supplying or maintaining
common water, sewer or other utility supply or service, or the collection of
rents directly or indirectly from five (5) or more independent mobile homes.
The license year or period shall begin on January 1 of each year and expire
on December 31 of said year. A new license may be issued upon proper
application and payment of the annual license fee as set forth in section
13-1 of this code provided the applicant is in substantial compliance with
the rules and regulations of the village of Justice. All licenses issued
under this article shall be nontransferable.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-410.  Permit; Application:



   No person, firm or corporation shall establish, construct, or alter in
any manner, a mobile home park without first obtaining a permit from the
village of Justice. In order to obtain a permit, the applicant shall file
with the village of Justice a written application and submit plan documents,
that shall be prepared by a registered engineer or architect, licensed to
practice in the state of Illinois, with registration seal affixed, setting
forth:



      (1)    The full name and address of the applicant or
applicants, or names and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a
partnership, or names and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a
corporation, and the present or last occupation of the applicant at the time
of the filing of the application;



      (2)    The location and legal description of the tract of land
upon which it is proposed to operate and maintain a mobile home park;



      (3)    The proposed facilities in the mobile home park for
water supply, sewage, garbage and waste disposal, fire protection and any
proposed alterations therein and the maintenance thereof;



      (4)    The proposed method of lighting the structures and land
upon which the mobile home park is to be located;



      (5)    The plot plans of the mobile home park, including the
designated and properly numbered manufactured home spaces which front on a
street, as may be required by the rules and regulations of the village of
Justice under the provisions of this article;



      (6)    The building plans and specifications for existing
buildings and facilities; and



      (7)    A statement of the firefighting facilities, public or
private, which are available to the mobile home park.



   An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters contained
in the application shall be attached thereto. Each application shall be
accompanied by an application fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The
application fee once paid to the village of Justice shall not be refunded.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-411.  Permit And License Issued:



   (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit to construct or
alter a mobile home park or an application for a license to operate and
maintain the same, the village of Justice shall, if the park is, or the
proposed park will be, in conformity with this article and the rules and
regulations adopted by the village of Justice pursuant thereto, and all other
applicable laws and ordinances, issue the required permit. If the application
for a permit to construct or alter, or an application for a license is
declined, the village of Justice shall give the reasons therefor in writing
to the applicant; and if the objections can be corrected, the applicant may
amend his application and resubmit it for approval. The village of Justice
shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits and
licenses within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the
plans do not conform to the requirements of all pertinent ordinances and
laws, the village of Justice shall deny the application in writing, stating
the reasons therefor. The village of Justice shall have the authority to call
on the assistance of other entities or agencies which could provide
consultation, expertise or have regulatory authority beyond that of the
village of Justice.



   (b)   Such issuance of a permit does not relieve the applicant from
securing building permits or from complying with any municipal, zoning board,
building and housing codes, or other ordinances applicable thereto.



   (c)   No change in any sanitary facilities, methods of water supply,
sewer, drainage, garbage or waste disposal, and no change in the plot plan
shall be made without first making a written application to the building
department of the village of Justice and receiving a written permit
therefrom. Such application shall be made in accordance with the provisions
contained in this article the way and manner hereinbefore set forth and shall
be accompanied by an application fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
No application fee shall be required to accompany an application for a permit
to alter a mobile home park where such alteration involves only a reduction
in the number of mobile home spaces to a number less than that for which such
park is currently licensed.



   (d)   If a permit to construct or alter a park has been issued, the
applicant upon completion of the construction or alteration shall notify the
village of Justice. The village of Justice shall then inspect the park and if
completed in accordance with the accepted application, the village of Justice
shall issue a license.



   (e)   All permits and licenses issued by the village of Justice are
nontransferable.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-412.  License Fee:



   (a)   In addition to the application fees provided for herein, the
licensee shall pay to the village of Justice on or before January 1 of each
year, an annual license fee as specified in section 13-1 of this code.



   (b)   The licensee shall pay to the village of Justice a fee
established in section 13-1 of this code for each additional mobile home
space added to a park under authority of a written permit to alter the park
as provided in sections 3-410 and 3-411 of this article. All requisite
permits and payment of fees must be secured before any mobile homes are
located on the additional mobile home sites spaces. The village of Justice
shall issue an amended license to cover such additional mobile home sites,
when they are to be occupied before the end of the license year, for which an
annual license has been previously issued.



   (c)   Provided that subsequent to the effective date hereof, an
applicant for an original license to operate a new park constructed under a
permit issued by the village of Justice shall only be required to pay a
prorated annual license fee based on the remaining months of the licensure
year for the first year of operation.



   (d)   Each license fee shall be paid to the village of Justice and
any license fee or any part thereof, once paid to and accepted by the village
of Justice shall not be refunded; once accepted by the village of Justice, no
license fee or portion thereof shall be returned to the applicant.



   (e)   The village shall deposit all funds received under this
section.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005; Ord. 2009-15, § 17, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-413.  Notices; Revocation And Suspension:



   (a)   Notices: Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to
revocation or suspension by the village of Justice. The village of Justice
shall first serve or cause to be served upon the licensee a written notice
which shall specify the way or ways in which such a licensee has failed to
comply with statute, this article, or any rules or regulations promulgated by
the village of Justice pertaining thereto. Said notice shall require the
licensee to remove or abate such nuisance, in sanitary or objectionable
condition, specified in such notice or to otherwise bring the mobile home
park into compliance with the provisions of this article and the rules and
regulations promulgated by the village of Justice, within five (5) days or
within a longer period of time as may be allowed by the village of Justice.
If the licensee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of said notice,
within the time specified or such extended period of time, the village of
Justice may revoke or suspend such license.



   (b)   Revocation Or Suspension:



      (1)    The village of Justice may revoke a permit in the event
that there has been any false statement or misrepresentation in the
application or plans on which a permit was based.



      (2)    The village of Justice may revoke or suspend a license
in the event a licensee fails to timely comply with any of the terms or
conditions contained in a village of Justice notice to comply. In the event
of a village of Justice revocation or suspension hearing, the following shall
apply:



         a.    The village of Justice shall serve written notice
by registered mail to the park operator, permit holder or licensee at least
ten (10) days prior to the village of Justice's scheduled hearing.



         b.    The village of Justice shall determine the date,
location and time for the hearing.



         c.    The hearing shall be conducted by a duly qualified
employee of the village of Justice designated in writing as a hearing officer.



         d.    The hearing officer may compel by subpoena or
subpoena duces tecum the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of books and papers, and administer oaths to witnesses.



         e.    The hearing officer shall permit the applicant or
licensee to appear in person and to be represented by counsel at the hearing
at which time the applicant or licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to
present all relevant matters in resisting the revocation or suspension
thereof.



         f.    In the event of the inability of any party, or the
village of Justice, to procure the attendance of witnesses to give testimony
or produce books and papers, such party or the village of Justice may take
the deposition of witnesses in accordance with the provisions of the laws of
the state of Illinois. All testimony taken at a hearing shall be reduced to
writing, and all such testimony and other evidence introduced at the hearing
shall be a part of the record of the hearing.



         g.    The hearing officer shall make findings of fact in
such hearing, and the hearing officer shall render his or her decision within
thirty (30) days after the termination of the hearing, unless additional time
is required by him or her for a proper disposition of the matter. It shall be
the duty of the hearing officer or a designated employee of the village of
Justice, to forward a copy of the hearing officer's decision, by registered
mail, to the park operator or permit holder, as the case may be, within
fifteen (15) days of rendering such decision.



         h.    Technical errors in the proceeding before the
hearing officer or their failure to observe the technical rules of evidence
shall not constitute grounds for the reversal of any administrative decision
unless it appears to the court that such error or failure materially affects
the rights of any party and results in substantial injustice to him.



         i.    All subpoenas issued by the hearing officer may be
served as provided for in civil actions. The fees of witnesses for attendance
and travel shall be the same as the fees for witnesses before the circuit
court and shall be paid by the party to such proceeding at whose request the
subpoena is issued. If such subpoena is issued at the request of the village
of Justice, the witness fee shall be paid as an administrative expense.



         j.    In cases of refusal of a witness to attend or
testify, or to produce books or papers, concerning any matter upon which he
might be lawfully examined, the circuit court of Cook County, upon
application of any party to the proceeding, may compel obedience by similar
order of said court.



         k.    The village of Justice shall not be required to
certify any record or file any answer or otherwise appear in any proceeding
for judicial review unless the party filing the complaint deposits with the
village of Justice the sum of ninety five cents ($0.95) per page representing
costs of reproduction and certification. Failure on the part of the plaintiff
to make such deposit shall be grounds for dismissal of the action.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-414.  Operating Requirements:



   Each mobile home park licensed or to be constructed under the
provisions of this article shall be operated and maintained in accordance
with the requirements of this section.



      (1)   All licenses and permits to construct, alter and operate
the mobile home park shall be prominently displayed in the mobile home park
office.



      (2)   Every mobile home park shall be in the charge of a
responsible attendant or caretaker whose name shall be on file at all times
with the village of Justice and the village of Justice building and zoning
commission and whose duty it shall be to maintain the park, its facilities
and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, and it shall be the
responsibility of the licensee, for any violation of the provisions of this
article.



      (3)   No mobile home park shall be located such that the
drainage of the park area will endanger any water supply. All mobile home
parks shall be well drained. No wastewater shall be deposited on the surface
of the ground within the mobile home park. The village of Justice shall
require the owner of the mobile home park to provide a report, at the expense
of the mobile home park, by an Illinois state licensed engineer concerning
drainage, overland water flow and compensatory storage requirements,
calculated on the basis of the 100-year frequency rainfall for the area and
the amount of impervious surfaces within the mobile home park, at least every
five (5) years. Section 11-11 of this code shall also apply.



      (4)   Each site on which a mobile home is located, shall have
a minimum area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, except that
sites existing in parks or approved by the village of Justice for
construction prior to August 21, 1967, shall contain an area of not less than
one thousand (1,000) square feet.



         No mobile home shall be located closer than five feet (5')
to the side lot lines of a mobile home park, or closer than ten feet (10') to
a public street, alley or building. Each individual site shall abut or face
on a private or public driveway or roadway of not less than twenty four feet
(24') in width, which driveway or roadway shall have unobstructed access to a
public highway or alley. There shall be an open space of at least ten feet
(10') adjacent to the sides of every mobile home and at least five feet (5')
adjacent to the ends of every mobile home for mobile homes placed on a site
prior to the effective date hereof. For mobile homes placed on a site after
the effective date hereof, no portion of a mobile home, excluding the tongue,
shall be closer than ten feet (10') side to side, eight feet (8') end to
side, and six feet (6') end to end horizontally from any other mobile home or
community building. Compliance with the setback and separation requirements
shall be adhered to whenever an owner of a mobile home community enlarges or
expands a concrete pad used to support a mobile home, installs a new mobile
home, or replaces an existing mobile home on or after the effective date
hereof.



         For new mobile home parks constructed and licensed after
the effective date hereof, no mobile home shall be located closer than ten
feet (10') to a private street.



         In the instance where an owner of a mobile home community
enlarges or expands a concrete pad in an existing community used to support a
mobile home, installs a new mobile home in an existing community, or replaces
an existing mobile home in an existing community, on or after the effective
date hereof, the mobile home shall be no closer than ten feet (10') to a
public or private street. The licensee may apply to the village of Justice
for a variance from this setback requirement.



      (5)   An adequate supply of water of safe, sanitary quality,
approved by the village of Justice shall be furnished at each mobile home
park. Where water from other sources than that supplied by the village is
proposed to be used, the source of such supply shall first be approved by the
village of Justice. Each site shall be provided with a cold water tap located
in accordance with regulations of the village of Justice.



      (6)   All sewage and other water carried wastes shall be
disposed of into a municipal sewerage system whenever the interceptor or
sewer main of such system is adjacent to the mobile home park. In mobile home
parks in which such connections are not available, disposal shall be into a
private system which includes a sanitary means of disposal, the operation of
which creates neither a nuisance nor a menace to health.



      (7)   When a water carriage system of sewage is used each site
shall be provided with a sewer connection for the combined liquid waste
outlet or outlets of each mobile home. It shall be the duty of the owner or
operator of said park to provide an approved type of water and odor tight
connection from the mobile home water drainage to the sewer connection, and
it shall be the duty of said owner or operator to make such connection and
keep all occupied mobile homes connected to said sewer while located in the
park. Sewer connections in unoccupied sites shall be closed such that they
will emit no odors or cause a breeding place for flies. No water or waste
shall be allowed to fall on the ground from a mobile home.



      (8)   A sufficient number of adequate vermin, pest resistant
and watertight containers in accordance with the rules and regulations
adopted by the village of Justice shall be supplied for the storage of
garbage. Grass, trees and shrubbery shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary
and attractive condition, which creates neither a nuisance nor menace to
public health.



         Garbage containers shall be emptied at least once a week
and shall not be filled to overflowing, or allowed to become foul smelling or
a breeding place for insects.



         Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in a manner which
creates neither a nuisance nor a menace to health and which is approved by
the village of Justice.



      (9)   Adequate insect and rodent control measures shall be
employed. All buildings shall be vermin and pest resistant and rodent
harborages shall not be permitted to exist in the mobile home park or
pathways.



      (10)   The authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) shall require
for any mobile home or manufactured home that is: a) newly constructed; or b)
all mobile homes brought into a mobile home park after the effective date
hereof, the installation of such approved automatic sprinkler equipment
throughout the entire structure as mandated by NFPA-13D. In addition, one (1)
fire sprinkler head at and in each heating plant area of a mobile home, with
the sprinkler head to be located within five (5) feet of a furnace and the
hot water heater; and one (1) fire sprinkler head within any attached garage.



         Additionally, a smoke detector in working order, shall be
installed by the tenant in each bedroom in the mobile home, and one (1)
carbon monoxide detector shall be installed in the mobile home, in accordance
with standards approved by the Fire Prevention Bureau having jurisdiction in
the village. The space under manufactured homes and accessory buildings and
structures shall not be used for the storage of combustible materials or for
the storage or placement of flammable liquids, gases or liquid or gas fuel
powered equipment.



         If a mobile home community has fire hydrants, the fire
hydrant valves shall be tested annually and the flow rates documented by the
local fire department, water department or other entity capable of analyzing
the available flow from the hydrants. Such test results shall be available to
the village upon request.



         The licensee shall provide notification in writing to the
local fire protection authority of the hydrants that have been deemed
unsatisfactory, which includes an agreement to either remove the hydrants,
reverse the top of the hydrant, or provide some other identification
acceptable to the fire department to indicate that the hydrant is not
acceptable. The licensee shall then take immediate, affirmative steps to
either eliminate the defective hydrants or restore them to working order.



         The residents of the mobile home community shall be advised
in writing by the licensee within thirty (30) days when a mobile home
community licensee becomes aware that one (1) or more hydrants in the
community is inadequate. The location of these fire hydrants shall be
specified in writing along with a plan to correct the situation and an
anticipated date for completion. A copy of such notification shall be
provided to the village.



         All new mobile home parks created and licensed after the
date of adoption hereof, must be provided with fire hydrants at least every
five hundred (500) feet of any structure. At a minimum, the hydrants within
the community must be linked to a six inch (6") water main that generates one
thousand (1,000) to one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons per minute,
with a static pressure of thirty-five (35) psi.



         Within five (5) years after the adoption hereof, all mobile
home parks must implement one (1) of the following fire protection systems:



         a.   A manufactured home community based system,
connected to the local fire protection district, with fire hydrants at least
every five hundred (500) feet of any structure. At a minimum, the hydrants
within the mobile home park must be connected to a six inch (6") water main
that generates one thousand (1,000) to one thousand five hundred (1,500)
gallons per minute, with a static pressure of thirty-five (35) psi; or



         b.   An adequate and reliable water supply system that
meets fire mitigation needs, if approved by the village in consultation with
the local fire protection district. Examples include, but are not limited to,
the following:



            1.   A mobile home park based system, connected to
the local water distribution system, with fire hydrants strategically placed.
At a minimum, the hydrants within the system must be connected to a six inch
(6") water main that generates one thousand (1,000) to one thousand five
hundred (1,500) gallons per minute, with a static pressure of thirty-five
(35) psi;



            2.   An onsite water reservoir, with a
distribution system meeting the minimum requirements of subsection (10)b1 of
this section.



      (11)   Temporary porches, canvas roofed canopies and skirts
may be permitted for mobile homes if in compliance with applicable local fire
safety and building codes. No permanent or semipermanent structure shall be
affixed to any manufactured home as an addition to such manufactured home.
Permanent or semipermanent additions to movable structures are considered
nonconforming uses and are not allowed under village of Justice code.



         Manufactured home accessory buildings or structures
constructed after the date of adoption hereof must maintain five foot (5')
setbacks from all property lines and must be constructed entirely of
noncombustible materials, provided that such buildings or structures are at
least five feet (5') from an accessory building or structure on an adjacent
site. Accessory buildings and structures constructed before the date of
adoption hereof shall be permitted as nonconforming.



      (12)   All streets and driveways in every mobile home park
must be maintained in a passable and reasonably dustproof condition at all
times. All streets and driveways in every mobile home park established after
January 1, 1954, shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20') for streets
or driveways. All streets and driveways in mobile home parks constructed
after August 21, 1967, shall have a minimum width of twenty four feet (24').



      (13)   The management of every mobile home park shall assume
full responsibility for maintaining in good repair and condition all
sanitary, electrical and safety appliances in the park. Management shall
promptly bring such action as is necessary to prosecute or eject from the
park any person or persons who fail to comply with the regulations of this
article.



      (14)   Electrical outlets for each individual site shall be
provided and the installation shall be in accordance with all state and
village of Justice codes and ordinances.



      (15)   In no event shall a dependent mobile home, or
nonpermanent shelter or other vehicle designed or used for sleeping purposes,
other than an independent mobile home, be permitted for occupancy at any time
in a mobile home park.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005; Ord. 2006-06, § 2, 3-13-2006; Ord. 2007-25,
§ 2, passed 10-9- 2007; Ord. 2009-06, § 2, 3-9-2009)



Sec. 3-415.  Community Buildings:



   When mobile home community kitchens, dining rooms, laundries, or other
facilities are provided, such facilities and equipment as are supplied must
be maintained in a sanitary condition and kept in good repair, and subject to
such rules and regulations as may be issued by the village of Justice.



   All buildings constructed or altered and all plumbing, and all
electrical and heating installations shall be in accordance with existing
building codes as adopted by the village of Justice.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-416.  Records Maintenance:



   When the village of Justice has approved an application for a permit to
construct or make alterations to a mobile home park or the appurtenances
thereto or has issued a license to operate and maintain the same, the village
of Justice shall retain the original permit or license and keep a file
thereof, and one (1) copy shall be returned to the applicant or his agent,
one (1) copy to the village president and one (1) copy to the village of
Justice building commissioner. The village of Justice shall provide notice of
all approved applications for construction of new parks or expansion of
licensed parks to the village of Justice building commissioner.



   Licenses issued hereunder apply only to the premises described in the
application and in the license issued thereon, and only one location shall be
so described in each license. A license which has been issued to a person may
not be transferred to any other person without the written consent of the
village board.



   The village shall draft and supply all forms necessary to obtain a
permit or license from the village of Justice. The forms shall specify the
documents and detail necessary to obtain permits to construct or make
alterations upon mobile home parks and the documents and detail necessary for
a license to operate and maintain a mobile home park according to this
article.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005; Ord. 2009-15, § 17, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-417.  Mobile Home Park Sites:



   The village of Justice building commissioner shall keep a record of all
mobile home parks licensed by the village of Justice. Said records shall
include the names and addresses of all such parks, the names and addresses of
the licensees, the number of mobile home lots in each mobile home park, the
source of water supply, the system of sewage and garbage disposal, and any
other information desired by the building commissioner.



   The village of Justice shall supply licensees of all mobile home parks
with any and all applicable health rules and regulations pertaining thereto
made by the village of Justice, and any change or changes that may be made
from time to time and such rules and regulations shall be posted by the
management of such mobile home park in a protected, conspicuous place within
the mobile home park.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-418.  Mobile Home Park Registration:



   Each mobile home park shall be provided with a custodian's office where
each mobile home entering such park shall be assigned to a site, given a copy
of the park rules and regulations and registered according to the prescribed
form. Such registration shall include the name and address of the owner of
each mobile home; every occupant of such a mobile home; the square feet of
floor space contained in each mobile home; the license number of all units,
the state issuing such licenses and a statement indicating the exact location
at which such manufactured home was last parked, including the state, city,
town, or village where such parking occurred; and the date of entry of each
mobile home into the mobile home park.



   No manufactured home shall be admitted to a manufactured home park
without having displayed, in accordance with section 3-120 of the Illinois
vehicle code, approved July 1, 1970, as amended, a display certificate of
title. Representatives of the state department of revenue and all other law
enforcement officers may enter any mobile home park at any time for the
purpose of determining which, if any, mobile homes located therein do not
have the display certificate of title.



   The register shall be signed by the owner or occupant of the mobile
home. Any person furnishing misinformation in the register shall be deemed
guilty of a class A misdemeanor. The registration records shall be neatly and
securely maintained, and no registration records shall be destroyed until six
(6) years have elapsed after the departure of any tenant from the park. The
register shall be available for inspection upon request by all law
enforcement officers and by the village of Justice.



   In order to comply with the reporting requirements of this section, it
shall be the duty of each licensee to conduct sufficiently in advance of the
reporting dates, surveys in advance of the report's due dates of every owner
or occupant of all manufactured homes located in the community to determine
the names and ages of all school age children residing in the community. It
shall be the duty of each licensee, on February 1 and September 1 of each
year, to file with the school board or boards of the school district or
districts wherein the manufactured home park is located, a report giving the
names and ages of all children of school age living in said manufactured home
park.



   The governing body of the school district in which a manufactured home
park is located, by and through its officers, attendance officers and proper
employees, may inspect and visit a manufactured home park for the purpose of
examining the register with reference to children of school age for the
purpose of enforcing attendance of schoolchildren housed in the manufactured
home park. When a manufactured home park is located in two (2) or more school
districts, the school district boards of such districts, acting jointly, may
proceed under the provisions of this article.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-419.  Fines:



   Whoever violates any provisions of this article shall, except as
otherwise provided, be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day's violation shall
constitute a separate offense. The village attorney shall bring such actions
in the name of the people of the village of Justice or may, in addition to
other remedies provided in this article, bring action for an injunction to
restrain such violation, or to enjoin the operation of any such mobile home
park.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-420.  Exclusions:



   Nothing in this article shall be construed to include the state parks
of Illinois. The term "mobile home park" shall not be construed to include
buildings, tents, or other structures maintained by any individual or company
on their own premises and used exclusively to house their own farm labor, or
any military establishment of the United States or of this state wherein a
travel trailer or mobile home may be located.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-421.  Enforcement:



   The village of Justice shall enforce the provisions of this article and
the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and the village of Justice
shall inspect, at least once each year, each mobile home park and all the
accommodations and facilities therewith. Such officials or officers are
hereby granted the power and authority to enter upon the premises of such
mobile home parks at any time for the inspection purposes herein set forth.
The village of Justice shall promptly bring such action as is necessary to
prosecute any person or persons who fail to comply with this article and the
rules and regulations. Failure to comply with the village of Justice
directions for compliance or the failure to cooperate with village officials,
including granting them access to the park, shall be grounds for the
revocation of any license issued or to refuse to renew a license.



   The village of Justice building commissioner may issue rules and
regulations to carry out the provisions of this article.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-422.  Administrative Review Act:



   The "administrative review act" 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101
et seq. (2002), and all amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules
adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern all proceedings for
judicial review of final administrative decisions of the village of Justice
hereunder. The term "administrative decision" is defined in section 3-101 of
the "administrative review act".



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-423.  Severability:



   If any one or more of the provisions of this article are declared
unconstitutional or the application thereof is held invalid, the validity of
the remainder of this article and the application of such provisions to other
persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-424.  Jurisdiction:



   This article applies to all mobile homes and mobile home parks located
in the village of Justice.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Sec. 3-425.  Effective Date:



   This article to be effective on the date of passage by the village of
Justice board of trustees.



(Ord. 2005-22, § 1, 10-24-2005)



Secs. 3-426-3-450.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XIV.  SALES ON PRIVATE RESIDENCE PROPERTY



Sec. 3-451.  Definitions:



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Private Residence: A private apartment or home and outbuildings
thereto, but shall not include any buildings used solely for commercial
purposes.



   Resident: Any person residing within the premises involved in the
activities as defined in this article.



(Code 1972, § 3-21-2)



Sec. 3-452.  Violations:



   (a)   A permittee under this article shall be subject to a fine of
up to ten dollars ($10.00) for each sign not removed within the three (3) day
period as stated in section 3-458 of this article.



   (b)   Any person who sells or endeavors to sell any merchandise at a
private residence sale without a permit shall be subject to a fine of not
less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for each day of such offense.



   (c)   No resident may conduct more than two (2) private residence
sales in any calendar year and any resident conducting more than two (2)
sales in any calendar year shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
day that such sale is conducted.



   (d)   Any person who sells or endeavors to sell merchandise not
commonly used in or about a residence shall be fined not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such
offense.



(Code 1972, § 3-21-9; Ord. 76-6, 4-1-1976)



Sec. 3-453.  Purpose:



   This article is enacted to cover sales of items commonly identified
with and for use in or in connection with a private residence and covers
sales commonly referred to as garage sales.



(Code 1972, § 3-21-1)



Sec. 3-454.  Permit Required:



   (a)   Any resident conducting a private residence sale must obtain a
permit for such sale from the village not less than five (5) days prior to
the commencement of such sale.



   (b)   The fee shall be five dollars ($5.00) for such permit.



   (c)   The permit shall be issued for the residence of the permittee
only.



   (d)   All fees collected shall be turned over to the Justice youth
department.



(Code 1972, § 3-21-3; Ord. 88-11, 5-23-1988; Ord. 90-12, § 1, 8-13-1990;
Ord. 2009-15, § 18, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-455.  Restriction On Items For Sale:



   All private residence sales shall be limited to household furniture,
furnishings, clothing and other such items as are commonly used in and about
a private residence.



(Code 1972, § 3-21-4)



Sec. 3-456.  Permit Issued Annually:



   No resident may conduct a garage sale without a permit in any calendar
year.



(Code 1972, § 3-21-5)



Sec. 3-457.  Number Of Signs:



   The application for a permit under this article must specify the number
of signs announcing the sale that the permittee shall erect.



(Code 1972, § 3-21-6)



Sec. 3-458.  Removal of signs.



   Signs shall be removed within three (3) days after the private
residence sale is concluded.



(Code 1972, § 3-21-7)



Sec. 3-459.  Length limited.



   The limit of garage sales shall not exceed three (3) consecutive days.



(Code 1972, § 3-21-8)



Secs. 3-460-3-475.  Reserved.



ARTICLE XV. HOSPITALS1



1  State law reference-Municipal licensing and regulation of hospitals, Ill.
Rev. Stat. Ch. 111 1/2, § 145.



Sec. 3-476.  Definition.



   As used in this article, "hospital" means any institution, place,
building or agency, public or private, whether organized for profit or not,
devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the
diagnosis and treatment or care of two (2) or more unrelated persons admitted
for overnight stay or longer in order to obtain medical, including obstetric,
psychiatric and nursing, care of illness, disease, injury, infirmity, or
deformity. The term "hospital," without regard to length of stay, shall also
include:



      (1)    Any facility which is devoted primarily to providing
psychiatric and related services and programs for the diagnosis and treatment
or care of two (2) or more unrelated persons suffering from emotional or
nervous diseases;



      (2)    All places where pregnant females are received, cared
for, or treated during delivery irrespective of the number of patients
received.



   The term "hospital" includes general and specialized hospitals,
tuberculosis sanitaria, mental or psychiatric hospitals and sanitaria, and
includes maternity homes, lying-in homes, and homes for unwed mothers in
which care is given during delivery.



(Code 1972, § 6-14-1)



Sec. 3-477.  Penalty.



   Any person or corporation convicted of any section of this article
shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-14-6; Ord. No. 75-14, 9-4-75)



Sec. 3-478.  License required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the regularly
constituted authorities of the United States, the state, the county or the
village to conduct or operate any hospital within the village without first
obtaining a license therefor.



(Code 1972, § 6-14-2)



   State law reference-Hospital Licensing Act, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 111
1/2, § 142 et seq.



Sec. 3-479.  Removal of bodies.



   The person acting as superintendent or manager, or who is otherwise in
charge or control of any hospital, or any person connected with any hospital
in any capacity whatsoever as nurse, physician or attendant, shall not order,
permit or allow the body of any patient or person who has been under
treatment in such hospital and who shall have died therein to be removed from
any such hospital at any time within twenty-four (24) hours after the hour of
death, unless the removal of such body has been authorized in writing by some
member of the immediate family of such deceased person, or by some other
person legally authorized to order or permit such a removal; and no such body
shall be removed otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this
Code concerning the removal of dead bodies; provided, that no body shall be
kept at any hospital longer than thirty-six (36) hours after death without
permission from the board of health.



(Code 1972, § 6-14-3)



   State law references-Coroner inquests, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 31, § 10 et
seq.; sudden infant death syndrome, autopsy, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 31, § 10.2a.



Sec. 3-480.  Equality of care and treatment.



   No hospital nor any person acting as superintendent or manager, or who
is otherwise in charge or control of any hospital, nor any person connected
with or rendering services in any hospital in any capacity whatsoever, nor
any agent or employee thereof, shall deny to any person, admission for care
or treatment, equality of care or treatment in a hospital, or the use of any
of the hospital facilities and services relating to care or treatment of such
person on account of race, color, creed, sex, national origin or ancestry,
provided that a member of the medical staff of the hospital or an authorized
physician designated to act for him may examine such person and determine the
need of such person for medical care or treatment.



(Code 1972, § 6-14-4)



   State law reference-Loss of tax exemption for discriminatory practice,
Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 120, § 500.7.



Sec. 3-481.  Contacting police department about certain treatments.



   (a)   It shall be the duty of any person conducting or operating a
hospital to telephone the police department immediately upon application for
treatment of a person, who is not accompanied by a police officer, when the
person conducting or operating a hospital, or any employee thereof, knows
that the person to be treated is at the hospital as a result of:



      (1)    Any injury resulting from the discharge of a firearm;



      (2)    Any injury or wound apparently inflicted by any object
used as a weapon;



      (3)    Any injury sustained in the commission of or as a
victim of a criminal offense;



      (4)    Any animal or human bite;



      (5)    Poisoning;



      (6)    Any injury in which a motor vehicle was involved;



      (7)    Any injury sustained on public property;



      (8)    Any injury of any cause where it is evident that death
will probably occur as a direct result thereof, or when death has resulted;



      (9)    Any affliction which is a result of an overdose or
misuse of and from alcohol and/or narcotics.



   (b)   The hospital shall not be held responsible for inaccurate
information being given by the patient or those accompanying him.



(Code 1972, § 6-14-5)



   Cross reference-Police department, Ch. 9.



   State law reference-Notification of treatment of firearm injury and
injury sustained in commission of or received from criminal offense, Ill.
Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, § 206-3.2.



Secs. 3-482-3-500.  Reserved.



ARTICLE XVI. MASSAGE PARLORS



Sec. 3-501.  Definition.



   For the purpose of this article, a "massage parlor" is hereby defined
to mean any building, room, place or establishment other than a regularly
licensed hospital or dispensary, where nonmedical and nonsurgical
manipulative exercises are practiced upon the human body, for other than
cosmetic or beautifying purposes, by anyone not a physician or surgeon or of
a similarly registered status, with or without the use of mechanical,
therapeutic or bathing devices.



(Code 1972, § 6-14.1-1)



Sec. 3-502.  License required.



   No person shall conduct or operate a massage parlor without first
having obtained a license therefor.



(Code 1972, § 6-14.1-2)



Sec. 3-503.  Segregation of sexes for treatments.



   No person conducting or operating a massage parlor shall give treatment
or permit treatment to be given by any of his employees to nude patrons of
one sex in the presence of nude patrons of another sex. No male person shall
give treatments in a massage parlor to a nude female patron, and no female
person shall give treatment in a massage parlor to nude male patrons. It
shall be unlawful for any person conducting a massage parlor to give
treatment or permit treatment to be given by any of his employees to nude
patrons of either sex without providing adequately for segregation of the
sexes, either by arrangements of hours when patrons of either sex are
received or by providing separate quarters and accommodations for patrons of
each sex.



(Code 1972, § 6-14.1-3)



Sec. 3-504.  Inspection, supervision.



   Every massage parlor shall at all times be held open for inspection by
duly authorized representatives of village departments concerned with the
licensing and supervision of such establishments. The president of the board
of health shall have general sanitary supervision thereof, and shall cause
inspections of such establishments to be made periodically to determine
whether the health and sanitary provisions of this Code are being complied
with. Moral supervision of massage parlors shall be directed by the chief of
police.



(Code 1972, § 6-14.1-4)



Sec. 3-505.  Penalty.



   Any persons or corporations convicted of violating any of the sections
of this article shall be lined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
offense or shall be punished by imprisonment for a period of six (6) months
or by both fine and imprisonment. The business license of any such person or
employees thereof directly involved in the violation of any of the sections
of this article may be revoked in the discretion of the village president,
after a formal hearing.



(Code 1972, § 6-14.1-5; Ord. No. 75-14, 9-4-75)



Secs. 3-506-3-520.  Reserved.



ARTICLE XVII. VETERINARY HOSPITALS1



1  Cross reference-Animals, § 7-86 et seq.
State law reference-Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act of 1983,
Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 111, § 7001 et seq.



Sec. 3-521.  Definition.



   For the purpose of this article, the term "veterinary hospital" is
hereby defined to mean any institution, place or enclosure used for the
harboring or reception for the care and treatment of two (2) or more dogs,
cats or other animals in the practice of veterinary medicine and surgery.



(Code 1972, § 3-22-2)



Sec. 3-522.  Penalty.



   Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be fined not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(Code 1972, § 3-22-8; Ord. No. 73-30, 12-20-73)



Sec. 3-523.  License-Required.



   It shall be unlawful to operate any veterinary hospital unless such
hospital has at least one (1) licensed veterinarian in attendance at all
times.



(Code 1972, § 3-22-1)



Sec. 3-524.  Same-Application.



   An application for a veterinary hospital license shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of the village relating to
applications for licenses. The health officer shall cause an investigation to
be made of the premises named and described in the application for the
purpose of determining the fitness and suitability of such premises for such
business from a sanitation standpoint.



(Code 1972, § 3-22-3)



Sec. 3-525.  Sanitation; inspection.



   All veterinary hospitals shall be kept free and clean from all decaying
food and from filth of any kind. All parts of buildings, premises and
enclosures shall be disinfected from time to time and shall be kept in a
sanitary condition. The health officer shall periodically inspect such place
of business to determine whether or not the provisions of this article
relative to the health and sanitation thereof are being complied with.



(Code 1972, § 3-22-4)



   Cross reference-Health and sanitation, Ch. 5.



Sec. 3-526.  Housing animals out-of-doors; kennels.



   No animal shall be housed or kept out-of-doors on veterinary hospital
premises and no kennel shall be established or maintained on such premises.



(Code 1972, § 3-22-5)



Sec. 3-527.  Incinerators.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain, use or operate an incinerator on
veterinary hospital premises.



(Code 1972, § 3-22-6)



Sec. 3-528.  License fee.



   No person shall engage in the business of a veterinary hospital without
first obtaining a license therefor. The annual fee for such veterinary
hospital shall be as provided in section 3-61.



(Code 1972, § 3-22-7)



Secs. 3-529-3-540.  Reserved.



ARTICLE XVIII. CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE



Sec. 3-541.  Title.



   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Cable TV
Franchise."



(Code 1972, § 8-11-1)



Sec. 3-542.  Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   CATV means community antenna television.



   Federal communications commission or FCC means the present federal
agency of that name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, or any
successor agency created by the United States Congress.



   Grantees means:



      (1)    Cablevision of Chicago, its successors and assigns.



      (2)    Russell Fluhr, its successors and assigns.



   Gross subscriber revenues includes any and all compensation or receipts
derived by grantees from installation, disconnection and reinstallation
charges and periodic service charges in connection with the carriage of
broadcast signals and Federal Communications Commission mandated nonbroadcast
services within the village, but shall not include any refunds or credits
made to subscribers or any taxes imposed on the services furnished by
grantees. Nor shall it include revenue from "ancillary" or `auxiliary"
services, which include, but are not limited to, advertising, leased
channels, and programming supplied on a per-program or per-channel charge
basis, if any.



   Regular subscriber services includes the carriage of broadcast signals
and FCC mandated nonbroadcast services but shall not include "ancillary" or
"auxiliary" services, which include, but are not limited to, advertising,
leased channels, and programming supplied on a per-program or per-channel
charge basis, if any.



   Village means the Village of Justice, a village corporation under the
laws of the State of Illinois.



   Village board means the village board of the Village of Justice or its
designated representative.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-2; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 2-8-88)



Sec. 3-543.  Grant of authority.



   There is hereby granted by the village to grantees the right and
privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across,
above, over or under the streets, alleys, easements, public ways and public
places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions
thereto in the village, all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and
operation in the village of a cable television system for the transmission of
television signals and other signals either separately or upon or in
conjunction with any public utility maintaining the same in the village with
all of the necessary and desirable appliances and appurtenances pertaining
thereto. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this franchise and
grant shall and does hereby include the right in, over, under and upon the
streets, sidewalks, alleys, easements and public grounds and places in the
village to install, erect, operate or in any way acquire the use of, as by
leasing or licensing, all lines and equipment necessary to a cable television
system and the right to make connections to subscribers and the right to
repair, replace, enlarge and extend such lines, equipment and connections.
The rights granted in this article for the purposes herein set forth shall
not be exclusive, and the village reserves the right to grant a similar use
of such streets, alleys, easements, public ways and places to any person at
any time during the period of this franchise; provided that nothing contained
herein shall be deemed to require the granting of additional cable television
franchises if, in the opinion of the village board, it is in the public
interest to restrict such franchise to one (1) or more.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-3)



Sec. 3-544.  Indemnification.



   Grantees shall save the village harmless from all loss sustained by the
village on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand
whatsoever against the village resulting from negligence on the part of
grantees in the construction, operation or maintenance of its cable
television system in the village; and for this purpose grantees shall carry
property damage and personal injury insurance with some responsible insurance
company or companies qualified to do business in the state. The amounts of
such insurance to be carried for liability due to property damage shall be
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) as to any one (1) occurrence;
and against liability due to injury to or death of persons, one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) as to any one (1) person and three million dollars
($3,000,000.00) as to any one (1) occurrence. The village shall notify
grantees, in writing, within ten (10) days after the presentation of any
claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the village on
account of any such negligence on the part of grantees. Where any such claim
or demand against the village is made by suit or other legal action, written
notice thereof shall be given by the village to grantees not less than five
(5) days prior to the date upon which an answer to such legal action is due
or within ten (10) days after the claim or demand is made upon the village,
whichever notice yields grantees the larger amount of time within which to
prepare an answer. Failure by the village to properly notify grantees in
accordance with the foregoing of any such claim, suit or demand against the
village shall release grantees from their obligation to indemnify the village
as provided in this section.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-4)



Sec. 3-545.  Franchise fee.



   The grantees shall pay, as compensation to the village, a fee of five
(5) percent of their gross subscriber revenues.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-5; Ord. No. 88-29, § 1, 10-10-88)



Sec. 3-546.  Construction; maintenance.



   (a)   All structures, lines and equipment erected by grantees within
the village shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the
proper use of streets, alleys, easements and other public ways and places and
to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of
property owners, and grantees shall comply with all reasonable, proper and
lawful ordinances of the village now or hereafter in force. Existing poles,
posts, conduits, and other such structures of any electric power system,
telephone company or other public utility located in the village shall be
made available to grantees for leasing or licensing upon reasonable terms and
rates and shall be used to the extent practicable in order to minimize
interference with travel and avoid unnecessary duplication of facilities. The
village shall actively assist grantees to the fullest extent necessary in
obtaining reasonable joint pole or conduit use agreements from the owners of
existing poles or conduits.



   (b)   In case of any disturbance by grantees of pavement, sidewalk,
driveway or other surfacing, grantees shall, at their own cost and expense
and in a manner approved by the village, replace and restore all paving,
sidewalk, driveway or surface so disturbed in as good condition as before
such work has commenced.



   (c)   If, at any time during the period of this franchise, the
village shall lawfully elect to alter or change any street, alley, easement
or other public way requiring the relocation of grantees' facilities,
grantees, upon reasonable notice by the village, shall remove, relay and
relocate the same at their own expense; provided, however, that where public
funds are available for such relocation pursuant to law, grantees shall not
be required to pay the cost.



   (d)   Grantees shall, on the request of any person holding a
building moving permit issued by the village, temporarily raise or lower
their lines to permit the moving of the building. The expense of such
temporary removal shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and
grantees shall have the authority to require such payment in advance.



   (e)   Grantees shall have the authority to trim trees upon and
overhanging all streets, alleys, easements, sidewalks and public places of
the village so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into
contact with grantees' facilities.



   (f)   All poles, lines, structures and other facilities of grantees
in, on, over and under the streets, sidewalks, alleys, easements and public
grounds or places of the village shall be kept by grantees at all times in a
safe and substantial condition.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-6)



Sec. 3-547.  Rates.



   The rates for regular subscriber services shall be nondiscriminatory;
provided that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit
reasonable promotional rates which may, from time to time, be less than the
standard rates imposed. The rates for installation of equipment shall also be
nondiscriminatory; provided, however, that grantees may recover their cost of
extending service to any new area as part of their installation of equipment
charges even if such installation charges for subscribers living in the area
which is the subject of the extension of services is greater than the
subscribers in areas where service was previously available.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-7)



Sec. 3-548.  Term.



   This article shall take effect and be in full force from and after
acceptance by grantees as provided in section 3-564, and the same shall
continue in full force and effect for a term of fifteen (15) years; provided,
however, that should FCC certification be necessary prior to implementation
of the cable television service contemplated under this article, then the
term shall begin upon the effective date of the grant by the FCC of the
necessary certification.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-8)



Sec. 3-549.  Renewal procedure.



   Grantees shall have the option to renew the franchise granted in this
article for an additional period of fifteen (15) years. Should grantees
desire to exercise this option, they shall so notify the village, in writing,
not less than three (3) months prior to expiration of such franchise. Upon
exercise of this option by grantees, the franchise shall be renewed by the
village and all of the terms and provisions contained in this article shall
be controlling during the renewal period.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-9)



Sec. 3-550.  Resolution of subscriber complaints.



   (a)   Grantees shall maintain an office with telephone service in a
place reasonably accessible to residents of the village, for so long as they
continue to operate the system hereunder, and hereby designate such office as
the place where all notices, directions, orders and requests may be served or
delivered under this article. Grantees shall file a notification with the
village whenever such address is changed.



   (b)   All complaints against grantees relating to their performance
under this article, including but not limited to those concerning quality of
service, equipment malfunctions, and billing disputes, shall be received at
such office by duly authorized employees. All complaints so received will be
turned over to the head of the department to which the complaint relates. The
manager of the system shall establish a followup procedure for all complaints
other than those concerning equipment or system malfunction, so that the
resolution of all complaints shall be reviewed weekly.



   (c)   Regarding complaints of equipment or system malfunction,
grantees shall respond to such complaints within forty-eight (48) hours after
receipt thereof and shall correct malfunctions as promptly as possible.
Grantees shall provide a daily pro rata credit to any subscriber who is
without service for any period in excess of forty-eight (48) hours due to the
fault of grantees.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-10)



Sec. 3-551.  Construction bond.



   (a)   Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of all necessary
governmental and utility company authorizations, grantees shall deposit with
the village a surety bond or the equivalent thereof in cash, marketable
securities, or a letter of credit from a banking institution, guaranteeing
the timely construction of the cable television system to be constructed
pursuant to this article.



   (b)   The value of the security bond posted hereunder shall be two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). The village shall have the right
to require grantees to increase the amount of such security, but in no event
shall such security exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).



   (c)   If the deposit is forfeited to the village in whole or in part
because of the failure of grantees to perform as set forth in this article,
grantees shall have twenty (20) business days after receipt of written notice
from the village that such collateral has been forfeited in whole or in part,
to replace the collateral so forfeited.



   (d)   The surety shall remain in effect for a term of five (5) years
or until cable television services are available throughout the village,
whichever occurs sooner.



   (e)   Anything contained in this section to the contrary
notwithstanding, there shall be no default or forfeiture pursuant to the
terms of this article if the failure to perform by grantees is caused by
circumstances beyond the control of grantees.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-11)



Sec. 3-552.  Public, educational and municipal access.



   Grantees shall provide and maintain such access channels as may be
required by the rules and regulations of the FCC.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-12)



Sec. 3-553.  Public, educational and municipal connections.



   Subject to the applicable rules and regulations of the FCC:



      (1)    Grantees shall without charge make one (1) aerial
connection for regular subscriber service, as provided in this article, into
the internal radio frequency (R.F.) distribution system of each village
office building, police station, fire station, library and school within the
village (singly or collectively referred to in this section as the
"premises"). Grantees shall make a connection at one (1) outlet in each of
such premises for the purpose of enabling the premises to distribute the
regular subscriber service. Where such premises consist of more than one (1)
building, only one (1) tie-in and connection shall be made.



      (2)    Grantees shall make such tie-in and connection at the
location designated by the appropriate official as the location of the
"head-end" of the internal R.F. distribution system of the premises. The
responsibility of grantees shall terminate when the tie-in and connection to
the internal R.F. distribution system is completed, and the responsibility
for performance of the internal R.F. distribution system, and for
distribution of the transmissions throughout such system, shall be solely
that of the premises. Grantees make no representation or warranty as to the
ability of such distribution system to carry the programs transmitted over
their cable systems. However, grantees shall offer, without charge, technical
consulting services to the premises in order to make the internal system work
effectively for the purposes intended herein.



      (3)    The procedure for making such connections shall be as
follows: Connections shall be made at the time when grantees are serving the
area within which the premises are located. At such time, grantees shall send
written notification of the provisions of this paragraph to such premises.
Thereafter, upon written request from the recipient official, grantees shall
make the above described tie-in and connection to the internal distribution
system of such premises. When grantees are serving the area but the building
on the premises to be connected with an aerial installation is located more
than five hundred (500) feet from the nearest CATV cable, the cost of the
aerial cable installation beyond five hundred (500) feet will be paid by the
premises. For underground installations, grantees shall charge the recipient
their actual cost. Such cost will be submitted to such premises, in writing,
before installation is begun. All such premises shall be connected according
to the orderly progress and construction of the system.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-13)



Sec. 3-554.  Interface of CATV companies.



   Subject to the applicable rules and regulations of the FCC, if more
than one (1) franchise is issued within or immediately adjacent to the
village, and if such operating systems are contiguous and technically
compatible with grantees, and have allocated access channels, grantees shall
provide suitable interconnection facilities for one (1) access channel at the
boundary of their service areas. In no event, however, shall grantees be
required to interconnect with a cable system not having substantially the
same access provisions in their franchise as contained in this article,
unless such system agrees voluntarily to connect with grantees, nor shall
grantees be required to interconnect at any point beyond any area where they
have trunk or feeder service. In no event shall interconnection be required
where the combined cable systems include more than fifty (50) trunk
amplifiers in cascade or as the state of the art then permits.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-14)



Sec. 3-555.  Studio facility.



   Grantees shall establish and maintain a studio for local programming,
consisting of at least two (2) view-finder cameras, switcher fader controls,
audio system, lighting system, film chain, two (2) videotape recorders and
multiplexing unit. All equipment shall be remotely controlled from a master
control unit. This facility shall be available on a time-sharing basis to the
village, its agencies, public service organizations and schools lying wholly
or partly within the village. The studio facility shall be provided as soon
as reasonably practicable but in no event later than five (5) years from the
date of registration with the FCC of a franchise granted under this article.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-15)



Sec. 3-556.  Governmental approvals.



   Grantees shall register their franchise with the FCC within sixty (60)
days of the execution thereof.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-16)



Sec. 3-557.  Equal opportunity employer.



   Grantees hereby agree that they will not refuse to hire or employ, nor
will they bar or discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any
person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment,
because of age, race, creed, color, national origin or sex.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-17)



Sec. 3-558.  Exercise of reasonable police power.



   Nothing contained in this article shall in any way be deemed to limit
the right of the village to adopt, in addition to the provisions hereof and
existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find
necessary in the exercise of its reasonable police power; provided, however,
that such regulations are reasonable and do not materially conflict with the
terms and conditions of this article.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-18)



Sec. 3-559.  Right to inspect books.



   Grantees hereby grant to the village the right to inspect all their
books, records, maps, plans, financial statements, and other similar
materials of grantees, insofar as they relate to the terms and conditions of
this article and the performance of the obligations hereunder, upon
reasonable notice to grantees and during normal business hours.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-19)



Sec. 3-560.  Regulating office or officer of village.



   The office or officer of the village that bears the primary
responsibility for the continuing administration of the terms and conditions
of this article is the president or his designee.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-20)



Sec. 3-561.  Forfeiture.



If grantees should violate any of the terms, conditions or provisions of this
article or if grantees should fail to comply with any reasonable provisions
of any ordinance of the village regulating the use by grantees of the
streets, alleys, easements or public ways of the village, and should grantees
further continue to violate or fail to comply with the same for a period of
thirty (30) days after grantees shall have been notified, in writing, by the
village to cease and desist from any such violation or failure to comply so
specified, then grantees may be deemed to have forfeited and annulled and
shall thereby forfeit and annul all the rights and privileges granted by this
article; provided, that such forfeiture shall be declared only by written
decision of the village board after an appropriate public proceeding before
the board affording grantees due process and full opportunity to be heard and
to respond to any such notice of violation or failure to comply; and provided
further that the village board may, in its discretion and upon a finding of
violation or failure to comply, impose a lesser penalty than forfeiture of
the franchise or excuse the violation or failure to comply upon a showing by
grantees of mitigating circumstances. Grantees shall have the right to appeal
any finding of violation or failure to comply and any resultant penalty to
any court of competent jurisdiction. In the event that forfeiture is imposed
upon grantees, they shall be afforded a period of twelve (12) months within
which to sell, transfer or convey this cable television system to a qualified
purchaser at fair market value. During this twelve (12) month period, which
shall run from the effective date of the final order or decision imposing
forfeiture, including any appeal, grantees shall have the right to operate
this cable television system pursuant to the provisions of this article.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-21)



Sec. 3-562.  Surrender Right:



   Grantees may surrender their franchise under this article at any time
upon filing with the village a written notice of their intention to do so at
least three (3) months before the surrender date. On the surrender date
specified in the notice, all of the rights and privileges and all of the
obligations, duties and liabilities of grantees in connection with such
franchise shall terminate.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-22; Ord. 2009-15, § 19, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-563.  Transfers:



   All of the rights and privileges and all of the obligations, duties and
liabilities created by this article shall pass to and be binding upon the
successors of the village and the successors and assigns of grantees. Any
transfer by grantees shall become effective upon receipt by village of
written notice from grantees advising the village of the transfer and the
name and address of the transferee and the receipt by the village of a
statement, in writing, from the transferee agreeing to be bound and abide by
all of the obligations, duties and liabilities as well as the rights and
privileges created by this article.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-23)



Sec. 3-564.  Acceptance:



   This article shall become effective when accepted by grantees and shall
then be and become a valid and binding contract between the village and
grantees; provided, that this article shall be void as to a grantee unless it
shall, within ninety (90) days after a franchise is effective, file with the
village a written acceptance of this article and the franchise granted
hereunder, agreeing that it will comply with all of the provisions and
conditions hereof and that it will refrain from doing all of the things
prohibited hereby.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-24; Ord. 2009-15, § 19, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-565.  Unlawful Acts:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized
connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or
otherwise, with any part of grantees' cable television system for the purpose
of enabling themselves or others to receive any television signals, radio
signals, pictures, programs, sounds or any other information or intelligence
transmitted over grantees' cable system without payment to grantee or their
lessee.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of
the owner, to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wires or
other equipment used for the distribution of television signals, radio
signals, pictures, programs, sounds or any other information or intelligence
transmitted over grantees' cable system.



   (c)   It shall be an offense punishable by a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed
six (6) months, or both, for any person to violate any of the provisions of
this article.



(Code 1972, § 8-11-25; Ord. 79-17, 7-19-1979)



Secs. 3-566.  Construction Of Utility Facilities In The Rights-Of-Way:



   (a)   Purpose And Scope:



      (1)   The purpose of this section is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the
village’s jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with
the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the
village rights-of-way and the village as a whole.



      (2)   Intent. In enacting this section, the village intends to
exercise its authority over the rights- of-way in the village and, in
particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by
establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility
facilities, including without limitation:



         a.   Prevent interference with the use of streets,
sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;



         b.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical
obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic;



         c.   Prevent interference with the facilities and
operations of the village’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully
located in rights-of-way or public property;



         d.   Protect against environmental damage, including
damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;



         e.   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to
structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;



         f.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in
which facilities are installed;



         g.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined
parkways that characterize the village’s residential neighborhoods;



         h.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of
facilities in the rights-of-way; and



         i.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of
private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.



      (3)   Facilities Subject To This Section. This section applies
to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the
rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this section may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and
located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement.



      (4)   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements. The
village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to
enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of
locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within the village rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to
enter into such an agreement may request that the village enter into such an
agreement. In such an agreement, the village may provide for terms and
conditions inconsistent with this section.



      (5)   Effect Of Franchises. Licenses, Or Similar Agreements.



         a.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers.
In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a
franchise, license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



         b.   Telecommunications Providers. In the event of any
conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this section and
the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the
village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the
term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



      (6)   Conflicts With Other Sections. This section supersedes
all sections or parts of sections adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



      (7)   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws. In the event that
applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this section, the utility shall comply with the requirements
of this section to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or
state laws or regulations.



      (8)   Sound Engineering Judgment. The village shall use sound
engineering judgment when administering this section and may vary the
standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this section when the
village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability
of the village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare.



   (b)   Definitions. As used in this section and unless the context
clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section. Any term not defined in this
section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30,
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



      AASHTO: American  Association  of  State  Highway  and 
Transportation Officials.



      ANSI: American National Standards Institute.



      Applicant: A person applying for a permit under this section.



      ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.



      Backfill: The methods or materials for replacing excavated
material in a trench or pit.



      Bore or Boring: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for
the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.



      Cable Operator: That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).



      Cable Service: That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



      Cable System: That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).



      Carrier Pipe: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.



      Casing: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices
such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.



      Clear Zone: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge
of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may
consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a
clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes
and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the
AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.



      Coating: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried
pipe for protection against external corrosion.



      Code: The Municipal Code of the village of Justice.



      Conductor: Wire carrying electrical current.



      Conduit: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.



      Construction or Construct: The installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.



      Cover: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.



      Crossing Facility: A facility that crosses one or more
right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.



      Director of Public Works: The village director of public works or
his or her designee.



      Disrupt The Right-Of-Way: For the purposes of this section, any
work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on
the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include,
without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement
(whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or
structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil,
and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that
does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.



      Emergency: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for
the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.



      Encasement: Provision of a protective casing.



      Engineer: The village engineer or his or her designee.



      Equipment: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other
items used to facilitate construction of facilities.



      Excavation: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material,
or laying bare by digging.



      Extra Heavy Pipe: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe
designation.



      Facility: All structures, devices, objects, and materials
(including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic
cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals,
poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto)
located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way
under this section. For purposes of this section, the term “facility”
shall not include any facility owned or operated by the village.



      Freestanding Facility: A facility that is not a crossing facility
or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter
station.



      Frontage Road: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to
land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a
highway.



      Hazardous Materials: Any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is
determined by the village engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk
to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives,
radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons,
etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute
or regulation.



      Highway Code: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et
seq., as amended from time to time.



Highway: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. “Highway” includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.



      Holder: A person or entity that has received authorization to
offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois
Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.



      IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.



      ICC: Illinois Commerce Commission.



      Jacking: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by
mechanical means with or without boring.



      Jetting: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under
pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.



      Joint Use: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by
two or more utilities.



      J.U.L.I.E.: The  Joint Utility Locating Information  for 
Excavators utility notification program.



      Major Intersection: The intersection of two or more major
arterial highways.



      Occupancy: The presence of facilities on, over or under
right-of-way.



      Parallel Facility: A facility that is generally parallel or
longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.



      Parkway: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street
or sidewalk.



      Pavement Cut: The removal of an area of pavement for access to
facility or for the construction of a facility.



      Permittee: That entity to which a permit has been issued under
this section.



      Practicable: That which is performable, feasible or possible,
rather than that which is simply convenient.



      Pressure: The internal force acting radially against the walls of
a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).



      Petroleum Products Pipelines: Pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry.



      Prompt: That which is done within a period of time specified by
the village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30)
days.



      Public Entity: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.



      Restoration: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or
other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.



      Right-Of-Way or Rights-Of-Way: Any street, alley, other land or
waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has
the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the village. “Right-of-way” or
“rights-of-way” shall not include any real or personal village property
that is not specifically described in the previous two sentences and shall
not include village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements,
regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.



      Roadway: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.



      Sale Of Telecommunications At Retail: The transmitting,
supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in
connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another
such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer
for their use or consumption and not for sale.



      Security Fund: That amount of security required pursuant to this
section.



      Shoulder: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.



      Sound Engineering Judgment: A decision(s) consistent with
generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.



      Telecommunications: This term includes, but is not limited to,
messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter
service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio
services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way
radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or
two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information
by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. “Private
line” means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer
that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to
one or more other specified locations. “Telecommunications” shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are
used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. “Telecommunications” shall not include
purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for
use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the
ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end
communications. “Telecommunications” shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or
cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee
payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the Rules
of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. § 76.1500 et seq.), as
now or hereafter amended.



      Telecommunications Provider: Means any person that installs,
owns, operates or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to
be used to  transmit telecommunications in any form.



      Telecommunications Retailer: Means and includes every person
engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.



      Trench: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation
of an underground facility.



      Utility: The individual or entity owning or operating any
facility as defined in this section.



      Vent: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of
gases or vapors from an underground casing.



      Video Service: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the
Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v).



      Village: The Village of Justice.



      Water Lines: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.



      Wet Boring: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting
auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.



   (c)   Annual Registration Required: Every utility that occupies
right-of-way within the village shall register on January 1 of each year with
the director of public works, providing the utility’s name, address and
regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more
contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with
emergencies involving the utility’s facilities in the right-of-way and a
twenty-four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of
insurance as required under this section, in the form of a certificate of
insurance.



   (d)   Permit Required; Applications and Fees:



      (1)   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined
in this section) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within any village right-of-way which (a) changes the location of the
facility, (b) adds  a new facility, (c) disrupts the right-of-way (as
defined in this section), or (d) materially increases the amount of area or
space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within
the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the director of
public works and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as
otherwise provided in this section. No permit shall be required for
installation and maintenance of service connections to customers’ premises
where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.



      (2)   Permit Application: All applications for permits
pursuant to this section shall be filed on a form provided by the village and
shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the village may
designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application
materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential
information as “proprietary” or “confidential” by clearly marking
each page of such materials accordingly.



      (3)   Minimum General Application Requirements: The
application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized
representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:



         a.   The utility’s name and address and telephone and
telecopy numbers;



         b.   The applicant’s name and address, if different
than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its
interest in the work;



         c.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy
numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any,
advising the applicant with respect to the application;



         d.   A general description of the proposed work and the
purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will
be put. The scope and detail of such  description shall be appropriate to
the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis
on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;



         e.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with
the village:



            (i)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating
the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and



            (ii)   An emergency contingency plan which shall
specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response
by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the
village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the
public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this section unless the village finds that
additional information or assurances are needed;



         f.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work
proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings,
plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and
regulations;



         g.   Evidence of insurance as required under this
section;



         h.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as
required under this section;



         i.   Any request for a variance from one or more
provisions of this section; and



         j.   Such additional information as may be reasonably
required by the village.



      (4)   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types
Of Utilities: In addition to all other applicable requirements, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:



         a.   In the case of the installation of a new electric
power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video
service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any “certificate
of public convenience and necessity” or other regulatory authorization that
the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected
to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;



         b.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the
proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;



         c.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of
Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;



         d.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate
that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District have been satisfied; or



         e.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state
the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure,
and the design standard to be followed.



      (5)   Applicant’s Duty To Update Information: Throughout the
entire permit application review period and the construction period
authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit
application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village
within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the amendment.



      (6)   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by
franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits
pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount
established in Chapter 13 (“Rates and Fees”) of the code. No application
fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the
municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.



   (e)   Action On Permit Applications:



      (1)   Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit
applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
director of public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the director of public works shall
reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the
director of public works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this section and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the director of public works shall issue a permit therefor
as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the director of public
works, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full
compliance with the requirements of this section.



      (2)   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of
Telecommunications Retailers:



         a.   Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act,
220 ILCS 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it
intends to commence work governed by this section for facilities for the
provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement
of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring excavation. The director of public works
shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be
placed, used and constructed.



         b.   In the event that the director of public works
fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications
retailer within either (i) ten (10) days after service of notice to the
village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving
excavation for new construction or (ii) twenty-five (25) days after service
of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving
excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence
work without obtaining a permit under this section.



         c.   Upon the provision of such specification by the
village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to the requirements of
section the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (a) of this
section.



      (3)   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of
State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007:
Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization
under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted
forty-five (45) days after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted
upon by the  Village, provided the holder has complied with applicable
village codes, ordinances, and regulations.



   (f)   Effect Of Permit:



      (1)   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest
Created: A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this section on village rights-of-way,
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the
rights-of-way.



      (2)   Duration: No permit issued under this section shall be
valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually
begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.



      (3)   Pre-Construction Meeting Required: No construction shall
begin pursuant to a permit issued under this section prior to attendance by
the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform
any work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the village
with such village representatives in attendance as the village deems
necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under
the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where
work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other
utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid
disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during
construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.



      (4)   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a
permit by the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules,
and regulations.



   (g)   Revised Permit Drawings: In the event that the actual
locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the
locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with
the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings
or plans to the village within ninety (90) days after the completion of the
permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify
where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations
approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from
the requirements of this section, it shall be treated as a request for
variance in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section. If the
village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either
remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it
conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.



   (h)   Insurance:



      (1)   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided
by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying
right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure
and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility
as named insured and naming the village, and its elected and appointed
officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the
policies listed below:



         a.   Commercial general liability insurance, including
premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as “X,” “C,” and “U” coverages) and
products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:



            (i)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for
bodily injury or death to each person;



            (ii)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for
property damage resulting from any one (1) accident; and



            (iii)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for
all other types of liability;



         b.   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired
vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
for personal injury and property damage for each accident;



         c.   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and



         d.   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not
less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.



If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and
subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors
shall comply with this section.



      (2)   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by
this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella
policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over
underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss
covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy,
the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.



      (3)   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any
of the policies required by this section to the village within ten (10) days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the village.



      (4)   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The
insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following
endorsement:



         “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may
not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30)
days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail,
return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village
President of such intent to cancel or not to renew.”



Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no
event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.



      (5)   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a
portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under this section or with any other applicable requirements of this
section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required under this section, such
as evidence that the utility is a “private self insurer” under the
Workers Compensation Act.



      (6)   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility’s
Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person
for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or
self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such
insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts
thereunder.



      (7)   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to
this section shall be effected under  valid and enforceable policies, issued
by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State
of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated
“A-” or better and of a class size “X” or higher by A.M. Best Company.



   (i)   Indemnification: By occupying or constructing facilities in
the right-of-way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and
hold the village and its elected and appointed officials and officers,
employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all
injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of,
resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent,
careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the
utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the
rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities,
whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this
section or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however,
that the utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any
injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out
of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this section by
the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.



   (j)   Security:



      (1)   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund
in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund
shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the
permittee’s sole cost and expense until the completion of the work
authorized under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for:



         a.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all
the requirements of this section;



         b.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the
village occasioned by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes,
rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the village
issued pursuant to this section; and



         c.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all
damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by
reason of any action or non-performance by permittee in violation of this
section including, without limitation, any damage to public property or
restoration work the permittee is required by this section to perform that
the village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of
the permittee’s failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due
the village from the permittee pursuant to this section or any other
applicable law.



      (2)   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to
the village in the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety
bond in a form acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of
credit in a form acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of
credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:



         a.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior
notice to the village and the permittee;



         b.   Not  require  the  consent  of  the 
permittee  prior  to  the collection by the village of any amounts covered
by it; and



         c.   Shall provide a location convenient to the village
and within the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.



      (3)   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the
right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the director of public works,
and may also include, reasonable directly related costs that the village
estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such
restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit
will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each
phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related
group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be
undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous
phase or phases, the director of public works may, in the exercise of sound
discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which
shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The
amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the
greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this
section for any single phase.



      (4)   Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days’
advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to
exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from
the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village
for such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may
be made if the permittee:



         a.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by
the permittee hereunder;



         b.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities
that are due and unpaid;



         c.   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages,
claims, costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or
incur by reason of any action or non-performance by the permittee; or



         d.   Fails to comply with any provision of this section
that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in
the security fund.



      (5)   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt
of written notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from
the security fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the
amount specified under this section.



      (6)   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all
interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the
permittee by the village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the
village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund
below the minimum balance required under this section.



      (7)   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of
the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the
return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit,
within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any
provisions of this section or other applicable law. In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest
therein, shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to
cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a
result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs,
loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.



      (8)   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village
with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the
village, whether reserved by this section or otherwise authorized by law, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund
shall affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery
with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise
violated.



   (k)   Permit Suspension And Revocation:



      (1)   Village Right To Revoke Permit: The village may revoke
or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this section for one or more of the
following reasons:



         a.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially
incomplete statements in the permit application;



         b.   Non-compliance with this section;



         c.   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of
permittee’s facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public
health, safety, or welfare; or



         d.   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities
substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.



      (2)   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The village shall
send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued
pursuant to this section stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or
suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.



      (3)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of
Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or
suspension from the village, the permittee shall have the following options:



         a.   Immediately provide the village with evidence that
no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;



         b.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the
village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written
proof of such correction to the village within five (5) working days after
receipt of the written notice of revocation; or



         c.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore
the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof
of such removal to the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation.



The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time
periods provided in this subsection.



      (4)   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice
of revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order
immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth
under this section.



      (5)   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the
permittee fails to comply with the provisions of this section, the village or
its designee may, at the option of the village: (1) correct the deficiencies;
(2) upon not less than twenty (20) days’ notice to the permittee, remove
the subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than thirty (30)
days’ notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem
them abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in
all events to the village for all costs of removal.



   (l)   Change Of Ownership Or Owner’s Identity Or Legal Status:



      (1)   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the
village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of
any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The
new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and
privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this section,
with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way.



      (2)   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any
current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails
to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be
presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and
conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to
remain on the village’s right-of-way.



      (3)   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage
or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.



   (m)   General Construction Standards:



      (1)   Standards And Principles: All construction in the
right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws
rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control
and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where
applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT
publications, as amended from time to time:



         a.   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction;



         b.   Supplemental Specifications and  Recurring Special
Provisions;



         c.   Highway Design Manual;



         d.   Highway Standards Manual;



         e.   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;



         f.   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545);



         g.   Flagger’s Handbook; and



         h.   Work  Site  Protection  Manual  for 
Daylight  Maintenance Operations.



      (2)   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If
a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards
required by this section, the director of public works shall determine, in
the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such
decision shall be final. If requested, the director of public works shall
state which standard or principle will apply to the construction,
maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.



   (n)   Traffic Control:



      (1)   Minimum Requirements: The village’s minimum
requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this code.



      (2)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The
utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective
devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and
local requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers
when performing any work on the rights-of-way.



      (3)   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so
that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



      (4)   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty-eight (48)
hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access
to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the
resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and
duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency
repairs under this section, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.



      (5)   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to
correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought
to the utility’s attention by the village.



   (o)   Location Of Facilities:



      (1)   General Requirements: In addition to location
requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility
facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location
requirements of this subsection.



         a.   No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility
facilities shall be placed in any location if the director of public works
determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the village’s utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the village’s utility
facilities.



         b.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed
location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of
the right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners
who adjoin said right-of-way.



         c.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility
shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such
right-of-way.



         d.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility
shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of
the right-of-way.



         e.   Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed
installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment
enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility
owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.



      (2)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:



         a.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



            (i)   Lines are located as near as practicable to
the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as
reasonable pole alignment will permit;



            (ii)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as
remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two (2) feet
(0.6 m) behind the face of the curb, where available;



            (iii)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as
remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four (4)
feet (1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not
within the clear zone;



            (iv)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a
highway; and



            (v)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located
within one (1) foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible
to the right-of-way line.



         b.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground
parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway
only if:



            (i)   The facility is located as near the
right-of-way line as practicable and not more than eight (8) feet (2.4 m)
from and parallel to the right-of-way line;



            (ii)   A new facility may be located under the
paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and



            (iii)   In the case of an underground power or
communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than five (5) feet (1.5 m) from the
right-of-way line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within
one (1) foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.



      (3)   Facilities Crossing Highways:



         a.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design
of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of
village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections
(such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future
repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing
facilities.



         b.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities:
Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or
drainage facilities.



         c.   Ninety-Degree Crossing Required: Crossing
facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety (90) degree angle to the
centerline as practicable.



         d.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An
overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



            (i)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as
required by ICC’s rules entitled, “Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines” (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305);



            (ii)   Poles are located within one (1) foot (0.3
m) of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and



            (iii)   Overhead crossings at major intersections
are avoided.



         e.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An
underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



            (i)   The design materials and construction
methods will provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and



            (ii)   Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable
future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.



         f.   Markers: The Village may require the utility to
provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility
other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker
shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone
number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current Federal
regulations. (49 C.F.R. § 192.707 (1989)).



      (4)   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular
Rights-Of-Way: The village may require that facilities be located within
particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular
highways.



      (5)   Freestanding Facilities:



         a.   The village may restrict the location and size of
any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way.



         b.   The village may require any freestanding facility
located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.



      (6)   Facilities Installed Above Ground: Above ground
facilities may be installed only if:



         a.   No other existing facilities in the area are
located underground;



         b.   New underground installation is not technically
feasible; and



         c.   The proposed installation will be made at a
location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the
greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed
without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not
limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical
configuration of conductors and cable.



Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.



      (7)   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:



         a.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to
bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that
all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other
means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater,
independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are
completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities
transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or
energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present
high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted.



         b.   A utility shall include in its request to
accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure
supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing.
Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge
or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations:



            (i)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the
commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to
persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;



            (ii)   The type, length, value, and relative
importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;



            (iii)   The alternative routings available to the
utility and their comparative practicability;



            (iv)   The proposed method of attachment;



            (v)   The ability of the structure to bear the
increased load of the proposed facility;



            (vi)   The degree of interference with bridge
maintenance and painting;



            (vii)   The effect on the visual quality of the
structure; and



            (viii)   The public benefit expected from the
utility service as compared to the risk involved.



      (8)   Appearance Standards:



         a.   The village may prohibit the installation of
facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.



         b.   A facility may be constructed only if its
construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or
terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents
and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the
lands being traversed.



   (p)   Construction Methods And Materials:



      (1)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of
Construction Methods:



         a.   Boring Or Jacking:



            (i)   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under
rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance
specified by the director of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits
for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty-eight (48) hours
in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty-eight
(48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are
open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall
be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will
safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it
during the boring or jacking operation.



            (ii)   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or
jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.



            (iii)   Borings With Diameters Greater Than 6
Inches: Borings over six (6) inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be
accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger
shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one
(1) inch (25 mm).



            (iv)   Borings With Diameters 6 Inches Or Less:
Borings of six (6) inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either
jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.



            (v)   Tree Preservation: Any facility located
within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or
protected shall be bored under or around the root system.



         b.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation,
repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the
applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction.”



            (i)   Length: The length of open trench shall be
kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line
testing. Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any
time unless special permission is obtained from the director of public works.



            (ii)   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open
trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by
Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where
practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway
and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed
to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does
not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the
roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.



            (iii)   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not
trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be
preserved.



         c.   Backfilling:



            (i)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created
during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width,
depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s
“Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.” When
excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable
granular backfill shall be used.



            (ii)   For a period of three (3) years from the
date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be
responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to
construction of the facility. If so ordered by the director of public works,
the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material
to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill
material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the
proper grades, as determined by the director of public works.



         d.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility
installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion
of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set
forth under this section is permitted, the following requirements shall apply:



            (i)   Any excavation under pavements shall be
backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of
CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the director of public works.



            (ii)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be
accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous
mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the
temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
village.



            (iii)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.



            (iv)   For all rights-of-way which have been
reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or
resurfaced in the last three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless
such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered
necessary or unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction  or unless a
pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.



         e.   Encasement:



            (i)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand
the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be
continuous either by one (1) piece fabrication or by welding or jointed
installation approved by the village.



            (ii)   The venting, if any, of any encasement
shall extend within one (1) foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No
above-ground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear
zone for that particular section of the highway.



            (iii)   In the case of water main or service
crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous
pipe or village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may
be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and
carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the
village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of
installation method.



            (iv)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or
less, encasement may be eliminated.



            (v)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum
products pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if: (1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future
maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;



            (vi)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or
petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide
that construction does not disrupt the right-of-way.



         f.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover
shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the
following table for minimum cover for the type of facility:



 


TYPE OF FACILITY

 

MINIMUM COVER



Electric lines
 
30 inches (0.8 m)


Communications, cable or video service lines
 
18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by village)


Gas or petroleum products
 
30 inches (0.8 m)


Water line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection


Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection



 



      (2)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of
Facilities:



         a.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:



            (i)   Code Compliance: Electric power or
communications facilities within village rights-of-way shall be constructed,
operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm.
Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce
Commission) entitled “Rules for Construction of Electric Power and
Communications Lines,” and the National Electrical Safety Code.



            (ii)   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or
communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where
practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be
needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.



            (iii)   Underground Facilities:



               1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or
plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to
minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.



               2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or
jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.
Encasement may be eliminated only if: (a) the crossing is installed by the
use of “moles,” “whip augers,” or other approved method which
compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or (b) the
installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to
roadway construction.



               3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance
with the National Electrical Safety Code.



            (iv)   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service
drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current
year, also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year,
weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather
permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops,
within ten (10) business days after placement.



         b.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or
Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:



            (i)   The use of “moles,” “whip augers,”
or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for
the pipe;



            (ii)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement
provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;



            (iii)   Open trench with vented encasement between
ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or



            (iv)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only
if installation is not possible by other means.



         c.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas
pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated
in a village approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the
Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part
192—Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal
Safety Standards (49 CFR § 192), IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction,” and all other applicable laws, rules, and
regulations.



         d.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products
pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of
ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation
Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).



         e.   Waterlines. Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer
Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer
lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the
recommendations of the current “Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois.”



         f.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted
appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a
right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one (1)
foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The
vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or
by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the director of public
works. With the approval of the director of public works, shrubbery
surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area.
The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color
to blend with the surroundings.



      (3)   Materials:



         a.   General Standards: The materials used in
constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the
accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of
IDOT’s “Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,” the
requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards
established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate
industry.



         b.   Material Storage On Right-Of-Way: No material shall
be stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the
director of public works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit,
wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the
right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards
to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the
right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way,
prior approval must be obtained from the village.



         c.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the
utility to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be
involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing
facilities.



      (4)   Operational Restrictions:



         a.   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at
the discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such
operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and
welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or
restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in
extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.



         b.   These restrictions may be waived by the director of
public works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility
services.



         c.   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the
hours of construction are those set forth in Chapter 5, Article I. of this
code.



      (5)   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing
to construct facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain
the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities
within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The
village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose
of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when
requested by the village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and
physically mark its underground facilities within forty-eight (48) hours,
excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground
Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.)



   (q)   Vegetation Control:



      (1)   Electric Utilities - Compliance With State Laws And
Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and
vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with
applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local
franchise or other agreement with the village as permitted by law.



      (2)   Other Utilities - Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree
trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the
right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws
and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal
maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the
issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this
section.



         a.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications
for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be
accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in
accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an
expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be
expeditiously accomplished.



         b.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting
in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The
village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees
removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International
Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the
compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village
may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical
pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.



      (3)   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The
village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees
or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher
poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.



      (4)   Chemical Use:



         a.   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no
utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees,
shrubs or vegetation in the village for any purpose, including the control of
growth, insects or disease.



         b.   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals
will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the director of public works that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control.



   (r)   Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities:



      (1)   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice
from the village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support,
temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the
position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the
corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change
or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair,
maintenance, or installation of any village improvement in or upon, or the
operations of the village in or upon, the rights-of-way.



      (2)   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30)
days following written notice from the village, any utility that owns,
controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances
within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of
such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:



         a.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s
license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;



         b.   If the facility was constructed or installed
without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;



         c.   If the  facility was  constructed  or installed
without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this section; or



         d.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.



      (3)   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The
village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located
within the rights-of-way of the village, as the village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify
the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall
notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.



      (4)   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a
facility within the rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify
the village within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the
village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility
if the director of public works determines that such removal will be in the
best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the
village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it,
by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall
be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of
the facility by another utility or person.



   (s)   Clean-Up And Restoration: The utility shall remove all excess
material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10)
days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or
destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the
satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of entrances and side
roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and
methods approved by the director of public works. Such cleanup and repair may
be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or
any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of
the project.  The time period provided in this section may be extended by
the director of public works for good cause shown.



   (t)   Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance:



      (1)   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in
a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility’s expense.



      (2)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may
justify non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:



         a.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled
portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to
provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on
the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers.
If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the
emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment
required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided.
Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no
other means of access to the facility is available.



         b.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as
possible, notify the director of public works or his or her duly authorized
agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken
for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere
with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified
immediately.



         c.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at
hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.



      (3)   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with
the village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way
within forty-eight (48) hours after an emergency repair.



   (u)   Variances:



      (1)   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance
from one or more of the provisions of this section must do so in writing to
the director of public works as a part of the permit application. The request
shall identify each provision of this section from which a variance is
requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.



      (2)   Authority To Grant Variances: The director of public
works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of
this section identified in the variance request on an individual basis.



      (3)   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The director of
public works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the
variance has demonstrated that:



         a.   One or more conditions not under the control of the
utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and



         b.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or
facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.



      (4)   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a
condition for authorizing a variance, the director of public works may
require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and
conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this section but
which carry out the purposes of this section.



      (5)   Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order,
requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made
by the director of public works under the provisions of this chapter shall
have the right to appeal to the village board, or such other board or
commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted
in writing to the village clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of
such order, requirement, decision or determination. The village board [city
council] shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the board’s
[council’s] next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7)
days after the filing of the appeal. The village board [city council] shall
timely decide the appeal.



   (v)   Penalties: Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with any of the may be times when the village will incur
delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will
not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this section. Unless
the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the village’s costs
of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocation,
or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may renew or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility
that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.



   (w)   Enforcement: Nothing in this section shall be construed as
limiting any additional or further remedies that the village may have for
enforcement of this section.



   (x)   Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase or portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall
be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord.
2008-11, § 2, 3-10-2008)



Secs. 3-567   Cable/Video Service Provider Fee And PEG Access Support Fee:



   (a)   Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:



      (1)   Cable Service means that term as defined in U.S.C. §
522(6).



      (2)   Commission means the Illinois Commerce Commission.



      (3)   Gross Revenues means all consideration of any kind or
nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind
contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video
system to provide cable service or video service within the holder’s cable
service or video service area within the village.



         a.   Gross Revenues shall include the following:



            (i)   Recurring charges for cable or video service.



            (ii)   Event-based charges for cable service or
video service, including, but no limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand
charges.



            (iii)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable
service or video service equipment.



            (iv)   Service charges related to the provision of
cable service or video service, including but not limited to activation,
installation, and repair charges.



            (v)   Administrative charges related to the
provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to
service order and service termination charges.



            (vi)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient
funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of
collecting delinquent payments.



            (vii)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived
by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
or video service within the village. The allocation shall be based on the
number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of
subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation
arrangement.



            (viii)   Compensation received by the holder that
is derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable
service or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the
holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or
services on the holder’s network, such as a “home shopping” or similar
channel, subject to subsection (ix).



            (ix)   In the case of a cable service or video
service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services,
capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder’s revenue
attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be
included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the
division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept
in the regular course of business.



            (x)   The service provider fee permitted by 220
ILCS 5/21-801(b).



         b.   Gross Revenues do not include any of the following:



            (i)   Revenues not actually received, even if
billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).



            (ii)   Refunds, discounts, or other price
adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder
of the state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or
discount is attributable to cable service or video service.



            (iii)   Regardless of whether the services are
bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video
service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service
or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of
directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues
attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in
accordance with the holder’s books and records and records kept in the
regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards, or orders.



            (iv)   The sale of cable services or video
services for resale in which the purchase is required to collect the service
provider fee from the purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser
certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and
pay the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.



            (v)   Any tax or fee of general applicability
imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or
any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including
sales and use taxes.



            (vi)   Security deposits collected from
subscribers.



            (vii)   Amounts paid by subscribers for “home
shopping” or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping
channel offered as part of the cable service or video service.



         c.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be
included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of
the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect
of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which
would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.



      (4)   Holder means a person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.



      (5)   PEG means public, education and governmental.



      (6)   PEG Access Support Fee means the amount paid under this
section and 220 ILCS 5/21- 801(d) by the holder to the village for the
service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.



      (7)   Service means the provision of “cable service” or
“video service” to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with
the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.



      (8)   Service Provider Fee means the amount paid under this
section and 220 ILCS 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.



      (9)   Video Service means video programming and subscriber
interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video
programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities
located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to
delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition
does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile
service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming
provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access
content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the
public Internet.



   (b)   Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed:



      (1)   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder
providing cable service or video service in the village.



      (2)   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby
shall be five percent (5%) of the holder’s gross revenues.



      (3)   Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the
village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins
to offer cable service or video service in the village.



      (4)   Holder’s Liability: The holder shall be liable for and
pay the service provider fee to the village. The holder’s liability for the
fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following thirty
(30) days after receipt of Ord. 2008-13 by the holder. Ord. 2008-13 shall be
sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder’s
application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.



      (5)   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee
shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of
the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is
postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for
the calculation of the fee.



      (6)   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to
existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing
franchise agreement with the village in which a fee is paid.



      (7)   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator
that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS
5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under this
section.



   (c)   PEG Access Support Fee Imposed:



      (1)   PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby
imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village
in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to this section.



      (2)   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee
imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%) of the holder’s gross revenues or,
if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators
pay to the village or its designee for PEG access support in the village.



      (3)   Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee
to the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG
access. The holder’s liability for the PEG access support fee shall
commence on the date set forth under this section.



      (4)   Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee
shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of
the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is
postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for
the calculation of the fee.



      (5)   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator
that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS
5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All
payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous
sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under this
section.



   (d)   Applicable Principles: All determinations and calculations
under this section shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting
principles.



   (e)   No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder: Nothing contained in
this section shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or
may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that is or may later
be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service
or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village’s
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.



   (f)   Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider:



      (1)   Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of
the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers
to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with
the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video
service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and
records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the
requirements of the village. If all local franchises between the village and
cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by
the village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act,
50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as
an accord that the amounts are correct.



      (2)   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an
audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the village’s submission
of an invoice for the sum.



   (g)   Late Fees/Payments: All fees due and payments which are past
due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this village pursuant to the
Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.



(Ord. 2008-13, § 2, 3-10-2008)



Sec. 3-568.   Consumer Protection:



   (a)   Customer Service And Privacy Protection Law:



      (1)   Adoption: The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are
hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village’s boundaries.



      (2)   Amendments: Any amendment to the Cable and Video
Customer Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of
this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and shall
be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the
municipality’s boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions
optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this
section by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of
the village.



   (b)   Enforcement: The village does hereby pursuant to law declare
its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection
standards of the Cable and Video Protection Law with respect to complaints
received from residents within the village.



   (c)   Penalties: The village, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(l),
does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of
the Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to
the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material
breach per customer.



      (1)   Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable
or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards
specified in any provision of the law.



      (2)   The village shall give the cable or video provider
written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such
provider at least thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy
the specified material breach.



      (3)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing
penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has
not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice
provided above.



   (d)   Customer Credits: The village hereby adopts the schedule of
customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in
the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to
the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following
the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible
for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request
the credit.



(Ord. 2008-12, § 2, 3-10-2008)



Sec. 3-569.   Reserved:



ARTICLE XIX.  LINGERIE MODELING



Sec. 3-570.  Definitions:



   Lingerie: Any article or item of clothing designed to be worn as an
undergarment, including underpants, "teddies", "g-strings", panties,
brassieres, bustiers, bikinis and swimwear.



   Nudity: The exposure of any of the following parts of the human body to
any person: male or female genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, anal cleavage, or
female breast below the top of the areola, or the employment of any device or
covering which is intended to give the impression of or simulate such parts
of the male or female anatomy.



   Sexual Conduct: Any conduct by a person intended to induce any person
to engage in any act of sexual contact, including sexual intercourse, oral or
anal intercourse or masturbation.



   Sexual Contact: The touching of the female breasts, male or female
genitals, anus or anal cleavage, by any person, whether male or female.
Sexual contact shall include acts of autoeroticism or masturbation.



(Ord. 93-28, § 1, 8-23-1993)



Sec. 3-571.  License Required:



   It shall be unlawful for any person, including a corporation, joint
venture or partnership, to own or operate an establishment where lingerie is
modeled, without first having obtained a license for each new year.



(Ord. 93-28, § 1, 8-23-1993)



Sec. 3-572.  Licenses-Application:



   Application for such license shall be made to the village, and shall
contain the following:



      (1)   Name of the person, corporation, joint venture or
partnership making the application;



      (2)   Name of the owner of the property on which the business
will be operated, and the name, business and telephone number of the person,
including the corporate officer, responsible for the operation of the
business;



      (3)   The address where the business will be operated;



      (4)   A statement as to whether the application is for a new
or existing business;



      (5)   A statement as to what kinds of clothes will be modeled
and for what purpose.



(Ord. 93-28, § 1, 8-23-1993; Ord. 2009-15, § 20, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-573.  License Fee:



   The applicant shall pay an annual fee of as set forth in section 13-1
of this code when the application is submitted. Said fee shall be due on or
before May 1 of each year.



(Ord. 93-28, § 1, 8-23-1993; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998)



Sec. 3-574.  License-Issuance:



   Upon receipt of the application fee and the application, the village
shall issue the license to the applicant if the business is already in
operation as of the effective date hereof, or if the applicant has already
obtained a license for the previous year. When the application is not for
renewal, but for a new license, and the business was not in operation before
the effective date hereof, the village  shall refer the application to the
village president, who shall make inquiry into whether the applicant, or the
manager of the establishment, or any employee of the establishment, have ever
been convicted of a felony or theft under the laws of the state or any other
jurisdiction. If no such convictions are disclosed in the village
president’s investigation, the president shall issue the license within one
month after the application was submitted to the village.



(Ord. 93-28, § 1, 8-23-1993; Ord. 2009-15, § 20, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-575.  Revocation:



   (a)   All persons licensed hereunder will comply with all federal,
state and local laws, which in any way relate to the operation of the
establishment where such lingerie is modeled.



   (b)   When any village officer or employee becomes aware of any
violation, he shall immediately notify the village president. Upon
notification of violation of any such federal, state or local law, the
village president may call a hearing to determine whether the license issued
hereunder should be revoked or suspended. If the village president decides to
call such a hearing, he will act as hearing officer. The person named as
owner or manager of the establishment on the license application form shall
be notified by certified mail, the date the hearing is set for and the nature
of the charges lodged against the establishment, its agents or employees. In
no event shall the hearing date be less than seven (7) days after service of
said notice upon the owner or manager of the establishment. At the hearing
the village and the owner or manager may present evidence relating to and
relevant to the question as to whether a violation has occurred. All evidence
shall be presented in accordance with the rules of evidence as set out by the
Illinois Administrative Review Act1. If the village proves by a preponderance
of the evidence that the charged violation or violations took place, the
village president shall determine whether the license should be suspended or
revoked. If a suspension or revocation is ordered, it shall begin immediately
upon notification to the owner.



   (c)   If the village president suspends or revokes the license, the
licensee may file a written appeal to the village board within thirty (30)
days after the village president sends notice of his decision of revocation
or suspension to the owner or manager of the establishment. The licensee may
appear before the Board to present his reasons why his license should not be
revoked or suspended. The board shall hold the appeal hearing within fourteen
(14) days of its filing. Upon hearing all the evidence, the board shall
render its findings, recommending approval or disapproval of the revocation
or suspension, as the case may be. If the village board by majority vote,
approves the revocation or suspension, the license shall remain revoked or
suspended as of the date of the village president's action. If the village
board disapproves the revocation or suspension, the license shall be
reinstated as of the date of the village board’s action. The village board
shall render its decision within forty five (45) days as to whether or not to
approve the revocation or suspension.



   (d)   Once a license is revoked, the licensee shall not be able to
reapply for a license until the next license year.



(Ord. 93-28, § 1, 8-23-1993)



Sec. 3-576.  Prohibited Conduct:



   No employee, agent or independent contractor shall appear nude during
the modeling of lingerie. No employee, agent, independent contractor or
patron shall participate in any sexual contact before, during or after the
modeling of lingerie. No employee, agent, independent contractor or patron
shall engage in any sexual conduct before, during, or after the modeling of
lingerie.



(Ord. 93-28, § 1, 8-23-1993)



Sec. 3-577.  Conduct:



   It shall be unlawful for any owner or manager of any establishment to
allow any nudity, sexual conduct or sexual contact to occur within the
establishment.



(Ord. 93-28, § 1, 8-23-1993)



Sec. 3-578.  Penalties:



   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
For purposes of prosecution, each act of nudity, sexual contact or sexual
conduct, shall be deemed to be a separate act.



(Ord. 93-28, § 1, 8-23-1993)



Secs. 3-579-3-599.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XX. FIREARMS AND ASSAULT WEAPON CONTROL



Sec. 3-600.  General Provisions:



   (a)   Title: This article shall be known as the JUSTICE FIREARMS AND
ASSAULT WEAPON CONTROL ORDINANCE.



   (b)   Applicability:



      (1)   It is intended that this article shall preempt all Cook
County licensing or other regulatory schemes for firearms, firearms dealers
and assault weapons. As provided in article VII, section 6(c) of the State
Constitution of 1970, if a county ordinance conflicts with an ordinance of a
municipality, the municipal ordinance shall prevail within its jurisdiction.



      (2)   It is specifically intended that this article shall
preempt the Cook County Firearms Dealer’s License and Assault Weapons and
Ammunition Ban Ordinance as now in effect or as may be hereafter amended.



      (3)   Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be issued
separate and apart from any general business license issued by the village.



(Ord. 94-29, § 1, 12-27-94)



Sec. 3-601.  Firearms Dealer's Licensing:



   (a)   Definitions: As used in this section of this article, the
following terms shall have the following meaning:



      (1)   Firearm: Any device, by whatever name known, which is
designed to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion,
expansion of gas or escape of gas; excluding however:



         a.   Any pneumatic gun, spring gun, paint ball gun or BB
gun which either expels a single globular projectile not exceeding .18 inch
in diameter or breakable paint balls containing washable marking colors;



         b.   Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety
and required or recommended by the United States Coast Guard or the
Interstate Commerce Commission;



         c.   Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud
cartridges, explosive rivets or similar industrial ammunition;



         d.   Any antique firearm (other than an assault weapon)
which, although designed as a weapon, the Department of State Police finds by
reason of the date of its manufacture, value, design, or other characteristic
is primarily a collector’s item and is not likely to be used as a weapon.



      (2)   Firearm Ammunition: Any self-contained cartridge or
shotgun shell, by whatever name known, which is designed to be used or
adaptable to be used in a firearm; excluding however:



         a.   Any ammunition exclusively designed for use with a
device used exclusively for signaling or, safety and required or recommended
by the United States Coast Guard or the Interstate Commerce Commission; or



         b.   Any ammunition designed exclusively for use with a
stud or rivet driver or other similar industrial ammunition.



      (3)   Firearms Dealer: Any federally licensed firearms dealer,
excluding any persons licensed solely as a “collector” pursuant to
section 924 (b) of title 18 of the, United States Code (USC) and possessing
only a Type 03 federal license, and shall also include any person who repairs
or services firearms.



      (4)   Gun Shop: The premises of any federally licensed
firearms dealer where the business or commercial enterprise conducted on the
premises is the purchase or sale of firearms or firearms ammunition.



      (5)   Engaged In The Business: “Engaged in the business”
has the same meaning as in 18 USC section 9:21(a)(21).



      (6)   Person: Any individual, public or private corporation,
partnership, firm, society, or unincorporated association.



      (7)   Department: The police department of the village of
Justice.



      (8)   Chief: The chief of police of the village of Justice.



      (9)   Village: The village of Justice, Cook County, Illinois.



      (10)   President: The president of the village of Justice.



      (11)   Village Board: The trustees of the village of Justice.



   (b)   License Required:



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of dealing in firearms at an address within the corporate limits of
the village without having applied for or obtained a village firearms
dealer’s license pursuant to this article by January 1, 1995. A village
firearms dealer’s license shall be required in addition to any other
village license required by law. All applicants for a village firearms
dealer’s license must possess a valid Federal firearms dealer’s license.
Possession of a valid federal firearms dealer’s license shall be deemed
proof of being engaged in the business of dealing in firearms in the village
and thus requiring a village firearms dealer’s license. An applicant for a
village firearms dealer’s license shall meet all other applicable village
ordinances and regulations. A person engaged in the repair or servicing of
firearms is engaged in the business of dealing in firearms and must acquire a
license hereunder which shall be limited to such gunsmith activities.



      (2)   Any person who becomes a federally licensed firearms
dealer after January 1, 1995, and is required under this article to obtain a
village firearms dealer’s license, shall apply for such license within
forty five (45) days of receipt of the federal firearms dealer’s license or
such other federal authorization to act as a gunsmith.



      (3)   No license issued under this article shall be
transferrable or assignable to any other person or any other location.



      (4)   The dealer must provide to the chief of police on a
quarterly basis a list of all sales of firearms and firearm ammunition in an
orderly and prompt manner.



   (c)   License Administration: The village president shall administer
the licensing of firearms dealers, and shall approve or deny all applications
for licenses and revoke existing licenses pursuant to this article.



      (1)   The president shall promulgate reasonable rules,
definitions and regulations necessary to carry out the duties imposed by this
article; including, but not limited to, developing reasonable procedures
consistent with existing practices of licensing persons engaged in the
business of dealing in firearms, and including seeking the assistance of the
village police department or other law enforcement agencies as necessary to
conduct investigations or inspections in connection with licensing.



      (2)   Any rules or regulations promulgated under this article
shall be filed in the police department’s principal office and in the
office of the village president, and shall be made available for public
inspection. Copies shall be made, available upon request and payment of a
reasonable fee as determined by the department or the village president to
cover the cost of the provided copy.



   (d)   License Fee: The annual fee for a village firearms dealer’s
license shall be determined from time to time by the president and board of
trustees.



   (e)   License Application; Issuance:



      (1)   All applications for a license under this article shall
be made in writing to the village president on a form provided for that
purpose. In addition to any other information required by the president, each
application for a license shall contain:



         a.   The applicant’s full name, residence, and the
address and telephone number where the person is engaged in the business of
dealing in firearms;



         b.   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporate
name, business, and principal place of business of the applicant, the date
and state of incorporation, and the names and residence addresses of the
corporate officers and its registered agent;



         c.   If the applicant is a partnership, the name and
business address and telephone number of the principal office or place of
business; the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all partners; the
name, address and telephone number of the person authorized to receive
notices issued pursuant to this article.



      (2)   The president shall not issue a village firearms
dealer’s license to any person who fails to provide proof of a valid
federal firearms dealer’s license and a valid firearm owners identification
card issued by the state, or such other identification and authorization as
appropriate for a gunsmith.



   (f)   License Denied Or Revoked:



      (1)   The president may deny an application for a license if
the applicant fails to provide the information required by, or is otherwise
not in compliance with, any provisions of this article or any applicable
rules or regulations. Such denial shall be in writing and shall state the
reasons for the denial. Any person seeking to appeal the denial may do so by
filing a written request for a hearing with the village board. Such request
must be filed within thirty (30) days of the denial, and a hearing must be
held within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request. The hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with the procedures provided herein.



      (2)   The president may revoke or suspend the license of any
person who violates any provision of this article or rules or regulations
adopted pursuant to this article. Before any such revocation or suspension is
effective, the licensee shall be notified by certified mail or personal
delivery of the specific basis for the suspension or revocation and the date
for a hearing on the matter. Such hearing shall occur not fewer than seven
(7) days and not more than fourteen (14) days after the mailing of the
notice. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures
provided herein.



   (g)   Hearing Procedures:



      (1)   If a person wishes to appeal the denial of a village
firearms dealer’s license, or in the event of a revocation of a village
firearms dealer’s license, the village board shall appoint a hearing
officer who shall conduct the hearing. The hearing officer is authorized to
conduct hearings concerning any matter covered by this article and may
determine factual and legal matters raised by the parties to the hearing.



      (2)   The hearing officer may:



         a.   Examine any books, papers, records or memoranda
bearing upon the business or activities or the licensee;



         b.   Request the Circuit Court to issue subpoenas
requiring the attendance of any person having personal knowledge of any
contested issue;



         c.   Request the Circuit Court to issue subpoenas duces
tecum for production of books, records, papers or memoranda;



         d.   Administer oaths;



         e.   Take testimony;



         f.   Make rulings as to the admissibility of evidence;



         g.   Take any further action as may be required for the
expeditious conduct of the hearing.



      (3)   The hearing officer is not bound by the technical rules
of evidence. No informality in any proceeding or in the manner of taking
testimony or receiving evidence shall invalidate any order decision, ruling
or recommendation of the hearing officer or final administrative decision of
the village board.



      (4)   The department’s books, papers, records and memoranda
or parts thereof may be provided in any hearing or legal proceeding by the
original documents or by reproduced copies under the certificate of the
president without further proof, the original documents or reproduced copy
shall be admissible into evidence at any hearing.



      (5)   If the Circuit Court issues a subpoena duces tecum, the
following rules shall apply:



         a.   Service shall be made as provided by the Illinois
Civil Practice Law, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-201, et seq.;



         b.   Fees of witnesses for attendance and travel shall
be the same as the fees of witnesses before the Circuit Court of Cook County
and shall be paid after the witness is excused from further attendance;



         c.   When a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum is issued
at the instance of either party, the hearing officer may require that party
to bear the cost of services and witness fees. The hearing officer may
require a deposit to cover the cost of service and witness fees.



      (6)   Any party to a hearing may apply to any judge of the
Circuit Court of this state for enforcement of any subpoena or subpoena duces
tecum issued by a hearing officer holding a hearing authorized by this
article.



      (7)   At any hearing held under this article, the
president’s initial decision to deny or revoke a license shall be presumed
prima facie correct and the person contesting the decision shall have the
burden of proving with books, records and other documentary or testimonial
evidence that it is incorrect.



      (8)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
shall make a recommendation to the village board. The village board shall
adopt, reject or modify the recommendation based on a review of the record
within seven (7) days of receiving the hearing officer’s recommendation,
and shall issue a final decision. The village board shall give written
notification to the licensee of the decision and the reasons for such
decision. The village board’s decision shall be a final decision reviewable
under Illinois Administrative Review Law.



      (9)   A person seeking judicial review of the village
board’s final decision shall bear the cost of certification. If the
protesting party prevails on appeal, the village shall reimburse that party,
for the cost of certification.



      (10)   Items constituting the record may include notice and
demands; the initial decision; the written protest and petition for hearing
all relevant pleadings, briefs and memoranda of law; evidence admitted at the
hearing; the transcribed testimony given at the hearing, the recommendation
of the hearing officer; and the final decision of the village board.



   (h)   Penalties:



      (1)   Failure to comply with the provisions of this article
shall result in a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and
up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. Each day of operation in
violation of this Article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.



      (2)   The sale or other distribution of firearms without a
license as required by this article is punishable by a fine of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each firearm sold or distributed.



(Ord. 94-29, § 2, 12-27-94; Ord. 2009-15, § 21, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-602.  Assault Weapons And Assault Ammunition Prohibited:



   (a)   Definitions: As used in this section of this article, the
following terms shall have the following meaning:



      (1)   Assault Weapon: Any weapon which shoots, is designed to
shoot, or can be readily restored to shoot automatically, more than one shot,
without manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger. The term shall
also include the frame or receiver of any such weapon, any part designed and
intended, for use in converting a weapon into a machine gun, any combination
of parts from which a machine gun can be assembled if such parts are in the
possession or under the control of a person.



      (2)   Assault Ammunition: A detachable magazine capacity of
which is more than sixteen (16) rounds center fire.



   (b)   Assault Weapons Or Ammunition; Sale Prohibited; Exceptions:



      (1)   No person shall sell, offer or display for sale, give,
lend, transfer ownership of, acquire or possess, manufacture or distribute
any assault weapon or assault ammunition within the corporate limits of the
village. This subsection shall not apply to:



         a.   The sale, distribution or the possession for sale
and distribution by any firearms dealer licensed pursuant to this article of
an assault weapon or assault ammunition to any officer, agent or employee of
the village or any other municipality, county, body, politic or state, or of
the United States, members of the armed forces of the United States; or the
organized militia of this or any other state, and peace officers to the
extent that any such person is otherwise authorized to acquire or possess an
assault weapon or assault ammunition and is acting within the scope of his or
her duties;



         b.    The possession for sale and distribution or the
sale to, or the acquisition or possession of assault ammunition by persons
employed to provide security for armored carriers or mobile check cashing
services while in the course of such duties, while commuting directly to or
from the person's place of employment, and while at the person's home, if the
assault ammunition is sold, acquired or possessed for use with a weapon that
the person has been authorized to carry under section 28 of the Illinois
private detective, private alarm and private security act of 19831;



1  225 ILCS 446/1 et seq.



         c.    Transportation of assault weapons if such weapons
are broken down in a nonfunctioning state and are not immediately accessible
to any person.



      (2)   Any assault weapon or assault ammunition possessed, sold
or transferred in violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section is hereby
declared to be contraband and shall be seized and disposed of in accordance
with as provided in subsection (b)(4)c of this section.



      (3)    Any person found in violation of this section shall be
fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day and not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day, or both.



      (4)    Any person who, prior to the effective date hereof, was
legally in possession of an assault weapon or assault ammunition prohibited
by this section, shall have fourteen (14) days from the effective date hereof
to do any of the following without being subject to prosecution hereunder:



         a.   To remove the assault weapon or ammunition from
within the limits of the village; or



         b.    To modify the assault weapon either to render it
permanently inoperable or to permanently make it a device no longer defined
as an assault weapon; or



         c.    To surrender the assault weapon or ammunition to
the chief of police of the village or said chief's designee for disposal as
provided below.



   (c)   Destruction Of Weapons Confiscated:



      (1)    Whenever any firearm or ammunition is surrendered or
confiscated pursuant to the terms of this article, the chief of police shall
ascertain whether such firearm or ammunition is needed as evidence in any
matter.



      (2)    If such firearm or ammunition is not required for
evidence, it shall be destroyed at the direction of the chief of police. A
record of the date and method of destruction and inventory of the firearm or
ammunition so destroyed shall be maintained.



(Ord. 94-29, § 3, 12-27-1994)



Secs. 3-603-3-609.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XXI.  ADULT ENTERTAINMENT



Sec. 3-610.  Definitions:



   Adult Bookstore: An establishment having more than twenty percent (20%)
of its total floor space or significant portion of its sales or stock in
trade, books, magazines, films for rent, sale or for viewing on premises by
use of motion picture devices or by coin operated means, and periodicals
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or
"specified anatomical areas"; or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such materials; or an establishment that
holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its
signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or
coin operated booth, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or
any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey
such material.



   Adult Entertainment Club Or Nightspot: A public or private
establishment which: 1) features topless dancers, strippers, male or female
impersonators; 2) not infrequently features entertainers who display
"specified anatomical areas"; or 3) features entertainers who by reason of
their appearance or conduct perform in a manner which is designed primarily
to appeal to the prurient interest of the patron; or 4) entertainers who
engage in or are engaged in explicit simulation of "specified sexual
activities"; or 5) engage in lingerie or bikini modeling shows and displays.



   Adult Motion Picture Theater: A building or area used for presenting
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.



   Adult Use: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult
entertainment cabarets, nude modeling, escort services, nontherapeutic or
unlicensed massage parlors.



   Specified Anatomical Areas: For the purpose of this article, "specified
anatomical areas" means:



      (1)    Less than completely and opaquely covered: a) human
genitals, pubic region; b) buttock; c) female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and



      (2)    Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   Specified Sexual Activities: For the purpose of this article,
"specified sexual activities" means:



      (1)    Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;



      (2)    Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; and



      (3)    Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttock or female breasts.



(Ord. 95-33, § 1, 12-11-1995; Ord. 2001-17, § 1, 5-14-2001)



Sec. 3-611.  Licensing:



   All adult entertainment or uses shall require a business license issued
by the village board. The license fee for such business shall be one thousand
two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per year. Only one license for adult
entertainment or uses may be issued by the board. No license shall be granted
unless the board finds that:



      (1)    The design and operation of the facility will not
adversely affect the public health and safety;



      (2)    It will not cause substantial injury to the value of
other property in the neighborhood in which it is located;



      (3)    It will not unduly increase traffic congestion on the
public streets and highways in the area in which it is located;



      (4)    It will not cause additional public expense for fire or
police protection;



      (5)    It will not substantially increase the likelihood of
criminal acts against persons and properties within one thousand feet
(1,000') of such proposed special use or against persons who regularly use
such properties.



(Ord. 95-33, § 2, 12-11-1995)



Sec. 3-612.  Registration:



   The owner of a building or premises, his agent for the purposes of
managing, controlling or collecting rents, or any other person managing or
controlling a building or premises, any part of which contains an adult use,
shall register the following information with the village:



      (1)   The address of the premises;



      (2)   The name of the owner of the premises and names of the
beneficial owners if the property is in a land trust;



      (3)   The address of the owner and the beneficial owners;



      (4)   The name of the business or establishment;



      (5)   The name(s) and address(es) of the owner, beneficial
owner or the major stockholders of the business or establishment;



      (6)   The date of initiation of the adult use;



      (7)   The nature of the adult use;



      (8)   If the premises or building is leased, a copy of said
lease must be attached.



(Ord. 95-33, § 3, 12-11-1995; Ord. 2009-15, § 22, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-613.  Location:



   (a)   One such adult use may be allowed, upon obtaining a business
license, in an I-1 industrial district, provided that no adult use shall be
located on a parcel, a lot line of which is within five hundred feet (500')
of any property which is zoned or used for residences, churches, schools,
parks, or used for any other adult use. Such use shall be located at least
two hundred feet (200') from the following streets: Archer Avenue (Road),
88th Avenue (Cork Avenue), 79th Street and Roberts Road.



   (b)   Video stores that: 1) maintain twenty percent (20%) or less of
its total floor space for adult use materials, and 2) secure the adult use
area from general public viewing in an area separate from the other
merchandise, and 3) monitor the entry of persons into the secured area, are
exempt from the location restrictions of this section.



(Ord. 95-33, § 4, 12-11-1995; Ord. 2001-17, § 1, 5-14-2001)



Sec. 3-614.  Advertising:



   No advertising for any such adult use may be displayed on village
streets or roads.



   No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the
observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or
from any property not registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply
to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.



(Ord. 95-33, § 5, 12-11-1995)



Sec. 3-615.  Miscellaneous Provisions:



   (a)   No alcoholic beverage license will be issued to any adult
entertainment business or use.



   (b)   Models, dancers or performers are not allowed to handle or
serve food or beverages or to model or perform in the general public seating
area. A minimum distance of ten feet (10') existing between model, dancer or
performer shall be maintained at all times.



   (c)   Separate dressing and toilet facilities must be provided for
performers and the general public.



   (d)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted to
stock, sell, or otherwise handle any adult use books, magazines, films,
tapes, DVDs, or other material for viewing unless the said material is
completely covered in a plain, nonopaque, nontransparent material with only
the title visible on the outer wrapping.



(Ord. 95-33, § 6, 12-11-1995; Ord. 2001-17, § 1, 5-14-2001)



Sec. 3-616.  Background Check:



   When the application is not for renewal, but for a new license, and the
business was not in operation before the effective date hereof, the village
shall refer the application to the village president, who shall make inquiry
into whether the applicant, or the manager of the establishment, or any
employee of the establishment, has ever been convicted of a felony or theft
under the laws of the state or any other jurisdiction. If the application is
for a new license, and if no such convictions are disclosed in the village
president's investigation, the president shall issue the license. If the
application is for a renewal and if no such convictions are disclosed in the
village president’s investigation, the president shall issue the license
within one month after the application was submitted to the village.



(Ord. 95-33, § 7, 12-11-1995; Ord. 2001-17, § 1, 5-14-2001; Ord. 2009-15,
§ 22, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 3-617.  Judicial Review:



   Upon any decision to deny, suspend, or revoke a license an automatic
stay of such denial, suspension or revocation shall remain in place pending
prompt judicial review of such decision.



(Ord. 2001-17, § 1, 5-14-2001)



Sec. 3-618.  Hours Of Operation:



   All businesses granted an adult use license shall be closed between two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. Monday through Friday,
three o'clock (3:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Saturday, and
three o'clock (3:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sunday.



(Ord. 2001-17, § 1, 5-14-2001)



Secs. 3-619-3-649.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XXII.  REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS1



1  Prior ordinance history: Ord. 97-10, §§ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 3-24-1997; Ord. 99-10, § 1, 4-12-1999.



Sec. 3-650.  Legislative Findings, Declaration, And Purpose:



   The board of trustees finds cigarette smoking and other tobacco use by
minors a serious public health problem. Therefore, the purpose of this
article is to implement a strict and enforceable system to prevent the
illegal sale of cigarettes and other products to minors.



      (1)    Findings:



         a.    Cigarette smoking is dangerous to human health;



         b.    There exists substantial scientific evidence that
the use of tobacco products causes cancer, heart disease, and various other
medical disorders;



         c.    The surgeon general of the United States has
declared that nicotine addiction from tobacco is similar to addiction to
cocaine and is the most widespread example of drug dependence in this country;



         d.    The centers for disease control and prevention
have found that among persons who have ever tried a cigarette, more than
eighty percent (80%) reported having their first cigarette before age
eighteen (18); and



         e.    The national institute on drug abuse has found
that cigarette smoking precedes and may be predictive of adolescent illicit
drug use.



      (2)    Intention: The enactment of this article intends to
further the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the village of
Justice, particularly those residents under eighteen (18) years of age.



(Ord. 2001-37, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 3-651.  Definitions:



   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:



   Compliance Check. An inspection conducted with the intention of
assessing retail sales of tobacco products to minors, sales of unstamped
tobacco products, sales of single cigarettes, and enforcing age of sales
laws. Compliance checks are conducted by having designated persons to
purchase tobacco products from licensees.



   License. A license issued by the village of Justice for the retail sale
of tobacco products.



   Licensee. The holder of a valid license for the retail sale of tobacco
products.



   Minor. Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.



   Public Place. An area to which the public is invited or in which the
public is permitted, including, but not limited to, any right of way, mall or
shopping center, park, playground, and any other property owned by the
village, any school district, or any park district.



   Self-Service Displays. Open displays of tobacco products and point of
sale tobacco promotional products that the public has access to without
intervention of a store employee.



   Tobacco Accessories. Cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking
materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and other items, designed
primarily for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products.



   Tobacco Products. Any substance containing tobacco leaf; including, but
not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or
dipping tobacco.



   Vending Machine. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service
device, which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any form of payment,
dispenses tobacco products.



(Ord. 2001-37, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-652.  License Required:



   (1)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, give
away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away
or delivering tobacco products within the village without having first
obtained a valid tobacco retailer’s license from the village for each
location in which tobacco products are sold. All such licenses must be
renewed annually. Such license shall be in addition to any other license
required by this code.



   (2)   An application for a tobacco retailer’s license shall be
made to the Municipal Services Administrator, in writing, on forms provided
for that purpose. The applicant shall state under oath if the applicant has
ever been subject to suspension or revocation of a tobacco license or
assessed any penalty for violation of any municipal or county ordinance, or
state statute, concerning tobacco.



(Ord. 2001-37, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-653.  License Fee:



   The fee for a one year tobacco retailer’s license shall be set forth
in Section 13-1 Rates and Fees of this code, for each tobacco retail location.



(Ord. 2001-37, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2013-01, § 2, 2-11-2013; Ord. 2013-18,
§ 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-654.  Nontransferability Of License:



   A tobacco retail license is nontransferable, except a new license will
be issued to a tobacco retailer who changes location.



(Ord. 2001-37, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-655.  Prohibited Sales:



   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale,
give away or deliver tobacco products to any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years.



   (2)   It shall be unlawful for any tobacco retailer to have in their
possession, offer for sale, or give away any tobacco products that do not
display a Cook County tax stamp or a State of Illinois tax stamp.



   (3)   It shall be unlawful for any tobacco retailer to offer for
sale, give away, or deliver single cigarettes, out of the original
manufacturer’s packaging showing health restrictions and Cook County and
State of Illinois tax stamps.



   (4)   It shall be unlawful for any tobacco retailer to offer for
sale, give away, or deliver any tobacco accessories to minors.



(Ord. 2001-37, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-656.  Warning Signs:



   Signs informing the public of the age of sale restrictions shall be
posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products and on
or upon every vending machine, which offers tobacco products for sale. Each
sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:




THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS
OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW




   The text of such signs must be in red letters on a white background,
and said letters must be at least one inch (1") high.



(Ord. 2001-37, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-657.  Identification Required:



   Every licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent, or employee of such licensee shall refuse to sell, deliver or give
tobacco products to any person who appears to be younger than the age of
twenty seven (27), without first requesting and examining photographic
identification establishing the purchaser’s age as eighteen (18) years of
age or greater.



(Ord. 2001-37, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-658.  Minimum Age To Purchase Tobacco Products:



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to purchase tobacco products or to misrepresent their age or use any
false or altered identification with the intention of purchasing tobacco
products.



(Ord. 2001-37, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-659.  Minimum Age To Sell Tobacco Products:



   No minor under 16 years of age may sell any tobacco product at a retail
establishment selling tobacco products. This subsection does not apply to a
sales clerk in a family-owned business which can prove that the sales clerk
is in fact a son or daughter of the owner.



(Ord. 2001-37, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-660.  Vending Machine Sales:



   Tobacco products listed in this section may be sold through a vending
machine only if such tobacco products are not placed together with any
non-tobacco product, other than matches, in the vending machine and the
vending machine is in any of the following locations:



   1.   Places to which minors under eighteen (18) years of age are not
permitted access.



   2.   Places where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the
premises and vending machine operation is under the direct supervision of the
owner or manager.



   3.   Places where the vending machine can only be operated by the
owner or an employee over age 18 either directly or through a remote control
device if the device is inaccessible to all customers.



(Ord. 2001-37, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-661.  Tobacco Samples And Certain Free Distributions Prohibited:



   No person shall knowingly distribute or furnish without charge or at a
nominal charge, or cause to be furnished without charge or at a nominal
charge, cigarettes or other tobacco products, or coupons for cigarettes or
other tobacco products, in any store or public place or at any event open to
the public.



(Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-662.  Vendor Assisted Sales:



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, person, business, or tobacco
retailer to sell, permit to be sold, or offer for sale any tobacco products
by means of self-service displays or any other means other than vender
assisted sales.



(Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-663.  Prohibited Product Displays:



   All single packs of cigarettes must be sold from behind the counter or
in an age restricted area or in a sealed display case. Any other tobacco
products must be sold in line of sight.



(Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-664.  Responsibility For Agents And Employees:



   Every act or omission of any nature constituting a violation of any
provisions of this article by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of both
said officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of licensee and
the licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if
such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally.



(Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-665.  Possession By Minors Prohibited:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years to possess any tobacco products except as noted in (b) below.



   (b)   It shall not be a violation of this section for a minor to
possess any tobacco product where:



      (1)   Such use takes place under the direct supervision and
approval of the parent, parents, or legal guardian of the minor; and



      (2)   Such use takes place in the privacy of a home or
established place of worship or tribal meeting place; provided, however,
where such use takes place in an established place of worship or tribal
meeting place, such use shall not be a violation only where use is in the
performance of a religious service or tribal ceremony and the religious group
or tribe is legally established and recognized by the state of Illinois.



(Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-666.  Purchase/Possession Violations:



   Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years that violated the
purchasing and possession sections of this article will be subject to the
following penalties:



      (1)   For the first violation, a fine of twenty five dollars
($25.00) or the completion of 15 hours of community service;



      (2)   For the second violation that occurs within 12 months
after the first violation, a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) and 25 hours of
community service;



      (3)   For the third and subsequent violations that occur
within 12 months after the first violation, a fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00) and 30 hours of community service.



(Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-667.  Non-Retaliation:



   No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner
retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or customer because
such employee, applicant or customer reported violations of any provisions of
this article.



(Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-668.  Suspension And Revocation Of License:



   The village president shall initiate enforcement against license
holders who violate any provision of this article, and shall conduct hearings
as set forth in § 3-14 of this code.



(Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



Sec. 3-669.  Penalty:



   Except where otherwise provided in this code, any person convicted of a
violation of any provision of this code shall be fined in a sum not to exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any one offense. A separate and
distinct offense shall be held to have been committed each day any person
continues to violate any of the provisions hereof.



(Ord. 2013-18, § 1 (part), 11-11-2013)



ARTICLE XXIII.  TRAILER BEDS



Sec. 3-670.  Permitted Use:



   Only roadworthy trailer beds shall be permitted in the village of
Justice. All trailer beds must:



      (1)    Display the current FHWA inspection permit; and



      (2)    Display a current village sticker; and



      (3)    Have wheels on the trailer bed.



(Ord. 01-13, § 1, 4-9-2001)



Sec. 3-671.  Parking:



   The following regulations apply to all trailer beds parked in the
village of Justice. Each trailer bed:



      (1)   Must be parked on pavement;



      (2)   Must be in a parking space clearly marked;



      (3)   Must be maintained so that there is only one trailer bed
per every twelve feet (12') of parking;



      (4)   If parked with other trailer beds must maintain an aisle
between parked trailer beds of at least three feet (3');



      (5)   May not block aisles or parking spaces by putting the
ends of two (2) trailer beds together.



   It shall be illegal to lease parking spaces for the parking of trailer
beds unless the business has been granted a business license for the specific
purpose of tractor trailer parking.



(Ord. 01-13, § 2, 4-9-2001; Ord. 2002-38, § 1, 8-26-2002)



Secs. 3-672–3-679.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XXIV.  AUTOMATIC EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS



Sec. 3-680.  Mandatory Placement:



   Effective May 1, 2003, there must be one automatic external
defibrillator (AED) in place for every five thousand (5,000) square feet of
building space, sporting event square footage or entertainment square footage
usage in the following:



      (1)   All public buildings or private buildings used for
public purposes.



      (2)   All commercial buildings and any commercial business
with fifty (50) or more employees.



      (3)   All commercial buildings with an occupancy limit of one
hundred (100) or more persons.



      (4)   All organized sports events or amusement and
entertainment gatherings.



(Ord. 2002-16, § 2, 5-28-2002)



Sec. 3-681.  Mandatory Training:



   All businesses, property owners and organizations falling under this
article shall have a sufficient amount of personnel trained in the use of
AEDs such that there is someone trained and available to use the AED in the
event of an emergency at all times of operation or event performance.



(Ord. 2002-16, § 2, 5-28-2002)



Sec. 3-682.  Requirement Of Business License:



   Effective May 1, 2003, all businesses and organizations falling under
this article shall be required to be in full compliance with this article
prior to the issuance or reissuance of its business license.



(Ord. 2002-16, § 2, 5-28-2002)



Sec. 3-683.  Suspension; Revocation Of License; Fines; Costs:



   (a)   Licensee Violations: The village president shall be charged
with the administration of this article. The village president may suspend or
revoke any license issued under the provisions of this article, if he
determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this
article. In lieu of suspension or revocation of a license, the village
president may instead levy a fine on the licensee. The fine imposed shall not
exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each day on
which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.



      However, no such license shall be suspended or revoked and no
licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the village
president with a seven (7) day written notice to the licensee affording the
licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges obtained in
such notice. The seven (7) day notice provisions shall begin the day
following delivery by certified mail or by personal service.



      The village president shall within seven (7) days after such
hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be
revoked or suspended, or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason
for such determination in a written order and either the amount of the fine,
the period of suspension or that the license has been revoked and serve a
copy of such order within the seven (7) days upon the licensee.



      Any licensee determined by the village president to have violated
any of the provisions of this article shall pay to the village the costs of
the hearing before the village president on such violation. The village
president shall determine the costs incurred by the village for said hearing,
including, but not limited to: court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts
or records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and
orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village or such
lesser sum as the village president may allow.



      The licensee shall pay said costs to the village within thirty
(30) days of notification of a violation of this article.



   (b)   Additional Violations; Penalties.  In addition to any
criminal penalties that may apply, it shall be a violation of this article
for any person to tamper, alter, destroy or move an AED provided for this
article. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than four hundred dollars ($400.00) and not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day per each offense that an AED needs to
be recalculated, repaired or replaced and remains out of commission. In
addition, any person found to be in violation of this article shall be
personally responsible to the owner of the AED for any repair or replacement
costs created by such violation.



(Ord. 2002-16, § 2, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2002-41, § 2, 9-9-2002)



ARTICLE XXV. PUBLIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES



Sec. 3-684.  Definitions:



   The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:



   Chief of Police.  The Chief of Police of the Village of Justice or
his/her designee.



   Chronic nuisance property.  Any real property upon, or in which, at
least three separate nuisance activities have occurred within a one-year
period.



   Conspicuous place.  The front window of a structure or, in a
commercial or multi-family residential structure, in a common area visible to
all occupants and visitors. In the event that no structure exists on any real
property, a conspicuous place shall mean an area visible to a passerby of the
real property.



   Control.  The actual or constructive ability to exercise restraint,
possession or direction over the whole or a portion of any real property.



   Nuisance activities.  means any of the following activities,
behaviors, or conduct as defined by federal, state or village law:



      (1)   Any offense prohibited by Article 9 of the Criminal Code
of 1961, 720 ILCS 3/9-1, et seq.



      (2)   Any offense prohibited by Article 10 of the Criminal
Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/10-1, et seq.



      (3)   Any offense prohibited by Article 24 of the Criminal
Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/24-1, seq.



      (4)   Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 ILCS 5/26-1.



      (5)   Mob action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1.



      (6)   Gambling as defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-1.



      (7)   Possession, manufacture, or deliver of controlled
substances as defined in 720 ILCS 570/401, et seq.



      (8)   Public indecency as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-9.



      (9)   Assault, battery or any related offense as defined in
720 ILCS 5/12-1, et seq.



      (10)   Sexual abuse or related offenses as defined in 720 ILCS
5/12-15, et seq.



      (11)   Prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14, et seq.



      (12)   Keeping a place of prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS
5/11-17.



      (13)   Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 ILCS
5/21-1, et seq.



      (14)   Possession, cultivation, manufacture, or deliver of
cannabis as defined in 720 ILCS 550/1, et seq.



      (15)   Any offense prohibited by the Illinois Controlled
Substance Act, 720 ILCS 570/100, et seq.



      (16)   Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined
in 235 ILCS 5/1, et seq.



      (17)   Criminal housing management as defined in 720 ILCS
5/12-5.1.



      (18)   Interference with public officers as defined in 720
ILCS 5/31-1, et seq.



      (19)   Pandering as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-16.



      (20)   Obscenity as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-20.



      (21)   Child Pornography as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-20.1.



      (22)   Harmful materials to minors as defined in 720 ILCS
5/11-21.



      (23)   Kidnapping and related offenses as defined in 720 ILCS
5/10-1, et seq.



      (24)   Possession of explosives or incendiary devices as
defined by 720 ILCS 5/20-2, et seq.



      (25)   Any other offense that constitutes a felony or Class A
misdemeanor pursuant to any federal or Illinois statute.



      (26)   Violations of the Justice Municipal Code, Chapter 3,
Business Regulations.



      (27)   Violations of the Justice Municipal Code, Chapter 5,
Health and Sanitation.



      (28)   Violations of the Justice Municipal Code, Chapter 6,
Motor Vehicles and Traffic.



      (29)   Violations  of the Justice  Municipal  Code, 
Chapter  7,  Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions.



      (30)   Violations  of the Justice  Municipal  Code, 
Chapter 8,  Planning and Development.



      (31)   Violations of the Justice Municipal Code, Chapter 10,
Streets, Sidewalks, Driveways and Parking Lots.



      (32)   Violations of the Justice Municipal Code, Chapter 11,
Utilities.



      (33)   Violations of the Justice Municipal Code, Chapter 12,
Zoning.



   Occupant.  A person that resides in or occupies any real property.



   Owner.  shall mean the person that holds legal title to real property,
except: (1) if legal title is held by a land trust, owner shall also include
the beneficial owner or owners of the land trust; and (2) if there is a
purchaser or purchasers under a real estate installment sales contract, owner
shall also include the purchaser or purchasers.



   Person.  Any natural person, association, partnership, corporation, or
other entity.



   Property manager.  A person that manages or operates any real property
on behalf of an owner or who exercises control over any common area of real
property including, but not limited to, a management company, condominium
association, townhome association, homeowner association, or similar entity.



   Real property.  Any land and anything affixed, incidental, or
pertinent thereto, including but not limited to, any premises, house,
building, or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof, including,
but not limited to, any room, unit, apartment, condominium, and/or common
area.



(Ord. 2013-13 § 1, 7-22-2013)



Sec. 3-685.  Violation:



   It shall be unlawful for any real property to become a chronic nuisance
property or, once established as a chronic nuisance property, be the site of,
or the subject of, any further nuisance activities for a period of one year.



(Ord. 2013-13, § 1, 7-22-2013)



Sec. 3-686.  Classification Extension:



   Each nuisance activity occurring on any real property within one year
after said real property has been established as a chronic nuisance property
shall extend the expiration of said classification to one year from the date
of the most recent finding that a nuisance activity has occurred on the
chronic nuisance property.



(Ord. 2013-13, § 1, 7-22-2013)



Sec. 3-687.  Liability; Defenses:



   Owners, property managers, and occupants of real property shall be
jointly and severally responsible for violations occurring on any real
property under their control. It shall not be a defense that an owner,
property manager, or occupant: 1) did not personally commit the nuisance
activity(ies); 2) were not present when the nuisance activity(ies) took
place; or 3) lack(s)(ed) knowledge that the nuisance activity(ies) was/were
about to take or took place upon any real property.



(Ord. 2013-13, § 1, 7-22-2013)



Sec. 3-688.  Penalty:



   Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be fined no
less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each day on which a violation of this
article exists or continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Ord. 2013-13, § 1, 7-22-2013)



Sec. 3-689.  Procedure:



   The following shall constitute the process governing determinations of
chronic nuisance properties under this article:



      (1)   When the Chief of Police receives one or more police or
other reports documenting the occurrence of a nuisance activity on or within
any real property, he shall independently review such reports to determine
whether or not they constitute nuisance activities as defined in this article.



      (2)   Upon a finding of at least two nuisance activities have
occurred on any real property within a one-year period, the Chief of Police
shall use his/her best efforts to issue a written warning to the owner,
property manager, and/or occupant, as the case may be, notifying them that
the real property is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The
warning shall identify the address of the real property, any relevant portion
thereof, a concise description of the nuisance activities and the date they
occurred, a warning that the real property shall be declared a chronic
nuisance property if any other nuisance activities take place on the real
property within a specified period of time, and that fines and/or injunctive
relief will be sought if the property is declared a chronic nuisance
property. Failure to send a warning shall not adversely affect whether real
property may be declared a chronic nuisance property.



      (3)   Upon a finding of at least three nuisance activities
within a one-year period, the Chief of Police shall issue a written citation
to the owner, property manager and/or occupant, as the case may be, which
shall include the following information: (i) the street address of the real
property and any relevant portion thereof; (ii) a declaration that the
identified real property has been declared a chronic nuisance property; and
(iii) a concise description of the nuisance activities that exist or have
occurred which have caused the real property to be declared a chronic
nuisance property and the date said nuisance activities occurred. The facts
set forth in a citation shall be taken as prima facie true and correct.
Citations issued under this article shall be administered through Justice
Municipal Code, § 1-17, Administrative Adjudication.



      (4)   In the event any real property is found to be a chronic
nuisance property, the owner, property manager and/or occupant shall be
required to post in a conspicuous place a notice that the real property has
been declared a chronic nuisance property by the Village of Justice on a form
to be provided by the Chief of Police which shall identify the specific
nuisance activities that caused said classification to be found, and a
warning that any further nuisance activities taking place on the real
property by a specified date shall be cause for further fines and/or
injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for: (i) any owner, property manager,
or occupant to suffer or permit any such posted notice to be removed, altered
or defaced before or while the real property constitutes a chronic nuisance
property; or (ii) any person to remove, alter or deface a posted notice
before or while the real property constitutes a chronic nuisance property. In
the event an owner and/or property manager has control over real property
declared a chronic nuisance property in which occupants, other than
themselves reside, copies of said notice shall also be sent to each occupant
by certified mail return/receipt requested, within fifteen (15) days after
the real property has been declared a chronic nuisance property. A copy of
the letter and return receipts shall be filed with the Village of Justice
Police Department no later than thirty (30) days after the real property has
been declared a chronic nuisance property. It shall be unlawful to fail to
post and/or deliver and file the notices required by this subsection.



      (5)   Nothing herein shall constitute a waiver or prevent the
Village of Justice from instituting a civil action to: (i) seek an order to
classify any real property as a chronic nuisance property; (ii) seek an order
imposing fines for violations of this article; (iii) seek injunctive relief
requiring any owner, property manager and/or occupant to take action to abate
any nuisance activity ongoing or existing on any chronic nuisance property;
or, (iv) seek injunctive relief requiring an owner, property manager, and/or
occupant to take certain action (or refrain from taking certain action) so as
to prevent a chronic nuisance property from being the site of, or the subject
of, any further nuisance activities for a period of one year.



      (6)   A nuisance activity, of which three or more occurrences
may cause real property to become a chronic nuisance property, may
individually constitute separate and distinct violations of the Justice
Municipal Code. Nothing herein shall prevent the prosecution of individual
violations of the Justice Municipal Code as they occur even though they may
be additionally considered as nuisance activities for purposes of declaring
real property a chronic nuisance property under this chapter.



(Ord. 2013-13, § 1, 7-22-2013)



ARTICLE XXVI. PRECIOUS GEMS BUSINESSES



Sec. 3-690.   Declaration of Policy:



   The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare through the enactment of this article, which:



   (a)   Establishes procedures for the regulation of businesses that
participate in the buying and selling of precious gems and precious metals.



   (b)   Establishes license requirements for individuals buying and
selling precious gems and precious metals.



   (c)   Provides for the administration and the enforcement of this
article. This article shall be liberally construed to carry out its intended
purposes.



(Ord. 2012-02, § 2, 1-9-2012)



Sec. 3-691.   Other Ordinances:



   This article shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other
applicable ordinances, codes, statutes, laws, orders, rules, or regulations
that prescribe standards for the subject matter of this article. In the event
of a conflict between the provisions of the article and any other ordinance,
code, statute, law, order, rule or regulation, the most restrictive shall
apply.



(Ord. 2012-02, § 2, 1-9-2012)



Sec. 3-692.   Definitions:



   The words and terms used in this article shall have the meanings as
ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning. The use of any term in the present tense shall include the
future and past tense of the term, when applicable, and all terms used in the
singular shall include the plural and all words used in the masculine gender
shall extend to and apply to the feminine gender, when applicable.



   Employee Permit: A permit issued to an employee or agent of a precious
gems broker issued pursuant to this article.



   Precious Gems: include, but are not limited to: diamonds, opals,
citrine, garnet, sapphire, ruby, emerald, tourmaline, quartz, turquoise,
morganite, kunzite. topaz, aquamarine, zircon, tanzanite, alexandrite, coral
pearl, amethyst, apalite. jade, peridot, moonstone, lapis, malachite, iolite,
diopside, tiger’s eve, onyx, ivory, or any composition or jewelry
containing any amount of said gems.



   Precious Gems Broker: Any person having an interest in, employed by,
acting as an agent of or on behalf of any person having an interest in a
business whose undertakings involve the purchase or sale of precious gems or
precious metals as defined herein, but excluding those persons or businesses
licensed by the State of Illinois under 205 ILCS 510/0.01 et seq., The
Pawnbroker Regulation Act.



   Precious Gems Businesses: Businesses that participate in the buying and
selling of precious gems and/or precious metals.



   Precious Metals: include, but are not limited to: any metal or alloy
thereof containing any amount of gold, silver, sterling, platinum, copper,
brass, nickel, palladium, rhodium, iridium, osmium, rhenium, mercury, indium,
bismuth, or gallium, and includes U.S. minted currency containing any of the
above metals.



(Ord. 2012-02, § 2, 1-9-2012)



Sec. 3-693.   Records:



   (1)   Every precious gems broker shall keep a record of all
transactions involving the purchase, sale, barter, exchange or other
conveyance or receipt of any precious gems or precious metals.



   (2)   All records must be kept in compliance with the following
standards:



      (a)   Records must be legibly printed by hand or computer in
the English language.



      (b)   Records must be made at the time of the transaction and
shall display the following regarding the precious gems broker: name, age,
date of birth, gender and place of residence



      (c)   Records must contain the following information regarding
the transaction: general description of the individual with whom the
transaction is had and the signature of the individual on the receipt of the
permanent record, the date and time of the transaction and the signature of
the precious gems broker who consummated said transaction



      (d)   A photocopy of a valid state issued driver’s license
or state issued identification card bearing the photograph of the customer
with whom the transaction was consummated.



      (e)   For each record, the precious gems broker shall
photograph the customer with a clear and visible view of the customer’s
face and head. The customer’s name shall be inscribed on the back of said
photograph, and the photograph shall be maintained with the other record of
said transaction.



      (f)   If the customer does not have a valid state issued
driver’s license or identification card containing a photograph, name and
address of the customer, two (2) forms of identification must be shown, and
one of the two (2) forms of identification must include the customer’s
residence address. These forms of identification shall include, but not be
limited, to the following: passport, social security card, utility bill,
employee or student identification card, or a civic, union or professional
association membership card. At least one (1) of the aforementioned must
contain a photograph of the customer.



      (g)   A photograph and description of every article received,
purchased, sold or exchanged, which description shall give the
manufacturer’s name and other marks of identification appearing on the
article including, but not limited to, the serial number and engravings, if
any, on the article, and a complete description of all components or pieces
of each article, including any stones, gems and the weight and composition of
the metal comprising the article.



      (h)   The price or other consideration received, and the name
and address of the receiving party in the case of sale, and the sales price
in the case of a purchase, and the method of payment.



   (3)   All entries in the record shall be signed and dated by the
precious gems broker making the entry.



   (4)   Such records shall be retained for a period of three (3) years
from the date of the transaction.



(Ord. 2012-02, § 2, 1-9-2012)



Sec. 3-694.   Daily Report:



   It shall be the duty of the precious gems broker to complete and
transmit to the chief of police or his or her designee, before 12:00 P.M.
each business day, a copy of the records required to be kept under this
article, reflecting all completed transactions of the previous day.



(Ord. 2012-02, § 2, 1-9-2012)



Sec. 3-695.   Inspections:



   All precious gems brokers must prepare and keep available records to
reflect all items purchased, received, kept for sale or exchange for
inspection by any member of the village police department or any agent
authorized in writing to conduct such inspections on behalf of the chief of
police or his or her designee during reasonable business times.



(Ord. 2012-02, § 2, 1-9-2012)



Sec. 3-696.   Precious Gems Broker’s License Required:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in precious gems
businesses without first obtaining a precious gems broker’s license from
the village, as set forth in this article.



(Ord. 2012-02, § 2, 1-9-2012)



Sec. 3-697.   Precious Gems Broker’s License Application:



   (a)   An application form shall be provided to potential precious
gems brokers by the office of the village clerk. All applicants must
truthfully express the following information upon the license application:



      (1)   Personal Identification: name, place of residence,
length of residency at the aforementioned address, social security number and
date of birth.



      (2)   Photographic Identification: copy of current state photo
identification or driver’s license.



      (3)   Date Of Previous Application: the date, or approximate
date, of any previous applications for a precious gems broker’s license.



      (4)   Revocation History: the applicant’s historical
background related to the revocation of any prior precious gems broker’s
licenses.



      (5)   History Of A Violation Conviction: whether the applicant
has ever been convicted for violating any of the provisions of this article
or the ordinances of any other Illinois municipality regulating the
activities of precious gems brokers or similar such ordinances or laws of
other jurisdictions.



      (6)   History Of Felony Convictions: whether the applicant has
ever been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State
of Illinois or any other state or federal law of the United States, or had a
legal disposition of a sentence for a crime involving theft or dishonesty.



   (b)   All statements made by the applicant upon the application or
in connection therewith shall be under oath.



   (c)   Every applicant may be required to submit to fingerprinting by
the police department in connection with the application for a precious gems
broker’s license. The applicant shall pay the fee as set by the Illinois
State Police for fingerprint submissions.



   (d)   The office of the village clerk shall cause to be kept an
accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with
all other information and data pertaining thereto and all precious gems
broker’s licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter and of the
denial of applications. The clerk shall forward a copy of said record to the
chief of police on a quarterly basis.



   (e)   No precious gems broker’s license or employee permit shall
be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony
under the laws of the State of Illinois or the United Sates within five (5)
years of the date of the application; nor to any person who has been
convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, nor to any
person who has been convicted of any criminal offense involving theft,
possession of stolen property or dishonesty, or whose precious gems
broker’s license issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein
provided.



   (f)   In the event any of the aforementioned regulations is
superseded or conflicts with in any way with any provisions of this article
and any other ordinance, code, statute, law, order, rule or regulation, the
aforementioned regulation shall be read as having no force and effect.



(Ord. 2012-02, § 2, 1-9-2012)



Sec. 3-698.   License Fee:



   The annual precious gems broker’s license fee shall be that amount
set forth in section 13-1 of this code. A person or business licensed by the
village and State of Illinois to do business as a pawnbroker
(“Pawnbroker”) defined in and pursuant to The Pawnbroker Regulation Act,
(205 ILCS 510/1 et. seq.) shall not be required to obtain a precious gems
broker’s license. However, those licensed by the village and State of
Illinois to transact business as pawnbrokers shall otherwise comply with all
the rules and regulations established herein. Should there be any conflict
between the terms of this article of the village code and the pawnbroker’s
regulation act cited above, the provisions of the more restrictive law shall
apply.



(Ord. 2012-02, § 2, 1-9-2012)



Sec. 3-699.   Issuance Of Precious Gems Broker’s License:



   The village president or his or her designee, after consideration of
the application and all information obtained relative thereto by the board of
trustees, and after the return of the fingerprint check by the State Police
shall, shall, within thirty (30) business days, approve or deny the
application. If the applicant does not possess the qualifications for a
license, as herein required, and the issuance of a license to the applicant
would not be in accordance with the intent and purpose of this chapter, then
the village president or his or her designee shall deny the application. If
the applicant is found to be fully qualified, the license shall be issued
only if the application fees have been paid in full.



(Ord. 2012-02, § 2, 1-9-2012)



Sec. 3-700.   Prohibitions:



   (a)   The village shall establish rules and regulations regarding
the engaging in precious gems businesses as needs require.



   (b)   No precious gems broker, precious gems broker’s agent or
employee shall sell, transfer, exchange, or dispose of, or melt, transfigure
or transform from the design and form in which it was received any precious
gem or precious metal, as defined herein, within seven (7) days of the date
it was received.



(Ord. 2012-02, § 2, 1-9-2012)



Sec. 3-701.   Employee Permit:



   No precious gem broker shall allow an agent, employee or other person
to act on his of her behalf transacting any purchase, sale, exchange or other
transfer of any precious metal or precious gem until such agent, employee, or
person has applied for and been approved by the village for a precious gem
broker’s employee permit. A precious gem broker’s employee permit
application shall be provided by the village clerk. The employee permit
applicant shall be subject to the same processing regulations, rules and
prohibitions as established herein and imposed upon a precious gem broker’s
license applicant. Each employee permit applicant or precious gem broker
shall bear the cost of fingerprinting, which shall be paid at the time the
permit application is made. The fee for an employee permit shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00) and shall be paid to the village at the time application is
made.



(Ord. 2012-02, § 2, 1-9-2012)



Sec. 3-702.   Penalties And Enforcement:



   (a)   Violations of this article shall be civil in nature and
prosecuted under the terms of the village of Justice administrative
adjudication ordinance and the rules and regulations contained therein. Fines
for violations may be imposed up to seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00)
per incident and administrative remedies including, but not limited to, the
suspension and revocation of precious gems broker’s licenses.



   (b)   A precious gems broker’s license or employee permit may be
suspended or revoked in the sole discretion of the board of trustees if,
after proper written notice to the precious gems broker and hearing by the
board of trustees, or its designee, it is determined by a preponderance of
the evidence that said offending precious gems broker, agent or employee
violated this article, state statute or federal statute or any other law of
general applicability in the operation of the licensed business.



(Ord. 2012-02, § 2, 1-9-2012)



Secs. 3-703–3-710.   Reserved:



 


Notes

1 
65 ILCS 5/11-42-1 et seq., 5/11-60-1, 5/11-60-2; 720 ILCS 5/5-4, 5/16-5 et
seq., 375/1 et seq.

2 
See Chapter 12 of this Code.


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2015 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 4
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION*



   Art. I.   In General,  §§ 4-1--4-15



   Art. II.   Fire Department, §§ 4-16-440



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 4-16-4-45



      Div. 2.   Pension Fund. §§ 4-46-4-60



   Art. III.   Reserve Fire Department, §§ 4-61-4-85



   Art. IV.   Fire Prevention, §§ 4-86-4-120



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 4-86-4-115



      Div. 2.   Fireworks, §§ 4-116-4-120



*Cross references-Administration, Ch. 2; health and sanitation, Ch. 5; motor
vehicles and traffic, Ch. 6; police department, Ch. 9; utilities, Ch. 11;
civil emergencies, § 2-381 et seq.; fire protection tax, § 2-402; emergency
services and disaster agency, § 2-496 et seq.; board of fire and police
commissioners, § 2-576 et seq.; amusements, § 3-121 et seq.; fire hazards
in places of amusement, § 3-127; smoking in assembly halls, § 3-131; fire
inspections in cleaning and dyeing establishments, § 3-182; child care
homes, § 3-241 et seq.; fire protection in mobile home parks, § 3-425; air
pollution control, § 5-221 et seq.; fire extinguishers in school vehicles,
§ 7-200; building code, § 8-31 et seq.; fire limits, § 8-39; dangerous
buildings, § 8-141 et seq.; smoke detectors in condominium district, §
12-73.



State law references-Adoption of technical codes by reference, Ill. Rev.
Stat. Ch. 24, § 1-3-1 et seq., Ch. 85, § 1001 et seq.; municipal fire
protection, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, Art. 11, Div. 6 et seq.; false alarm,
Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, § 26-1; Fire Protection Training Act, Ill. Rev.
Stat. Ch. 85, § 531 et seq.; environmental protection agency, Ill. Rev.
Stat. Ch. 111 1/2, § 1001 et seq.; fire protection districts, Ill. Rev.
Stat. Ch. 127 1/2, § 21 et seq.; fireworks, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 127 1/2, §
101 et seq.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Secs. 4-1-4-15.  (Reserved)



ARTICLE II. FIRE DEPARTMENT



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 4-16.  Established:



   There is hereby established a department of the village government
which shall be known as the fire department, and which shall embrace a fire
chief and the members of the village fire department.



(Code 1969, Ch. 9; Code 1972, § 5-1-1)



Sec. 4-17.  Members Generally:



   Every member of the fire department shall be a certified emergency
medical technician and shall maintain such certification while he is a member
of the fire department.



(Code 1972)



Sec. 4-18.  Fire Insurance Tax Fund1,2:



   It shall be the duty of the village treasurer to keep all monies
received on account of fire insurance tax separate and apart from all other
funds in his hands.



(Code 1972, § 5-1-5)



1 See also § 2-401 et seq., taxation, of this code.



2  65 ILCS 5/11-10-1 et seq.



Sec. 4-19.  Fire Chief3:



   There is hereby created the position of the chief of the fire
department of the village; said fire chief shall be appointed by the
president and the board of trustees voting jointly; said fire chief shall
hold such position for the term of one year or until a successor is appointed
and qualified. This person need not be a resident of the village in order to
be appointed to said position.



(Code 1972, § 5-1-2; Ord. 78-14, 9-7-1978; Ord. 90-8, § 2, 5-14-1990; Ord.
91-12, § 1, 6-24-1991)



3  See also chapter 2, "Administration", of this code.



Sec. 4-20.  Fire Chief-Duties Generally:



   The chief shall be chief of the fire department, subject to the
president and board of trustees, and shall have command and control of the
department and all members thereof. He shall have the general care and
custody of the engines, hose carts, hoses, trucks, hooks, ladders and all
other property and equipment of the department and shall personally attend to
all repairs required to be made upon same.



(Code 1972, § 5-1-6)



Sec. 4-21.  Fire Chief-Command At Fires:



   The fire chief shall attend all fires occurring within the village and
take command of the organization, and see that the several members of the
fire department faithfully perform their respective duties. With the
concurrence of the president and board of trustees, or any two (2) members
thereof, the fire chief may order the tearing down of any buildings when, in
any case, it shall be deemed necessary to check the progress of any fire.



(Code 1972, § 5-1-7)



Sec. 4-22.  Department Records; Annual Report:



   The fire chief shall keep in a book to be provided for such purpose a
full, true and complete record of all the property and equipment of the fire
department, together with a record of all transactions of the fire department
and of all property placed in his charge and custody. He shall annually, at
the close of each fiscal year, make a written report to the president and
board of trustees showing the condition of the department under his
management, together with a complete list of all fires occurring in the
village during the preceding year, the date and location of each fire, the
loss incurred thereby, the amount of insurance and such other information as
he may deem important to the village.



(Code 1972, § 5-1-8)



Sec. 4-23.  Establishment Of Boundaries At Fires; Removal Of Property When
Necessary:



   The fire chief or other officer in command may prescribe limits in the
vicinity of any fire within which no persons except those who reside therein,
firemen, policemen and those admitted by order of any officer of the fire
department be permitted to go. He shall have power to cause a removal of any
property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such
property from fire, to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect adjoining
property.



(Code 1972, § 5-1-9)



Sec. 4-24.  Conduct Of Spectators At Fires; Disobedience:



   Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject and
obedient to the orders of the fire chief and other officers of the fire
department engaged in extinguishing the fire and in the removal and
protection of property. In case any person shall refuse to obey such orders,
the fire chief shall take appropriate disciplinary action.



(Code 1972, § 5-1-10)



Sec. 4-25.  Interfering At Fires; Tampering With, Damaging Equipment:



   Any person who shall wilfully offer any hindrance to any officer or
fireman in the performance of his duty at a fire, or shall wilfully in any
manner destroy, injure or deface any hose cart, hose or other fire apparatus
belonging to the village, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in this
code.



(Code 1972, § 5-1-11)



Sec. 4-26.  Driving Over Fire Hose:



   No wagon, railroad car or other vehicles shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of the fire department of the village when laid down on any
street or alley by order of the fire chief or other proper officer, without
the consent of the fire chief or officers or members in charge of such hose.



(Code 1972, § 5-1-12)



Sec. 4-27.  Opening Signal Box:



   It shall be unlawful for any person, except those connected with the
management of the fire department, to open any signal box unless it is to
communicate an alarm of fire; or to break, cut, deface, derange or in any
manner meddle or interfere with any signal box or fire alarm, telegraph or
telephone wires.



(Code 1972, § 5-1-13)



Sec. 4-28.  Chief To Turn Over Books, Equipment To Successor:



   On the expiration of his term of office or his resignation thereof or
removal therefrom, the fire chief shall on demand deliver to his successor in
office all books, records, equipment and property of every description in his
possession belonging to the village or appertaining to his office.



(Code 1969, Ch. 9; Code 1972, § 5-1-14)



Sec. 4-29.  Compensation:



   (a)   The chief and members of the fire department shall receive for
their services such compensation and shall be granted such privileges and
immunities in accordance with section 2-34 of this code.



   (b)   The compensation of the personnel of the fire department for
fire calls, ambulance calls, fire drills and training sessions shall be as
follows:



      (1)    Fire calls, ambulance calls, fire drills, training
sessions:



 

 

Rate Of Pay Per Call



Deputy or assistant chief
 

$ 6.50



Line officer
 

6.00



Engineer and emergency medical technicians (EMTs)
 

5.50



Firefighters
 

5.00



Probationary (6 months)
 

4.00




 



         The ranking EMT officer on the call shall be considered the
officer in charge. If no EMT officers are on the crew, the senior EMT will be
considered the officer in charge. If no EMTs or officers are on the crew, the
man in the radio operations will be considered the officer in charge.



         Every ambulance crew, on every call, will have an officer
in charge. The officer in charge will be responsible for the cleaning and
resupplying of the unit after the call and will validate the rest of the crew.



      (2)    Fire Drills And Training Sessions: No member of the
paid on call department shall be paid for more than three (3) fire drills or
for more than three (3) training sessions per week. Maximum payment shall not
exceed a total of three (3), whether drills or related training sessions or a
combination of both.



      (3)    Fire Prevention Inspector: The fire prevention
inspector shall receive the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per bona fide
inspection of a business or commercial building. A copy of every inspection
report is to be submitted to the village clerk's office. The words "bona
fide" will be interpreted to mean any fire inspection that has a legitimate
complainant, a new business license inspection or yearly inspection for
commercial properties.



(Code 1972, § 5-1-15; Ord. 85-25, 12-23-1985; Ord. 87-11, § 1, 6-8-1987)



Sec. 4-30.  Ambulance Service1:



   (a)   The fire department shall provide ambulance and rescue service
in cases of emergency requiring the prehospital care and transportation of
persons who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless
at the time of the dispatch of a fire department vehicle.



   (b)   The response area shall be limited to the territory within the
corporate limits of the village. Service outside corporate limits shall be
limited to:



      (1)    Circumstances governed by contract or mutual aid
agreements; and



      (2)    Extreme lifesaving necessity.



   (c)   Except when personnel or equipment is needed for continued
lifesaving support, the fire chief shall ensure that neither personnel nor
equipment is unduly delayed:



      (1)    In its dispatch to or departure from the scene;



      (2)    In transportation to and/or from the hospital; or



      (3)    Within a hospital.



   (d)   The fire department shall transport persons only to one of the
following hospitals:



      Christ hospital, Oak Lawn, Illinois;



      Little Company of Mary hospital, Evergreen Park, Illinois;



      Palos community hospital, Palos Heights, Illinois;



      Community memorial general hospital, LaGrange, Illinois;



      Loyola hospital, Maywood, Illinois;



      provided, however, that in exceptional circumstances, the fire
chief may authorize the transportation of persons to other hospitals that
have specialist physicians or special equipment and facilities not available
at the above mentioned hospitals.



(Code 1972, § 5-1-16; Ord. 80-11, 7-17-1980; Ord. 88-27, § 1, 9-26-1988;
Ord. 2001-31, § 1, 9-10-2001)



1  210 ILCS 50/1 et seq.



Sec. 4-30.1.  Fee Schedule:



   (a)   A fee, for emergency medical services rendered by or on behalf
of the village of Justice or for ambulance service provided by or on behalf
of the village or any municipality which provides emergency medical services
to the village pursuant to a contract or mutual aid agreement with the
village, will be charged as follows:



 


Procedure

 

Resident Cost

 

Nonresident Cost





BLS emergency
 

$  400.00

 

$  600.00



BLS nonemergency
 

400.00

 

600.00



BLS return trip
 

400.00

 

500.00



ALS base rate
 

500.00

 

700.00



Response charge
 

500.00

 

700.00



ALS response charge
 

500.00

 

700.00



BLS loaded mileage
 

11.00/mile

 

11.00/mile



ALS loaded mileage
 

11.00/mile

 

11.00/mile



Cold administration
 

50.00

 

75.00



Hot pack administration
 

50.00

 

75.00



Extrication
 

320.00

 

650.00



Chem strip
 

27.50

 

55.00



Glucose administration
 

27.50

 

55.00



OB delivery
 

500.00

 

1,000.00



Oxygen therapy
 

50.00

 

75.00



Body bag
 

27.50

 

55.00



Cardiac pacing
 

200.00

 

300.00



Suction
 

27.50

 

55.00



 


 






 



 


Procedure

 

Resident Cost

 

Nonresident Cost





EKG
 

55.00

 

110.00



Spinal immobilization
 

50.00

 

220.00



IV therapy
 

50.00

 

75.00



Drug administration
 

27.50

 

55.00



Irrigation
 

27.50

 

55.00



Communicable disease protection
 

27.50

 

55.00



Burn care
 

27.50

 

55.00



Bandaging
 

27.50

 

55.00



Airway intubation
 

55.00

 

110.00



Pulse oximetry
 

27.50

 

55.00



Splinting
 

27.50

 

55.00



Stair chair
 

27.50

 

55.00





 



   (b)   The fire chief is authorized to waive any or all of the fees
due from a person, business, or other entity under this section. He may do so
by administrative regulation or on an individual basis.



   (c)   All revenue from the charges assessed pursuant to the
emergency medical service portion of this section shall be deposited in the
ambulance fund.



   (d)   When emergency response services are rendered by or on behalf
of the village of Justice for noncommercial passenger vehicle fires of
persons, businesses, or other entities who are not residents of the village,
the charge to be assessed will be six hundred seventy five dollars ($675.00).



   (e)   When emergency response services are rendered by or on behalf
of the village of Justice for any other purpose to persons, businesses, or
other entities that are not residents of the village of Justice, the charges
to be assessed are as follows:



      (1)    One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per hour or
fraction thereof for each vehicle responding to such call.



      (2)    Thirty five dollars ($35.00) per hour or fraction
thereof for each firefighter responding to such call.



      (3)    When emergency response services are rendered by or on
behalf of the village for salvage or property preservation purposes due to
natural occurrence, windstorm, or mechanical damage, etc., and not due to
fire loss, the charge will be equal to the cost of any materials used and
thirty five dollars ($35.00) per hour per firefighter installing the
materials.



   (f)   No charge shall be levied against nonresidents of the village
if the total charge of the emergency response service is less than fifty
dollars ($50.00).



   (g)   All revenue from the charges assessed pursuant to the
emergency response services portions of this section shall be deposited in
the corporate fund.



   (h)   Nothing in this section shall authorize the village to refuse
to provide any service to any person, business or entity that has not paid
for services previously provided or that owes any money for services provided.



(Ord. 2001-31, § 1, 9-10-2001; Ord. 2005-16, § 2, 8-8-2005)



Sec. 4-31.  Illinois Fire Protection Training Act:



   (a)   The village is desirous to elect to participate in the
programs under the Illinois fire protection training act, public act
77-16651, as amended. In order for the village to be eligible for initial or
continued participation in the programs, the law requires that before an
individual may commence regular employment as a firefighter, he must have
been certified by the state fire marshal as having successfully completed an
approved firefighter I, II and III training course. The village intends to
establish its own school or to utilize some other school certified by the
state fire marshal for the purpose of providing the training required under
such act.



   (b)   The village hereby elects to participate in the programs
provided for in the Illinois fire protection training act.



   (c)   Before an individual may commence part time or paid on call
employment as a firefighter, he must have been certified by the state fire
marshal as a firefighter II, as having successfully completed an approved
training course as provided in such act.



   (d)   The firefighter II training must be completed by the trainee
within his probationary period of thirty six (36) months, for volunteer, part
time and paid on call personnel.



   (e)   The fire chief shall make the necessary amendments to the
personnel rules, the manual of rules of the fire department, in order to
require that any person accepted by the fire department of the village shall
not become a regular member of the fire department unless and until he shall
complete, pursuant to the Illinois fire protection and training act, the
approved training course within thirty six (36) months of the date of his
initial employment.



(Code 1972, § 5-1-17; Ord. 82-13, 10-7-1982)



1  50 ILCS 740/1 et seq.



Sec. 4-32.  Penalty:



   Any person violating any provision of sections 4-24 through 4-27 of
this division shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00).



Sec. 4-33.  Performance Evaluation:



   (a)   In conjunction with the provisions of section 4-29 of this
division, all pay raises will be based upon an incentive performance system
plus weighted average of production and performance from the prior fiscal
year. The performance evaluation will be determined by the supervisory
personnel. The system will be established by the police and fire committee of
the village board, based upon a general order of the department entitled
level of performance report/noting.



   (b)   All levels of personnel will be so evaluated.



   (c)   The board will determine the appropriate salary for each level
of performance at the first meeting in May of each year.



   (d)   The board will also consider the level of education in
granting raises. A rate of ten cents ($0.10) for each of the following levels
will be added to the compensation due an employee:



      Firefighter III



      Fire apparatus engineer



      Fire officer I



      Fire officer II



      Fire officer III



      Haz-mat I



      Haz-mat tech



      EMT-P



      Associate degree in fire science



      Bachelor's degree in fire science



      Justice firefighters who successfully complete each of the
classes listed below, by the anniversary dates of the service indicated,
shall receive a ten cent ($0.10) per hour pay raise:



 



Fire prevention inspector I
 
Vertical rescue I


Fire prevention inspector II
 
Vertical rescue II


Fire investigator
 
3 year anniversary


Arson investigator
 
5 year anniversary


Airport firefighter
 
10 year anniversary


Roadway extrication specialist
 
15 year anniversary


Auto extrication technician II
 
20 year anniversary


Breathing apparatus specialist
 
25 year anniversary


Fire attack and suppression technician
 
30 year anniversary




 



All firefighters who have successfully completed any of the proposed classes
by the indicated dates, up to June 26, 1995, shall be paid retroactive to May
1, 1995.



(Ord. 91-23, § 1, 7-22-1991; Ord. 91-24, § 1, 8-12-1991; Ord. 95-14, § 1,
6-26-1995)



Sec. 4-34.  Paramedic Program:



   A paramedic program is established for the village under the direction,
control and supervision of the fire chief. The various requirements of
section 4-30 of this division are embodied into this program.



(Ord. 96-17, § 1, 7-8-1996)



Sec. 4-35.  Hiring, Status, And Compensation:



   Paramedics shall be hired by the fire chief. They shall not be full
time employees of the village. They are not entitled to any benefits, except
those specifically authorized by the president and board of trustees. The
compensation of such individuals shall be in accordance with section 2-34 of
this code. The fire chief shall establish a job description for said
individuals. Paramedics shall from time to time be called upon to perform the
duties of a firefighter.



(Ord. 96-17, § 2, 7-8-1996)



Sec. 4-36.  Staffing:



   This program will be provided on a twenty four (24) hour, seven (7) day
a week basis. It will be staffed with two (2) paramedics at all times. The
minimum equipment carried on ambulances shall meet the department of
transportation equipment specifications.



(Ord. 96-17, § 3, 7-8-1996)



Sec. 4-37.  Training:



   The fire chief shall interview each person who applies as a paramedic.
A resume shall be provided, all individuals shall have such training as is
required by the state and the village. The fire chief shall have the right to
reject any individual from service for just cause or for reasons of
incompatibility.



(Ord. 96-17, § 4, 7-8-1996)



Secs. 4-38-4-45.  Reserved:



DIVISION 2. PENSION FUND1 1



1  40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.



Sec. 4-46.  Adoption Of Statute By Reference:



   In accordance with the procedures required by state law, 40 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/4-101 through 5/4-142 of the Illinois pension code,
approved March 18, 19631, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as if
set out at length in this section.



(Code 1972, § 5-6-1)



1  40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.



Sec. 4-47.  Contributions:



   All contributions by both the village and individuals covered by the
firefighters' pension fund shall be made in conformance with law.



(Code 1972, § 5-6-2)



Sec. 4-48.  Pension Fund Board Of Trustees:



   Pursuant to 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-121 of the Illinois
pension code, a board of trustees of the firefighters' pension fund shall be
created, consisting of the village president, the village clerk, the village
treasurer, the fire chief and the village attorney.



(Code 1972, § 5-6-3; Ord. 80-20, 10-2-1980)



Secs. 4-49-4-60.  Reserved:



ARTICLE III.  RESERVE FIRE DEPARTMENT2 2



2  65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-5, 5/10-2.1-6, 5/10-2.1-8.



Sec. 4-61.  Established:



   There is hereby established a department of the village government
which shall be known as the village reserve fire department, which shall be
under the jurisdiction of the fire chief of the regular fire department of
the village.



(Code 1972, § 5-2-1)



Sec. 4-62.  Members:



   The reserve fire department shall consist of not more than twenty (20)
members, who shall be residents of the village, between the ages of sixteen
(16) and eighteen (18) years.



(Code 1972, § 5-2-2)



Sec. 4-63.  Supervision:



   The members of the reserve fire department shall be subject to the
orders and directions of the chief of the fire department.



(Code 1972, § 5-2-3)



Sec. 4-64.  Compensation:



   Members of the reserve fire department shall not be entitled to
compensation for any services rendered as members of such department, but
shall be volunteer members serving without pay.



(Code 1972, § 5-2-4)



Sec. 4-65.  Bylaws:



   The members of the reserve fire department shall have the right to
adopt bylaws to govern the operation of the department, which bylaws shall be
subject to the approval in writing of the fire chief of the fire department.



(Code 1972, § 5-2-5)



Sec. 4-66.  Minors; Parents' Consent:



   The parents of any members of the reserve fire department shall consent
to and approve the joining of the department by any members of the
department, such members being minors as set forth herein.



(Code 1972, § 5-2-6)



Sec. 4-67.  Auxiliary Duties:



   The members of the reserve fire department shall not be assigned any
duties on firefighting equipment while a fire is in progress but shall only
be assigned such auxiliary duties as may be prescribed by the fire chief of
the fire department.



(Code 1972, § 5-2-7)



Sec. 4-68.  Rules And Regulations1:



   The fire chief of the fire department shall also have the right to
prescribe reasonable rules and regulations governing the operation of the
reserve fire department, and shall have the right to remove any member of the
department upon violation of any of such rules or for any other reason for
the good of the department, subject to approval of the discipline action
board of the fire department.



(Code 1972, § 5-2-8)



1 50 ILCS 745/1 et seq.



Sec. 4-69.  Use Of Equipment:



   Any member of the reserve fire department to whom any equipment, books,
records or personal property of any kind or description which is entrusted by
the fire chief or any member of the fire department shall be returned to the
department upon demand of the fire chief.



(Ord. 70-2, 2-19-1970; Code 1972, § 5-2-9)



Secs. 4-70-4-85.  Reserved:



ARTICLE IV.  FIRE PREVENTION2 3



2  20 ILCS 2905/1 et seq.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 4-86.  Definitions:



   (a)   As used in this article, the words "fire prevention code"
shall mean the standards adopted in section 4-88 of this article.



   (b)   As used in the fire prevention code:



      Corporation Counsel: The attorney for the village.



      Municipality: The village.



(Code 1972, § 5-3-3)



Sec. 4-87.  Penalties:



   (a)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire
prevention code adopted by this article or fail to comply therewith, or who
shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall
build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to
comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the president and board
of trustees or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance
respectively, be subject to a penalty as provided in this code. The
imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or
permit to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not
otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.



   (b)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to
prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.



(Ord. 71-8, 5-20-1971; Code 1972, § 5-3-13)



Sec. 4-88.  Adoption Of National Fire Codes1:



   In accordance with the procedures required by state law, there are
hereby adopted, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire and explosion, the
national fire codes, being codes and standards of the National Fire
Protection Association, being the most current volumes of such code
published, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified
or amended, of which code not less than three (3) copies are filed in the
office of the clerk of the village and the same are incorporated in this
section fully as if set out at length herein; the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the village.



(Code 1972, § 5-3-1; Ord. 80-24, 12-4-1980)



1  65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq.; 50 ILCS 220/1 et seq.



Sec. 4-89.  Bureau Of Fire Prevention:



   (a)   The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the fire
inspector of the village, who shall be appointed pursuant to section 2-26 of
chapter 2, article II of the Justice Municipal Code, and who shall exercise
such authority under the supervision of the commissioner of the building
department.



   (b)   The fire inspector shall be appointed on the basis of his
qualifications. His appointment shall be for one year or during good behavior
and satisfactory service.



   (c)   A report of the fire inspector shall be made annually and
transmitted to the president of the village; it shall contain all proceedings
under this article, with such statistics as the commissioner of the building
department may wish to include therein.



(Code 1972, § 5-3-2; Ord. 2009-20, § 1, 8-10-2009)



Sec. 4-90.  Modification Of Code:



   The fire inspector shall have power, subject to the approval of both
the commissioner of the building department and of the chairman of the
building, plats and zoning committee, to modify any of the provisions of the
fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or
his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way
of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of
the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the
decision of the building inspector thereon shall be entered upon the records
of the building department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.



(Code 1972, § 5-3-10; Ord. 2009-20, § 1, 8-10-2009)



Sec. 4-91.  Permits:



   The chairman of the building, plats and zoning committee of the board
of trustees, and the commissioner of the building department and the fire
inspector shall act as a board of approval to determine and specify, after
giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing of
which due notice shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village, and any new materials, processes or occupancies,
which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire
prevention code. The fire inspector shall post such a list in a conspicuous
place in the building department and distribute copies thereof to interested
persons.



(Code 1972, § 5-3-11; Ord. 2009-20, § 1, 8-10-2009)



Sec. 4-92.  Appeals:



   Whenever the commissioner of the building department shall disapprove
an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true
intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted,
the applicant may appeal from the decision of the commissioner of the
building department to the president and board of trustees within thirty (30)
days from the date of the decision appealed.



(Code 1972, § 5-3-12; Ord. 2009-20, § 1, 8-10-2009)



Sec. 4-93.  Construction Of Codes:



   (a)   The national fire codes shall be construed in conjunction with
the provisions of the county building ordinance.



   (b)   Nothing in this article shall be construed as being in
conflict with the provisions of the county building ordinance, and the
Chicago electrical code. The regulations which are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or requirements shall govern.



(Code 1972, § 5-3-14; Ord. 80-24, 12-2-1980)



Sec. 4-94.  Automatic Detection And/Or Extinguishment Of Fires:



   (a)   The authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) as identified by the
village board of trustees is hereby authorized to adopt and promulgate rules
based upon the standards of any nationally recognized organization embodying
details for the installation and construction of automatic sprinkler
equipment and/or automatic fire detection equipment in such instances where,
based upon the standards contained herein, any building or part thereof
because of its size, construction, occupancy or lack of suitable protective
equipment, shall be deemed by the AHJ to constitute a special fire hazard to
life or property or an excessive burden upon the fire extinguishing
facilities of the fire department.



   (b)   All automatic sprinkler equipment and/or fire detection
equipment specified herein shall be inspected at least once each year by a
licensed fire sprinkler and/or fire alarm contractor and at all times
maintained in proper operative condition by the owner or occupant of such
building. The occupants of such buildings containing such equipment shall
promptly notify the building commissioner in case such sprinkler system or
any other equipment specified herein is withdrawn from such building, or the
use of such equipment therein is interrupted, curtailed or altered.



   (c)   Automatic sprinkler equipment approved by any nationally
recognized testing laboratory shall be installed and connected to an adequate
water supply, with the sprinkler heads, valves, and auxiliary equipment being
of standard types as determined by the AHJ and the building commissioner.



   (d)   No automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed or altered
until plans have been submitted to and approved by the building commissioner.



   (e)   (1)   The AHJ shall require for any business, industrial,
or institutional structure, the installation of such approved automatic
sprinkler equipment in all of the following instances based upon the
standards contained therein:



         a.   Automatic sprinkler systems, which comply with NFPA
13 of the National Fire Protection Association, shall be installed throughout
all structures which are: 1) newly constructed; 2) increased in the hazard
classification of the use; and 3) when altered, remodeled, expanded,
increased in size, or changed in configuration in any way whatsoever,
including damage as a result of a fire or other disaster, wherein the square
footage for such alterations, remodeling, expansion, increase in size or
configuration is equal to fifty percent (50%) or more of the original square
footage of the existing structure, as determined by the village building
commissioner, and



         b.   Throughout every building or structure which by
reason of its interior construction or highly combustible occupancy involves
a severe life hazard to its occupants or in the judgment of the AHJ,
constitutes a fire menace to adjoining property; and



         c.   Throughout all basements and cellars used for the
1) manufacture, storage, or sale of combustible material, 2) the storage or
sale of merchandise, or 3) the housing or storage of motor vehicles or motor
vehicle parts; and



         d.   Automatic standpipe systems, which comply with NFPA
14 of the National Fire Protection Association, shall be installed in any
building which is three (3) stories or more or thirty-five (35) feet or more
in height.



         e.   All required alarm systems shall be connected to a
UL approved twenty-four (24) hour central monitoring service that will report
an activation of the automatic alarm to the fire department. An approved
twenty-four (24) hour monitoring service includes the fire department 911
center. An approved service is one that complies with the National Fire
Protection Association's standard NFPA 72, Central Watch Service. Alarm
systems shall comply, where applicable, with section 7-29 of this code.
Excepting businesses approved by the village as a home occupation business,
the following businesses shall be required to install and maintain in working
order the alarm system sited in this subsection (e)(1)e within each of its
business premise or location: 1) all new businesses; and 2) all existing
businesses that are sold and reopened under new ownership.



         f.   A manually operated device (pull box) used to
initiate an alarm signal shall be installed at each exit of the structure.



         g.   All buildings, excluding class A buildings,
transferred to a new owner are to be in full compliance with the current life
safety and health codes and the accessibility standards act (20 ILCS 3105/1
et seq.), as published by the capital development board.



      (2)   The AHJ shall require for all multiple-family dwellings
with two (2) units or more, condominiums, condominium conversions, and town
homes, hereafter erected, and when altered, remodeled, expanded, increased in
size, or changed in configuration in any way whatsoever, including damage as
a result of a fire or other disaster, wherein the square footage for such
alterations, remodeling, expansion, increase in size, or configuration is
equal to fifty percent (50%) or more of the original square footage of the
existing structure, as determined by the village building commissioner, the
following requirements:



         a.   Throughout every building or structure, interior
walls of cement block which follow the roof line and are sealed to the end of
the fascia with eight (8) feet of fire rated plywood from the cement block
wall outward on the roof; or as approved by the AHJ and the building
commissioner.



         b.   Smoke detectors, heat detectors, and strobe lights
both inside and out in accordance to the guidelines of the NFPA 72 and shall
be connected to a UL approved twenty-four (24) hour central monitoring
service that will report an activation of the automatic alarm to the fire
department. An approved twenty-four (24) hour monitoring service includes the
fire department 911 center. An approved service is one that complies with the
National Fire Protection Association's standard NFPA 72, Central Watch
Service. Alarm systems shall comply, where applicable, with section 7-29 of
this code.



         c.   A manually operated device (pull box) used to
initiate an alarm signal shall be installed at each exit of the structure.



         d.   Automatic sprinkler systems throughout the entire
structure, which complies with NFPA 13-D or NFPA 13-R as applicable, of the
National Fire Protection Association, and provides a separate cold water
line, fully charged, which shall only be used for the purpose of providing,
such sprinkler protection. In addition to NFPA 13-D or NFPA 13-R as
applicable, the following areas shall be required to be fully sprinkled:



            1.   For every furnace and hot water tank area,
one (1) sprinkler head for every seventy-five (75) square feet of such area.



            2.   For general storage area, one (1) sprinkler
head for every one hundred (100) square feet of such area, plus one (1)
sprinkler head for each individually provided storage area, which shall be
installed above the individual area.



            3.   For utility and or laundry area, one (1)
sprinkler head for every one hundred (100) square feet of such area.



            4.   On all stairways, one (1) sprinkler head for
every landing and off-landing.



            5.   In all corridors in excess of landing areas,
one (1) sprinkler head for every one hundred (100) square feet of area.



            6.   In all public areas there shall be installed
one (1) sprinkler head for every one hundred (100) square feet of area.



         e.   In addition to the foregoing, a local audible alarm
system shall be installed into the cold water line and shall be installed at
or near the water main. Such alarm system shall be so equipped to
automatically detect a flow of water within the sprinkler system resulting in
the activation of the audible alarm system which must be readily heard
throughout the building.



         f.   To provide proper fireproofing, all tray
ceilings/cathedral ceilings, located twelve inches (12") above any sprinkler
head must be enclosed by double five-eighths inch (5/8") drywall, as
applicable.



         g.   Hard wired smoke alarms shall be located in each
stairway, hallway, laundry room and basement. Such smoke alarms shall be
connected directly to an electrical circuit in the structure.



         h.   Ground fault circuit interceptor (GFCI) outlets
shall be installed in each kitchen, bathroom, and laundry area.



         i.   In addition to the requirements in this subsection
(e)(2), for condominium conversions, a separate gas meter, electric meter,
and water meter shall be installed for each individual living unit and a
separate set of meters, as necessary, shall be installed for the common areas.



      (3)   The AHJ shall require for any single-family dwelling
that is 1) newly constructed; or 2) altered, remodeled, renovated, increased
in size, or changed in configuration in any way whatsoever, including damage
as a result of a fire or other disaster, wherein the square footage for such
alterations, remodeling, expansion, increase in size, or configuration is
equal to fifty percent (50%) or more of the original square footage of the
existing structure, as determined by the village building commissioner, the
installation of such approved automatic sprinkler equipment throughout the
entire structure as mandated by NFPA-13D. In addition:



         a.   One (1) fire sprinkler head at and in each heating
plant area of a single- family residence, with the sprinkler head to be
located within five (5) feet of a furnace and the hot water heater; and



         b.   One (1) fire sprinkler head within any attached
garage; and



         c.   To provide proper fireproofing, all tray
ceilings/cathedral ceilings located twelve inches (12") above any sprinkler
head, must be enclosed by double five-eighths inch (5/8") drywall, as
applicable.



      (4)   The AHJ shall require for any mobile home or
manufactured home that is 1) newly constructed; or 2) all mobile homes
brought into a mobile home park after March 13, 2006, the installation of
such approved automatic sprinkler equipment throughout the entire structure
as mandated by NFPA-13D. In addition, one (1) fire sprinkler head at and in
each heating plant area of a mobile home, with the sprinkler head to be
located within five (5) feet of a furnace and the hot water heater; and one
(1) fire sprinkler head within any attached garage.



   (f)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the
installation of sprinklers in safe deposit or other vaults, or in rooms or
buildings devoted to the manufacture or storage of aluminum powder, calcium
carbide, calcium phosphide, metallic sodium and potassium, quicklime,
magnesium powder, sodium peroxide or like material, where the application of
water may cause or increase fire, nor in any other location where the
installation of sprinklers may increase the hazard; nor shall it be construed
in any way to interfere with the substitution of other approved protective
equipment.



   (g)   Any person violating the terms and conditions of this section
shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each and every day that the violation of this section is
allowed to remain in effect, with each and every day being a complete and
separate offense. In addition, the appropriate authorities of the village may
take such other actions they deem proper to enforce the terms and conditions
of this section, including, without limitation, an action in equity to compel
compliance with its terms. Any person violating the terms of this section
shall be subject, in addition to the foregoing penalties, to the payment of
court costs and reasonable attorney's fees of the village due to its
enforcement of this provision. 



(Code 1972, § 5-3-16.2; Ord. 98-9, § 1, 2-23-1998; Ord. 2000-05, § 1,
1-10-2000; Ord. 2000-57, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2001-04, § 1, 2-26-2001;
Ord. 2002-25, §§ 1, 2, 7-8-2002; Ord. 2004-18, §§ 2, 3, 5, 8-9-2004; Ord.
2005-07, §§ 2, 3, 4, 5, 2-14-2005; Ord. 2006-01, § 2, 1-9-2006; Ord.
2006-06, § 3, 3-13-2006; Ord. 2006-22, § 2, 11-27-2006; Ord. 2007-21, § 2,
10-9-2007)



Sec. 4-95.  Multiple-Family Dwelling Definition:



   Within the context of this article, the term "multiple-family dwelling"
shall mean a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units, originally
constructed for such purpose.



(Code 1972, § 5-5-1; Ord. 98-35, § 1, 8-10-1998)



Sec. 4-96.  Multiple-Family Dwelling Sprinkler Protection; Audible Alarm:



(Rep. by Ord. 2004-18, § 4, 8-9-2004)



Sec. 4-97.  Sprinkler Systems-Installation:



   (a)   A test pipe and valve shall be installed at the furthest point
of the sprinkler system so as to enable tests to be made indicating discharge
pressures. The discharge pressure at the furthest point of the system shall
not be less than fifteen (15) pounds per square inch (psi).



   (b)   All sprinkler pipe and fittings shall be so installed that the
system may be drained.



(Code 1972, § 5-5-3)



Sec. 4-98.  Sprinkler Systems-Permits:



   (a)   Plans for sprinkler systems, together with a copy of the
detailed drawings and specifications submitted in connection with the
application for a building permit, shall be submitted to the fire department
for approval prior to the installation of any sprinklers.



   (b)   Prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit, sprinkler
systems shall be tested, approved and certified fully operational by the fire
department. Such systems shall remain fully operational thereafter.



(Code 1972, § 5-5-4)



Sec. 4-99.  Balconies:



   All balconies which are part of any multiple-family dwelling unit
hereafter constructed shall extend for at least four feet (4') horizontally
beyond the apartment opening and shall be capable of providing a refuge to
inhabitants of such dwelling units from heat and smoke.



(Code 1972, § 5-5-5; Ord. 73-18, 7-19-1973)



Sec. 4-100.  Buildings Containing Three Or More Stories:



   The following are special regulations for all buildings containing
three (3) or more stories:



      (1)    Standpipes:



         a.    Standpipes and sprinkler fire department siamese
connections shall be no further than ten feet (10') apart, shall be located
on the street or road side wall of any such building, shall be readily
accessible and shall be located no further than three hundred feet (300')
from the nearest operable fire hydrant, which three hundred feet (300') shall
be measured along a route normally used by motor vehicles.



         b.    Wet standpipes for class II and class III service
shall be provided for each floor as follows:



            1.    All hose so installed shall be of a type
single jacket rubber-lined three hundred (300) psi test with NST (national
standard thread).



            2.    Such standpipes shall be installed in
accordance with the national fire codes.



      (2)    Elevators, Fire Service:



         a.    A two (2) position keyed switch shall be provided
at the main floor for each single elevator and for each group of elevators.
This keyed switch shall be located in the left doorjamb of the elevator
entrance. Where there is more than one elevator, the left elevator shall have
the switch. The keyed switch shall be located not less than six feet six
inches (6'6") above the floor and approximately four feet (4') below the head
jamb. When the switch is not in the "on" position, the signal elevator and
all elevators in a group which are in normal service shall return nonstop to
the main floor, and the doors shall open. The "main floor" shall be defined
as the floor where the keyed switch is located. The main floor shall be
determined by the chief of the bureau of fire prevention. The key shall not
be removable when switch is in the "on" position.



            1.    An elevator traveling away from the main
floor shall reverse at the next available floor without opening its doors and
return nonstop to the main floor.



            2.    Door reopening devices for power operated
doors which may be affected by smoke or heat so as to prevent door closures
shall be rendered inoperative.



            3.    Elevators equipped with power-operated doors
and standing at a floor other than the main or street floor shall close their
doors without delay.



            4.    The emergency stop button in the car shall
be rendered inoperative until the car reaches the main floor.



            5.    All keyed switches shall be marked "on" and
"off".



         b.    A keyed switch shall be provided in or adjacent to
the operating panel of each elevator. The switch, when operated, shall put
the elevator on emergency service. The key shall be compatible with the fire
department master key for all elevators located within the village.



            1.    When on emergency service an elevator shall
be operable only by a person in the car.



            2.    Elevators on emergency service shall respond
to the car buttons only and shall not be affected in their operation from
registered corridor calls.



            3.    Power-operated doors shall remain closed
when the elevator stops at any landing except the main floor until opened by
continuous pressure on a door-open button or switch. As soon as this
door-open button switch is released, the doors shall automatically reclose.



            4.    Where mechanical-electrical safety edge
devices are installed on the leading edge of the car doors, these devices
shall remain operative and doors may be maintained in open position by
operation of the device. Any features that may cause doors to reclose after
being held a predetermined time shall be disconnected.



         c.    Keys required to call or operate elevators shall
be kept in a metal box mounted in a conspicuous location at the main floor as
approved by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. The box shall have a lock-type
cover which can be opened only by the Fire Department's alarm box key. The
box shall contain a separate key for each elevator in the group.



         d.    When the elevator or elevators are controlled by
an attendant, the operation of the key switch shall sound a bell mounted
under the car platform as a signal to the attendant to return nonstop to the
main floor.



         e.    Attendant-operated elevators shall comply with all
the provisions and operations, except the automatic operation is not required
when the car control is manual through a car switch.



         f.    For double-deck elevator installations, the upper
deck is to be used for firemen's emergency control and as such will comply
with all provisions of this Section.



         g.    Every group of elevators in a building subject to
the provisions of this Section shall be available for firemen's emergency
service. In buildings where there are several groups of elevators and where
individual key switches are provided to cause cars to return to the main
floor, this arrangement is satisfactory, provided that a separate key box is
provided for each group of elevators.



         h.    Immediately adjacent to the firemen's return
switch in the car station, a push button shall be provided to cancel all
registered calls when the elevator is on firemen's control. The button shall
be marked "Fire Cancel". This button shall not be required if all car calls
are canceled when the car makes its first stop.



      (3)    Fire Extinguishers And Pull Stations:



         a.    Ten (10) pound ABC fire extinguishers shall be
installed in breakable glass-fronted cabinets at locations meeting the
requirements of the national fire codes.



         b.    Fire alarm systems shall conform to all
requirements of the national fire codes.



         c.    Emergency lighting circuits shall be provided for
all exit signs and in all corridors, stairwells, basements, assembly rooms
and any other public areas. Such lighting shall conform to the requirements
of the fire prevention code.



      (4)    Blueprints:



         a.    Prior to the issuance of any building permit, all
plans, specifications and blueprints for all construction related to article
28, section 28-18 of the fire prevention code amendments shall be approved by
the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Fire Department.



         b.    All such blueprints shall conform to the
requirements specified in the national fire codes.



      (5)    Smoke Hatches: Smoke hatches shall be provided in all
stairways. Such hatches shall be activated by automatic smoke detection
devices.



      (6)    Miscellaneous:



         a.    All stairways, shafts, corridors, boiler or
furnace rooms, laundry rooms, storage rooms, trash rooms, janitor closets and
mechanical equipment rooms, shall be completely enclosed and fire-rated at no
less than two (2) hours.



         b.    One smokeproof tower shall be provided on all
buildings exceeding three (3) stories in height.



(Code 1972, § 5-3-17)



Sec. 4-101.  Ventilation Panels:



   All buildings of a controlled atmosphere design, having nonoperable
windows or no windows at all, shall be constructed with the Fire Department
ventilation panels at all floor levels at locations determined by the Chief
of the Fire Prevention Bureau.



(Code 1972, § 5-3-18)



Sec. 4-102.  Conflicting Provisions:



   Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to conflict with any other law
or ordinance of the Village or any such regulations contained in this Chapter.



(Code 1972, § 5-3-19)



Sec. 4-103.  Reimbursement For Hazardous Emergency Responses:



   (a)   Any recipient of any hazardous materials response by the Fire
Department and Police Department, and any other Village departments, shall be
responsible for reimbursing the Village for the actual costs and expenses of
the Village as a result of said hazardous materials response, including, but
not limited to, supplies, equipment, clothing and manpower expenses. For
purposes of this Section "actual costs and expenses" shall also include the
actual costs and expenses of any other municipality or agency that renders
aid to the Fire and Police Departments in relation to said hazardous
materials response.



   (b)   Upon completion of a hazardous materials response, the Village
shall tender an itemized written bill to the recipient which sets forth the
actual costs and expenses of that hazardous materials response.



   (c)   For purposes of this Section, the "recipient" of a hazardous
materials response shall be defined as the owner(s) and/or tenant(s) of the
building and/or real or personal property where the hazardous materials
response took place.



   (d)   For purposes of this Section, a "hazardous materials response"
shall be defined as any response by the Fire and Police Departments to an
incident involving the spilling, leaking or escape of any hazardous substance
from any container intended for the storage or transportation of said
hazardous substance or any fire or explosion involving a hazardous substance.
For purposes of this Section, "hazardous substance" shall be defined as in
415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.14 of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Act, except that petroleum products and natural gas shall also be
considered "hazardous substances" for purposes of this Section.



(Ord. 92-43, § 1, 11-23-1992)



Sec. 4-104.  Key Box Access:



   (a)   All commercial and industrial buildings may install a key box,
of a type and installation location approved by the fire chief.



   (b)   The key box may contain:



      (1)   Keys to locked points of ingress whether on the interior
or exterior of such buildings.



      (2)   Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms.



      (3)   Keys to locked electrical rooms.



      (4)   Keys to elevator controls.



      (5)   Keys to other areas as directed by the fire chief.



   (c)   The key box shall be of a type having a tamper switch.



   (d)   The key box shall be supervised by the fire chief, and he may
set rules to govern the number and distribution of the key box keys, and the
procedure for gaining access.



   (e)   Any person, business or company who shall violate the key box
provisions of this code shall be subject to the penalty provisions stated in
section 1-7 of this code.



(Ord. 92-45, § 1, 12-14-1992)



Sec. 4-105.  Fire Resistance:



   (a)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all multi-family
structures containing two (2) or more living units; or one or more living
units in a structure containing any other type of use such as business or
industrial. The fire resistance rating of structural elements (including
walls, floors and roof) and tenant separation or party walls shall be a
minimum of two (2) hours and be constructed of masonry or concrete.



   (b)   Exterior and loadbearing wall construction shall be of
masonry. All floors shall be of the precast concrete type, or poured concrete
type having at least a two (2) hour fire resistance rating.



(Ord. 93-34, § 1, 9-27-1993)



Sec. 4-106.  Fire Hydrant Maintenance And Repair:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, business, corporation or
other entity to allow a fire hydrant, whether on public or private property
to fall into any state of disrepair or obstruction. It shall further be
unlawful for any person, business or corporation to permit any obstruction by
parking, growth of vegetation or construction of any fire hydrant located on
private property or public easement connected to private property.



   (b)   It shall be the responsibility of each owner of private
property on which is installed a system of fire hydrants operated by the
owner of the private property to have inspected each hydrant annually by a
licensed plumber or an inspector approved by the property insurer and report
the condition to the village fire prevention bureau within thirty (30) days
of the conduct of the inspection. The inspection shall be conducted only
during the months of March, April, September or October of each year.



   (c)   The annual inspection shall include operation of the valve and
stem, caps, drain, and free flow of the hydrant. The owner shall further
cause to have a certified fire flow from each fire hydrant, by the village
staff, at the owner’s expense, or an outside contractor, every three (3)
years.



   (d)   It shall be the responsibility of each owner of private
property on which is installed one or more fire hydrants operated by the
owner of the private property to repair any deficiency in the operation of
the fire hydrant or the water system supplying the fire hydrant within thirty
(30) days of the date of notice of the deficiency.



(Ord. 99-14A, § 1, 6-14-1999)



Sec. 4-107  Replacement Of Terms Secondary To Dissolution Of Fire Department:



   (a)   By reason of the dissolution/disbanding of the Justice fire
department (and by extension of the bureau of fire prevention), there no
longer exists within the village of Justice a “fire department,” not a
“chief” thereof; nor does there exist a “bureau of fire prevention,”
nor a “chief” thereof.



   (b)   Any references in chapter 4, article IV of the Justice
Municipal Code (or elsewhere in said code where applicable to fire prevention
code enforcement) to the term, “fire department,” shall be and is hereby
replaced with the term “building department,” and likewise all references
to the term “chief of the fire department,” or “fire chief,” or any
other such similar term, shall be and is hereby replaced with the term,
“commissioner of the building department.”



   (c)   Any references in chapter 4, article IV of the Justice
Municipal Code (or elsewhere in said code where applicable to fire prevention
code enforcement) to the term, “bureau of fire prevention,” shall be and
is hereby replaced with the term “building department,” and likewise all
references to the term “chief of the bureau of fire prevention” or any
such similar term shall be and is hereby replaced with the term, “fire
inspector.”



(Ord. 2009-20, § 2, 8-10-2009)



Secs. 4-108-4-115.  Reserved:



DIVISION 2. FIREWORKS1 4



1  425 ILCS 30/1 et seq.



Sec. 4-116.  Definition:



   For the purposes of this division, “fireworks” are hereby defined
as any explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances,
or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect
of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or
detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons in which
explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to
propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, 
sparklers, bombs or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks
containing any explosive compound; or any tablets or other device containing
any explosive substances, or containing combustible substances producing
visual effects. The term “fireworks” shall not include toy pistols, toy
canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper caps containing twenty five
one-hundredths (0.25) grain or less of explosive compound are used, provided
that they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the
paper caps which contain less than twenty five one-hundredths (0.25) grain of
explosive mixture, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.



(Code 1972, §§ 5-4-1, 6-4-7)



Sec. 4-117.  Sale:



   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any fireworks in the
village.



(Code 1972, § 5-4-2)



Sec. 4-118.  Discharge:



   No person shall set off, fire or explode any fireworks whatsoever.



(Code 1972, §§ 5-4-3, 6-4-8)



Sec. 4-119.  Exhibitions:



   Public exhibitions of fireworks and pyrotechnics may be given if a
license therefor is granted by the village board. Such exhibitions shall be
given subject to the supervision of the fire chief or of some person
designated by him.



(Code 1969, Ch. 19, Art. 2; Code 1972, §§ 5-4-4, 6-4-8)



Sec. 4-120.  Possession And Manufacture:



   No person shall have, keep, store, use, manufacture, assemble, mix,
sell, handle or transport any fireworks; provided, however, that nothing in
this Article shall be held to apply to the possession or use of signaling
devices for current daily consumption by railroads, vessels and others
requiring them or to the possession, sale or use of normal stocks of
flashlight compositions by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies;
and provided further that the fire chief or some person designated by him may
issue permits for the display of fireworks as hereinafter provided.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-9)



 


Notes

1 
40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.

2 
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-5, 5/10-2.1-6, 5/10-2.1-8.

3 
20 ILCS 2905/1 et seq.

4 
425 ILCS 30/1 et seq.



CHAPTER 5
HEALTH AND SANITATION 1,2



   Art. I.     In General, §§ 5-1–5-15



   Art. II.     Health, §§ 5-16–5-60



   Art. III.     Food And Food Establishments, §§ 5-61–5-220



      Div. 1.   Temporary Food Service Establishments, §§
5-61–5-70



      Div. 2.   Retail Food Dispensers, §§ 5-71–5-105



      Div. 3.   Food Dealers, §§ 5-106–5-130



      Div. 4.   Bakeries, §§ 5-131–5-155



      Div. 5.   Automatic Food Vending Machines, §§ 5-156–5-175



      Div. 6.   Drive-In Restaurants, §§ 5-176–5-190



      Div. 7.   Milk, §§ 5-191–5-220



   Art. IV.     Air Pollution Control, §§ 5-221–5-240



   Art. VI.   Garbage Collection, §§ 5-263-5-274



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 5-260-5-269



      Div. 2.   Refuse Containers, §§ 5-270-5-274



   Art. VII.   Nuclear Free Zone, §§ 5-275-5-289



   Art. VIII.   Storage Containers, §§ 5-290-5-300



   Art. IX.   Occupancy Standards, §§ 5-301-5-324



   Art. X.   Americans With Disabilities Act, §§ 5-325-5-339



1  See chapter 2, "Administration"; chapter 3, "Business Regulations";
chapter 4, "Fire Prevention And Protection"; chapter 7, "Offenses And
Miscellaneous Provisions"; chapter 8, "Planning And Development"; chapter 11,
"Utilities"; chapter 13, "Rates And Fees"; § 2-356 et seq., sanitation and
drainage inspector; § 2-621 et seq., board of health; § 3-11, businesses
constituting nuisances; § 3-94, sanitary conditions in premises used for
retail alcoholic liquor sales or storage; § 3-179, sanitation in cleaning
and dyeing establishments; § 3-248, sanitation in childcare homes; § 3-271
et seq., junkyards; § 3-406 et seq., manufactured home communities; § 3-476
et seq., hospitals; § 3-501 et seq., massage parlors; § 3-521 et seq.,
veterinary hospitals; § 3-525, sanitation of veterinary hospitals; § 4-30,
"Ambulance Service"; § 7-171 et seq., removal of weeds and debris; § 7-226
et seq., ratproofing; § 8-31 et seq., building code; § 11-120 et seq.,
emergency telephone system, of this code.



2  65 ILCS 5/7-4-1, 5/11-16; 70 ILCS 905/1 et seq.; 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



Sec. 5-1.  Nuisances Enumerated1:



1  5 ILCS 50/1; 65 ILCS 5/11-42-9, 5/11-60-2; 720 ILCS 630/1; 740 ILCS 105/1
et seq.; 775 ILCS 30/3.



   (a)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person within
the limits of the Village to commit any of the following described acts:



      (1)    To so negligently conduct any business or use premises
as to create such an offensive smell as may taint the air and render it
unwholesome or disagreeable in the neighborhood.



      (2)    To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or
vegetable matter, slops, swill, suds, garbage, filth, stable drippings, or
offal, or noisome substance of any kind to be collected or deposited or to
remain in any place in the Village to the prejudice of others.



      (3)    To throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited,
any offal or other offensive matter, or the carcass of any animal, in any
watercourse, pond, spring or well, within the limits of the Village.



      (4)    To deposit any night soil, dead animal or other filthy,
offensive or noisome substance, upon any lot, street, alley, highway, park or
other place.



      (5)    To corrupt or render unwholesome or injure the water of
any drinking hydrant, spring, stream, pond or lake, to the injury and
prejudice of others.



      (6)    To cause or suffer grass, leaves, underbrush or other
combustible matter to be collected, deposited or to remain on his premises in
such quantities and in such condition as to materially increase the danger to
property of others from forest or other fires.



      (7)    To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private
ways, streets, alleys, sidewalks and commons.



      (8)    To establish, maintain and carry on any offensive or
unwholesome business within the limits of the Village or within one mile of
the limits thereof.



      (9)    For any person to permit any slops, swill, garbage,
stable drippings, offal, filth, refuse, animal or vegetable matter, which is
liable to become putrid or offensive or injurious to health, to remain on any
premises used or occupied by him, for a longer period than twelve (12) hours
at a time.



      (10)    To keep or suffer to be kept in a foul, offensive,
nauseous or filthy condition any chicken coop, cow house, stable, cellar,
vault, drain, privy, sewer or sink upon any premises belonging to or occupied
by him, or any railroad car, building, yard, grounds and premises belonging
to or occupied by him.



      (11)    To own, use or keep any yard, pen, place, railroad car
or premises in or upon which cattle or other animals shall be confined or
kept, so as to be offensive to those residing in the vicinity, or any
annoyance to others.



      (12)    To locate and carry on any packinghouses, renderies,
tallow candleries, glue and bond factories, soap factories, and tanneries
within the limits of the Village, and within the distance of one mile outside
the Village limits.



      (13)    To erect, continue or use any building, or other
place, for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture which, by
occasion of noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive
or dangerous to health of individuals or of the public.



      (14)    To erect or maintain any privy within the Village.



      (15)    To slaughter or kill any cattle, hogs or sheep, or
keep, maintain or use in the Village any house or place in which the business
of slaughtering any of such animals may be carried on.



      (16)    To locate, establish or maintain any brewery or
distillery.



      (17)    To obstruct any watercourse, ravine or gutter so as to
cause water to stagnate therein, or to permit foul or stagnant water to stand
upon any premises to the prejudice of others.



      (18)    To permit the growth upon any premises of any noxious
weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistles, cockleburs and the like.



      (19)    To spit or expectorate on any public sidewalk, street
or other public place or floor or walk of any public vehicle or hall or other
public building.



      (20)    To commit any offense which is a nuisance according to
the common law of the land, or made such by the statutes of the State.



      (21)    To permit the growth upon any premises of any poplar
or cottonwood trees as hereinafter defined: A "poplar tree" is hereby defined
as any of a genus of slender quick-growing salicaceous trees, also known as
Populus; a "cottonwood tree" is hereby defined as a tree of the poplar group
with a cottony comma investing the seeds, also known as Populus balsamifera1.



1 See § 7-306 of this Code.



      (22)    To allow or permit any dense smoke to come or be
emitted from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency within the
limits of the Village shall be and is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and
may be summarily abated by the President or health officer, or by anyone whom
they or either of them may authorize for such purpose. Such abatement may be
in addition to the fine provided in Section 1-7 of this Code.



      (23)    To conduct any building operations between the hours
of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.; to operate any
steam shovels, pneumatic hammers, steam or electric hoists, or other
apparatus or equipment, the use of which is attended with loud or unusual
noise, in any block in which more than half of the buildings on either side
of the street are used exclusively for residence purposes.



      (24)    No person owning or in possession, charge or control
of any building or premises shall use the same or permit the use of the same,
or rent the same to be used for any business or employment, or for any
purpose of pleasure or recreation, if such use shall, from its noise or
boisterous nature, disturb or destroy the peace of the neighborhood in which
such building or premises is situated, or be dangerous or detrimental to
health, and such use is hereby declared a nuisance.



      (25)    The custom among merchants dealing in ice cream, ices,
soda waters and other soft drinks, or delivering at the curb, in the street
or upon the sidewalks or roadways, their merchandise in paper cups, cartons,
plates or other containers, has become a nuisance and menace to pedestrians
and persons traveling on the roadways by reason of the depositing of such
cups, cartons, plates or other containers on the sidewalks and streets; and
the delivery of such commodities in containers upon the public streets
anywhere is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a menace. No person shall
throw or drop such cup, plate or container upon a sidewalk, crosswalk,
roadway or any part of any public street, and such act is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and unlawful.



         The sale or disposition by any person of food, beverage,
dairy products, ice cream or any of its kindred products, in paper, cardboard
or any other container known by such person to be intended to be consumed by
the buyer on the sidewalks, alleys or at or near the place of business where
such food or beverages are sold or dispensed, is hereby declared to be a
nuisance, and a danger to the health and sanitation of the community. No such
dealer shall deliver any such goods to a person known to be a runner or
person employed to carry such goods from the place of business to persons on
the sidewalk, curb or street, and no such runner shall deliver any such
merchandise on the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the village.



         Any dealer in ice cream, ices, soda waters or other soft
drinks or merchandise of like character who shall violate any of the
provisions of this subsection shall upon conviction be fined as provided in
this code, and shall be subject upon a second offense to have his license as
such dealer revoked by the president; and any person throwing or dropping
such a cup, plate or container on the street shall be subject to a fine. Any
person acting as such runner as herein prohibited shall also be subject to a
fine.



      (26)   The allowing of water to accumulate and remain in a
pond or ponds either wholly or partly within the limits of any private
property for a period of more than ten (10) consecutive days is hereby
defined to be a nuisance and shall be abated as such. For the purposes of
this subsection, the term “pond” shall be considered to mean any exposed
surface of water not less than one hundred (100) square feet in area which
has accumulated either by natural or artificial means in any depression or
connected series of depressions or excavations, whether existing naturally or
created artificially.



      (27)   To use, operate or maintain any house car trailer for
human habitation upon any lot or plot of ground in the limits of the village,
except in a duly licensed trailer park.



      (28)   To permit or maintain an unsightly yard or premises
where there is an accumulation or deposit of any vehicle, equipment, material
of any nature, waste or earth.



      (29)   Any violation of the building code, fire prevention
code or zoning provisions, or to maintain the condition of any premises
declared by the president of the village to be a nuisance.



      (30)   To maintain an unsightly yard or area where junk,
wrecked or disabled automobiles, trucks or equipment or other such matter is
allowed to accumulate.



      (31)   To cause or suffer debris or junk, etc., to be
collected, deposited or to remain on his premises in such quantities and in
such condition as to increase breeding and refuse for rodents, vermin or any
undesirable nuisance.



      (32)   To cause or suffer garbage cans or containers to be
placed or to remain on parkways, walks, driveways or front yards on any day
before seven o’clock (7:00) P.M. on the day preceding public garbage
pickup, or after twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight on the day public garbage
pickup is made.



      (33)   To burn or incinerate any debris, garbage, paper,
leaves or other matter within the confines of the village.



      (34)   To leave or scatter wastepaper, paper containers for
foodstuffs, bills, posters, lithographs, advertising matter, refuse,
sweepings or material of like substance in or upon the streets, sidewalks,
alleys or public grounds of the village.



      (35)   To operate or play or cause to be operated or played
any phonograph, gramophone, radio set, wireless set, loudspeaker or other
device or instrument whereby sound is amplified, during the hours from seven
o’clock (7:00) P.M. to seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. of the next following
day, in such manner or with such volume that the sound caused thereby is
audible to human beings beyond a distance of four hundred feet (400') from
such phonograph, gramophone, radio set, wireless set or other device or
instrument and beyond the premises whereon the same is operated or played.



      (36)   Any act or omission, occupation and use of property,
equipment or structure which shall in any way threaten the life or the use of
property of individuals or of the public.



      (37)   All buildings, walls or other structures which have
been damaged or neglected by fire, decay or otherwise so as to constitute a
menace to the health, welfare or safety of individuals or of the public.



      (38)   To advertise wares or occupations by painting notices
of the same on or affixing them to fences, walls, windows, building
exteriors, utility poles or on hydrants, other public or private property, or
on rocks, or other natural objects, without the consent of the owner, or if
in the highway right-of-way or other public place, without the permission of
the village authorities.



      (39)   To dump, abandon, deposit, dismantle or burn upon any
public or private property, highway, park, street or parkway anywhere in the
village any trash, garbage, ashes, junk, junked or wrecked automobiles or
parts thereof or miscellaneous waste.



      (40)   To store, keep or maintain either on public or private
property any junk, parts, machinery or equipment not in an operable condition.



      (41)   To store, keep or maintain inoperable motor vehicles,
whether on public or private property and in view of the general public.
However, nothing in this subsection shall apply to any motor vehicle that is
kept within a building when not in use, to operable historic vehicles over
twenty five (25) years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a
place of business engaged in the wrecking, junking or repairing of motor
vehicles. All such inoperable motor vehicles stored on the premises of such
businesses shall be parked in the rear or side of such business in an
off-street parking facility and shall be effectively screened by a fence,
shrubbery or bushes on at least three (3) sides. As used in this chapter,
“inoperable motor vehicle” means any motor vehicle from which, for a
period of at least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels or other parts have
been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been
altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of
being driven under its own motor power. “Inoperable motor vehicle” shall
not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of
being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service
or repair operations.



      (42)   To own, maintain or keep a dwelling unit unfit for
human habitation, or dangerous or detrimental to life, safety or health
because of lack of repair, defects in the plumbing system, lighting or
ventilation, the existence of contagious diseases or unsanitary conditions
likely to cause sickness among persons residing in the premises, or residing
in proximity thereto.



      (43)   To permit any dangerous dog or other animal to leave
the premises of its owner when not under control by leash or other recognized
control methods. Guide dogs for the blind, sentry, guard or police-owned dogs
are exempt from this subsection when kept in compliance with law.



      (44)   Any act that offends decency or injures or endangers
the comfort, health or safety of others.



      (45)   Any act that interferes with the comfortable enjoyment
of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value and the property of
others.



      (46)   All owners, landlords, and managers of any rental
properties are hereby made liable for any nuisances committed by, or created
by, any tenants or their guests. All owners, landlords and managers of any
rental properties shall be given a warning citation when any such nuisance is
first found to exist. If such nuisance is not abated within forty eight (48)
hours, such persons shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-7 of this
code.



   (b)   Whenever any nuisance exists or shall be found on any premises
within the village, whether such nuisance is one specifically recognized by
ordinance or not, the president of the village is hereby authorized, in his
discretion, to cause the same to be summarily abated in such manner as he may
direct, and at the expense of the party permitting or maintaining such
nuisance.



   (c)   Subject to the provisions of section (a)(1), (22), (29), (36)
and (44) to (46) hereof, and notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in sections 5-1(a)(33), 5-222(d) or elsewhere in this code, “open
burning” of firewood within properly controlled and tended backyard “fire
pits,” and/or the operation of commercially available “fire pits”
utilizing a controlled and self-contained fuel source as reasonably intended
for backyard use, shall be permitted within the confines of the village,
conditioned upon such “fire pits” being (1) operated in a safe manner,
(2) tended at all times, and (3) not otherwise constituting a nuisance. 



(Code 1969, Ch. 13; Code 1972, § 7-1-1; Ord. 83-13, 7-7-1983; Ord. 86-21,
6-9-1986; Ord. 88-25, § 1, 9-12-1988; Ord. 99-42, § 1, 11-22-1999; Ord.
2009-21, § 2, 9-28-2009; Ord. 2009-29, § 2, 11-23-2009)



Sec. 5-2.  Inoperable Vehicles On Private Property1:



   The person who controls any motor vehicle determined to be inoperable,
located on private property and in view of the general public, shall be given
a notice (for purposes of this section, the “notice”) in person or by
certified mail notifying such person that he has seven (7) days from the
receipt of such notice to dispose of the vehicle. Failure of any such person
to obey such notice shall be punishable by fine(s) in accordance with section
1-7 of this code, and each day on which the vehicle remains after issuance of
the notice shall be deemed a separate offense. If such person does not
dispose of such vehicle within seven (7) days after receipt of the notice,
the chief of police shall authorize the removal of the vehicle or parts
thereof.



(Ord. 88-12, § 1, 5-23-1988; Ord. 2009-29, § 3, 11-23-2009)



1  See § 6-41 et seq.



Secs. 5-3-5-15.  Reserved:



ARTICLE II.  HEALTH2



2  65 ILCS 5/11-20-5; 20 ILCS 2305/2 et seq.



Sec. 5-16.  Violation:



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or refusing
to obey any lawful order of the board of health, or who destroys, mutilates
or conceals any notice posted by or under the authority of the board of
health, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-7 of this code.



(Ord. 70-23, 12-3-1970; Code 1972, § 7-2-29)



Sec. 5-17.  Health Officer-Duties:



   It shall be the duty of the health officer to:



      (1)   Enforce and observe all rules, regulations and orders of
the state Department of Public Health and all state laws pertaining to the
preservation of the health of the people within the village;



      (2)   Execute and enforce all provisions of this code relating
to nuisances, public health and sanitation;



      (3)   Investigate the existence of any contagious or
infectious disease within the village and to report the same promptly to the
village board and to the state Department of Public Health and to act without
delay in carrying out such measures for arresting the progress of the same as
either or both of such bodies shall adopt;



      (4)   Make all necessary sanitary and health investigations
and inspections within the village.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-1)



Sec. 5-18.  Health Officer-Compensation:



   The health officer shall receive, as compensation for his services, the
amount as set forth in section 13-1 of this Code.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-2; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998)



Sec. 5-19.  Health Officer-Assistance From Police1:



   The village policemen shall assist the health officer in the
performance of his duties when called upon by the health officer or by the
president of the board of trustees or any member thereof.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-3)



1  See Ch. 9 of this Code.



Sec. 5-20.  Registration Of Live Births2:



   Each live birth of a child which occurs in this village shall be
registered, within three (3) days after such birth as provided by state
statute.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-4)



2  410 ILCS 535/11, 535/12, 535/14.



Sec. 5-21.  Cases Of Sore Eyes In Newborns:



   Every physician, midwife, nurse, hospital or other person attending any
child at birth or within two (2) weeks thereafter shall report to the health
officer every case of sore eyes developed by such child. The report shall be
made within six (6) hours after the first appearance of symptoms of the case
of sore eyes.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-5)



Sec. 5-22.  Contagious Diseases-Prevention From Spreading:



   No person or thing liable to propagate cholera, smallpox, yellow fever,
diphtheria, scarlet fever or typhoid fever or other contagious or infectious
diseases shall be brought within the limits of the village without special
permit and direction of the health officer, and whenever it shall come to the
knowledge of any person that such person or thing has been brought within the
limits of the village, he shall immediately give notice thereof to the health
officer or board of health or some village policeman or one of the trustees,
together with the location thereof. No persons shall, within the village,
without a permit from the health officer or board of health, carry or remove
from one building to another any person afflicted with such contagious
disease. No person afflicted with any contagious disease thereof shall be
shipped or removed from the village to any other place, except under the
charge and direction of the health officer or board of health and with proper
precaution against the spread of contagion. Nor shall any person, by any
exposure of any individual sick of any contagious or infectious disease, or
of the body of a sick person or by any negligent act connected therewith or
in respect of the care or custody thereof, or by needless exposure of himself
when sick and not fully recovered, cause or contribute to or promote the
spread of disease from any such person or from any dead body.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-7)



Sec. 5-23.  Contagious Diseases-Reports:



   Any householder within the limits of the village in whose dwelling
there shall occur a case of cholera, scarlet fever, typhoid fever,
diphtheria, smallpox or other contagious or infectious disease, shall
immediately notify the health officer or the board of health or some village
policeman of same, and until instructions are received from the health
officer or the board of health, no clothing or property that may have been
exposed to the infection shall be removed from the house, nor shall any
occupant of such infected dwelling change his residence without any public
danger from such disease, and all physicians or other attendants upon any
person sick with smallpox, typhoid fever, scarlet fever, diphtheria or other
disease dangerous to the public health, shall forthwith report the same to
the health officer and the board of health of the existence of such disease
and shall cause a full report to be made to the Secretary of the state
Department of Public Health upon the blank forms furnished for that purpose.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-8)



Sec. 5-24.  Contagious Diseases-Placarding Of Buildings:



   As soon as the health officer is satisfied that there exists in any
house or building a case of contagious disease, such as typhoid fever,
scarlet fever, diphtheria, smallpox or cholera, it shall be his duty to place
or cause to be placed upon such house where such disease is in the house and
known, a placard notifying the public that such disease is in the house. No
person shall remove any such placard from any house or building that has been
so placarded until written authority is given by the health officer or the
board of health.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-9)



Sec. 5-25.  Contagious Diseases-Inmates Of Placarded Premises Not To Mingle
Until Cleared By Health Officer:



   When any house has been placarded with any placard notifying the public
that any contagious disease is in the house, no inmate of any such house or
building or person who has been exposed to such contagious disease shall
visit or attend any church, school, store, post office or other place of
public gathering, nor enter any other house, nor unnecessarily mingle with
other people until a certificate has been issued by the health officer
certifying that no danger of infecting others will result therefrom.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-10)



Sec. 5-26.  Students, Teachers To Be Vaccinated, Present Evidence:



   No person or persons, either pupil or teacher, shall attend any public
or private school in the village unless he shall have been first successfully
vaccinated within seven (7) years next preceding the date of admission to
such school. Such teacher or pupil shall be required to present satisfactory
evidence to the health officer that he has been properly and successfully
vaccinated and shall have received from the health officer a certificate of
such examination. It is hereby made the duty of the health officer to issue
such certificates of vaccination when the applicant therefor shall have
presented satisfactory evidence of such vaccination.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-11)



Sec. 5-27.  Authority To Quarantine Premises, Require Vaccination:



   (a)   The board of health is hereby authorized to make such
reasonable rules as may be necessary regarding quarantine and vaccination,
for the prevention and spread of contagious diseases, and to quarantine
premises where such disease occurs for such time as may be necessary to
protect public health.



   (b)   The board of health shall have power to prevent persons from
entering or leaving premises on which a case of a contagious or epidemic
disease occurs or is found, and to placard the same with signs indicating the
nature of such disease and the existence of the quarantine.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-12)



Sec. 5-28.  Inspection Of Schools:



   The health officer shall make regular inspection of all school
buildings at least once a year as to their hygienic condition and shall
report the result of such inspection to the board of trustees of the village
and to the board of education having charge and control of such schools, with
instructions as to remedy of condition (if any such be found), whereby the
health of those in attendance may be impaired or life endangered, that if the
health officer deems it advisable to close any public or private school or
schools, that he shall report his recommendations to the president and board
of trustees, and if they deem it advisable they shall order the school or
schools closed for such period of time as may be necessary.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-13)



Sec. 5-29.  Jurisdiction Over Schools:



   The board of health of the village shall have jurisdiction in all
matters pertaining to the preservation of the health of those in attendance,
upon the public and private schools in the village, to which and it is hereby
made the duty of the board of health to require that all persons attending
such schools, either as teachers or pupils, shall have complied with the
order of the state department of public health concerning vaccination, to
exclude from such schools any person suffering with a contagious or
infectious disease, or any person liable to convey such disease among those
in attendance, and to require and compel the vaccination of pupils when
necessary.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-14)



Sec. 5-30.  Refuse Receptacles-Required:



   (a)   It shall be the duty of every owner or any occupant of any
house, building, flat or apartment in the village where people reside, board
or lodge, or where animal or vegetable food is prepared or served, at all
times to maintain in good order and repair a separate metal receptacle for
garbage, and a separate metal receptacle for tin cans, bottles, ashes and
similar refuse.



   (b)   It shall be the duty of each such occupant to deposit nothing
but tin cans, bottles, ashes and similar refuse in the receptacle provided
therefor.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-15)



Sec. 5-31.  Refuse Receptacles-Specifications:



   Receptacles for garbage shall be watertight and made of metal with a
close fitting cover.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-16)



Sec. 5-32.  Deposits Of Refuse In Streets; Scattering By Wind1:



   No garbage or refuse of any kind shall be deposited in any street,
alley or public way, except as is provided in this chapter, and no such
refuse shall be so placed that it can be blown about or scattered by the wind.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-17)



1  See also chapter 10, "Streets, Sidewalks, Driveways And Parking Lots", of
this code



Sec. 5-33.  Unwholesome Food2:



   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any unwholesome or
polluted food or drink of any kind in the village.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-18)



2  410 ILCS 620/1 et seq.



Sec. 5-34.  Sanitation Of Food Establishments3:



   All premises used in the sale or storage of food or drink intended for
human consumption shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall
be unlawful to permit any person who is afflicted with a contagious disease
to handle any food or drink intended for sale, or for any such person to
handle such food or drink. All such premises shall be kept free from flies
and from vermin of all kinds.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-19)



3  410 ILCS 650/1 et seq.



Sec. 5-35.  Common Drinking Cups:



   It shall be unlawful to maintain any common drinking cup, dipper or
other similar utensil, for the use of more than one person, in any public
hall, theater, store or other place frequented by the public.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-20)



Sec. 5-36.  Towels In Public Places:



   It shall be unlawful to maintain in or about any public lavatory or
washroom any towel for common use. The term "common use" as used in this
section shall be construed to mean for use by more than one person.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-21)



Sec. 5-37.  Condition Of Premises:



   It shall be unlawful to permit any building, structure or place to be
or remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health in any
way. Any such building, structure or place is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.



(Code 1969, Ch. 5; Code 1972, § 7-2-22)



Sec. 5-38.  Temperature In Buildings:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating any
apartment building, commercial building, factory or any other structure of
any kind or description in which persons reside or are employed, to maintain
a minimum temperature of less than sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65°F) in
all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.



   (b)   The health officer or an inspector designated by the building
commissioner shall have the right and duty to inspect the premises for the
purpose of ascertaining whether or not the provisions of this section are
being complied with from time to time.



(Ord. 70-23, 12-3-1970; Code 1972, § 7-2-23; Ord. 2004-28, § 1, 11-8-2004)



Sec. 5-39.  Dangerous Acts:



   It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act which endangers the public
health or results in discomfort to the public.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-24)



Sec. 5-40.  Utensils For Serving Food Or Drink:



   Utensils for personal use in all places serving food or drink to the
public shall be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized after each such usage.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-25)



Sec. 5-41.  Disposal Of Refuse:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit anywhere in the village
any uncovered pile of refuse, garbage, offal or the carcass of any dead
animal. Such refuse must be burned in a properly constructed and operated
incinerator or otherwise disposed of. Any uncovered pile of refuse is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-26)



Sec. 5-42.  Privy Vaults:



   It shall be unlawful to maintain any privy vault not connected with the
public sewer system in or on any premises abutting on a street or portion
thereof which is served by a sanitary sewer.



(Code 1972, § 7-2-27)



Sec. 5-43.  Tattoo And Body Piercing Licensing Regulations:



   (1)   Definitions:



   Animal means every living creature, domestic or wild, but does not
include human being. This exclusion does not apply to fish in aquariums.



   Apprentice means an individual who works under the supervision of a
body artist and performs body art services.



   Aseptic Technique means a practice that prevents and hinders the
transmission of disease-producing microorganisms from one (1) person or place
to another person or place.



   Body Art means the practice of physical body adornment, including, but
not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic
tattooing, branding and scarification. This definition does not include
practices that are considered medical procedures by the Illinois State
Medical Board, such as implants under the skin, which shall not be performed
in a body art establishment. Nor does this definition include piercing of the
non-cartilaginous portion or lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized single-use
stud-and-clasp ear-piercing systems.



   Body Art Establishment or Establishment means a body-piercing
operation, a tattooing operation, body modification establishment or a
combination of all operations in a multiple-type establishment, whether
public or private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, profit or
not for profit.



   Body Piercing means penetrating the skin to make a hold, mark, or scar
that is generally permanent in nature, including, but not limited to,
micro-dermal anchors, acts of suspension and sub-dermal/trans-dermal
implants. Body piercing does not include practices that are considered
medical procedures or the puncturing of the non-cartilaginous portion or lobe
of the ear using a pre-sterilized, single-use stud-and-clasp ear piercing
system.



   Body Piercing Artist means a person who actually performs the work of
body piercing.



   Client means the person, customer, or patron whose skin will be
tattooed, modified or pierced.



   Ear Piercing Gun means a mechanical device that pierces the ear by
forcing a disposable, single-use stud or solid needle through the ear lobe.



   Nuisance means unlawfully doing any act which either annoys, injures or
endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of any person, or that
renders a person insecure in life or the use of property.



   Operator means an individual, partnership, corporation, association, or
other entity engaged in the business of owning, managing, or offering
services of body art.



   Patron means a person requesting and receiving body piercing or
tattooing services or ear piercing services by an ear piercing gun.



   Physician means a person licensed to practice medicine and all its
branches under the Medical Practice Act of 1987.



   Single Use means products or items that are intended for one-time,
one-person use and are disposed of after use on each client, including, but
not limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or
plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, tattoo
needles, scalpel blades, stencils, ink cups and protective gloves.



   Tattooing means any method of placing ink or other pigment into the
skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to puncture
the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. This term
includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing.



   Tattoo Artist means a person who actually performs the work of
tattooing.



   Temporary Body Art Establishment means any place or premise operating
for educational, trade show or product demonstration purposes at a fixed
location where a body artist/apprentice performs body art procedures for no
more than fourteen (14) days consecutively in conjunction with a single event
or celebration.



   Workroom means the portion of the tattoo or body piercing establishment
used for applying tattoos or performing body piercing, including all
surrounding areas which are likely to come into contact with contaminated
waste.



   (2)   License Requirements: No person may conduct, operate, or
maintain a body art establishment without a current certificate of
registration issued by the Illinois Department of Public Health and a valid
business license from the village of Justice.



   Before any body art establishment is constructed or an existing
structure is converted to use as said establishment, plans shall be submitted
to the building department for review and approval. The plans and
specifications shall include the workroom layout, plumbing plans,
construction materials, and the type and model of proposed equipment. No
permanent body art establishment shall be constructed, remodeled or converted
except in accordance with approved plans.



   (3)   Inspections: The premises intended to be used as a body art
establishment shall be investigated by the village of Justice building
commissioner or his or her designee for the purpose of determining the
fitness and suitability of said premises for the conduct of such business.
Health inspections related to the premises intended to be used as a body art
establishment shall be conducted by the Illinois Department of Public Health
in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations, rules and guidelines.



   (4)   Related Regulations: All body art establishments shall comply
with all appropriate federal and state laws, rules and regulations, and local
ordinances, including but not limited to the following:



   The Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment Registration Act (410 ILCS
54/1 et seq.); Title 77, Chapter I, Subchapter m, Part 797 of the Illinois
Administrative Code; State of Illinois Department of Health Rules and
Regulations Pertaining to General Sanitation; State of Illinois Department of
Public Health Pertaining to Sewage Disposal Systems and Installers; State of
Illinois Department of Public Health Plumbing Code; and the plumbing codes
adopted by the Village of Justice; State of Illinois Indoor Clean Air Act;
and Title XV of the Environmental Protection Act, which regulates the
management and disposal of infectious waste; the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, Title 21, U.S.C.; the Food and Drug Administration Regulations
as published in the Federal Register and OSHA.



   (5)   General Facility Requirements:



      (a)   Each body art establishment shall be completely
separated by solid partitions or walls extending from floor to ceiling, from
any room used for human habitation, any establishment or room where food is
prepared, any hair salon, or any other such activity that may cause potential
contamination of work surfaces. Each body art establishment shall have an
area that may be screened from public review for clients requesting privacy.
Dividers, curtains or partitions, at a minimum, shall be available to
separate multiple work stations.



      (b)   The floor of the workroom shall be constructed of
impervious materials and shall be, at all times, maintained in a clean
condition. Floors shall be swept and wet-mopped daily. The walls and ceilings
shall be of light color and be maintained in good repair and shall be of such
materials to be easily cleanable. Floors, walls, or ceilings shall not be
swept or cleaned while anyone is being tattooed or pierced. Carpeting is
prohibited in the workroom(s) and toilet room(s).



      (c)   The establishment shall have adequate light to provide
at least thirty (30) foot-candles of illumination, and have good ventilation.



      (d)   Light fixtures, decorative materials, and similar
equipment attached to the walls or ceilings shall be kept clean.



      (e)   The building and equipment shall be maintained in good
repair at all times. All parts of the shop and its premises shall be kept
clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish.



      (f)   A lavatory, with hot and cold running water, shall be
located in the workroom. The lavatory shall be for the exclusive use of the
artists for washing their hands and preparing the customer. It shall be
equipped with controls which provide for wrist action, soap, approved
germicidal solution, individual hand brushes, and fingernail files for each
artist.



      (g)   A toilet and hand sink shall be located in the
establishment and be accessible to patrons. All plumbing shall meet the
requirements of the Illinois Department of Public Health Plumbing Code and
the plumbing codes adopted by the village of Justice. The plumbing fixtures
and toilet room shall be maintained in a sanitary manner and in good repair.



      (h)   Single service paper towels or mechanical means for hand
drying shall be provided.



      (i)   Adequate cabinets for the storage of instruments, dyes
and pigments, carbon, stencils, and other materials used in the procedures
shall be provided.



      (j)   An adequate number of worktables shall be provided for
each artist. The surface of all worktables shall be constructed of metal or
other material which is easily cleanable, smooth, light colored,
non-absorbent, corrosive-resistant, and easily sanitized.



      (k)   All furniture in the workroom shall be non-porous and of
such nature as to be chemically sanitized and maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition.



      (l)   The shop shall have sufficient covered waste receptacles
with disposable plastic liners for the disposal of waste materials.



      (m)   Animals shall not be permitted in the tattoo and body
piercing establishment, except for guide or service animals accompanying
persons with disabilities.



      (n)   Smoking and the use of tobacco in any form shall be
prohibited in the tattooing and body piercing establishment.



      (o)   Any other business or dwelling shall be completely
separated from the tattoo and body piercing establishment by at least a solid
partition from the floor to the ceiling.



   (6)   Restrictions:



      (a)   A body artist/apprentice shall be eighteen (18) years of
age prior to being issued a valid license. Tattoo artists and persons
performing body piercing must complete approved courses as noted below in
(b)1., (b)2., (b)3., and (b)4. prior to opening for business. Existing body
art establishments shall have three (3) months after the effective date of
this section to comply, subject to Illinois law and the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Illinois Department of Public Health.



      (b)   The operator shall maintain procedures ensuring that all
persons performing tattooing or body piercing services for the business shall
have received training, as evidenced by records of completion, courses or
seminars provided by nurses, organizations such as the American Red Cross,
accredited learning institutions, appropriate governmental entitles, or other
authorities recognized by the board of health as being qualified to provide
training in the following:



         1.   Basic training in first aid and advanced CPR as
well as proof of attendance at required renewal courses.



         2.   Safety and sanitation requirements for preventing
transmission of infectious diseases.



         3.   Universal precautions against blood-borne pathogens.



         4.   Appropriate tattoo and piercing procedures and
aftercare.



      (c)   The operator shall maintain written records of equipment
utilized by the business, including manufacturer and model numbers.



      (d)   The operator shall maintain procedures acceptable to the
Illinois Department of Public Health ensuring that persons performing
tattooing or body piercing services on the premises of the business shall
disinfect and sterilize all non-disposable equipment or parts of equipment
used in performing procedures, by utilizing methods meeting disinfection and
sterilization requirements.



      (e)   No tattooing or body piercing shall be performed in any
place other than a body art establishment having a valid license and a valid
certificate of registration from the Illinois Department of Public Health.



      (f)   No tattooing or body piercing shall be performed on any
person who appears to be or admits to being under the influence of
intoxicating substances, including, but not limited to, alcohol, drugs,
paints and glues, nor shall any tattoo artist practice his or her trade while
in an intoxicated state.



      (g)   No tattooing or body piercing shall be performed on the
person of anyone having a history of jaundice or similar disease, and each
patron shall be questioned.



      (h)   No tattooing or body piercing shall be performed on any
person suffering from any rash, sunburn, skin lesion or any skin disease or
possible communicable disease. The skin surface shall be free from rash,
sunburn, pimples, infection or recent scar tissue.



      (i)   No person with any disease in a communicable form or
suspected of having such a disease shall perform the application of tattooing
or body piercing. Such disease may include, but shall not be limited to, the
common cold, influenza, tuberculosis, scabies, shingles, impetigo, syphilis,
chickenpox, measles (rubella), mumps, whooping cough, hepatitis, infection on
the hands or arms, sore throat or jaundice of the skin or sclera. The health
officer may require a certificate signed by a duly licensed physician stating
the person is free from communicable diseases before permission to resume
operation is granted.



      (j)   No person shall perform any tattoo procedure upon a
person under the age of eighteen (18) year that is prohibited by Sections
12-10 through 12(c) of the Criminal Code of 1961. Age verification shall be
obtained by government issued identification containing a birth date and
photograph. In any procedure other than tattooing, the parent or legal
guardian shall sign a consent form in the presence of an operator/body
artist. The consent form shall indicate that the parent or legal guardian has
read and understood the disclosure warning statement required under Title 77,
Part 797, Section 797.600(c) of the Illinois Administrative Code.



      (k)   Any person who is an owner or employed by a business
that performs tattooing or body piercing, other than a person licensed to
practice medicine in all its branches, may not permit a person under eighteen
(18) years of age to enter or remain on the premises where tattooing or body
piercing is being performed, unless  the person under eighteen (18) years of
age is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian. A violation of
this subsection is a Class A misdemeanor.



      (l)   Before the oral cavity of a person under eighteen (18)
years of age may be pierced, the written consent form signed by the parent or
legal guardian must contain a provision in substantially the following form:
“I understand that the oral piercing of the tongue, lips, cheeks, or any
other area of the oral cavity carries serious risk of infection or damage to
the mouth and teeth, or both infection and damage to those areas, that could
result in but is not limited to nerve damage, numbness, and life-threatening
blood clots (Section 12-10.1 of the Criminal Code of 1961).”



      (m)   No establishment licensed under this section shall
attempt to remove a tattoo from any person or allow such a procedure to take
place on its premises.



   (7)   Procedural Requirements:



      (a)   Record keeping: The operator shall maintain proper
records on each patron. These records shall be entered in ink or indelible
pencil in a bound book kept solely for this purpose. This book shall be
available at a reasonable time for examination by the health officer. The
records shall be preserved for at least three (3) years from the date of the
last entry. The records shall contain the following information.



         1.   The date the procedure was performed.



         2.   The name, address, date of birth and age of the
patron. Valid state driver’s license or state ID number recorded.



         3.   The branch of service, rate or rank and serial
number of the patron if in the armed services.



         4.   The design and location of the tattoo applied.



         5.   The location where body piercing is performed.



         6.   The manufacturer, dye lot, and expiration date of
the dye or pigment injected into the client.



         7.   The name of the artist.



         8.   The signature of the patron.



         9.   Special instructions.



         10.   Medical history of patron conditions, including:
diabetes, allergies, cold sores and fever blisters, epilepsy, heart
conditions, hemophilia, hepatitis, use of blood thinners, moles or freckles
at the site of service, psoriasis or eczema, pregnancy or
breastfeeding/nursing, scarring or other medical or skin conditions.



      (b)   Patron Information: Before applying a tattoo, a
discussion of the risks involved and possible complications shall be
conducted by the artist or operator. The patron must be advised that the
procedure should be considered permanent and that it can be removed only by a
surgical procedure and that any effective removal may leave permanent
scarring. A written cautionary notice to that effect shall be furnished to
and signed by the patron and a copy retained on file at the establishment. A
list of ingredients should be included in the cautionary notice, along with a
statement that any adverse reaction should be referred to a physician.



      (c)   After the procedure is complete, written (printed or
photocopied) instructions, on the care of the skin to prevent infection,
shall be given to each patron. A copy of these instructions along with
ingredients shall also be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment.



   (8)   Required Equipment: Articles And Materials:



      (a)   The studio shall provide and maintain at the place of
business an adequate supply of disinfecting or sterilizing equipment,
tools/implements, and other necessary materials for business needs, taking
into account volume of business.



      (b)   All forceps, tubes, and the like must be pre-sterilized
stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated, used on one person, in
one sitting. After one (1) such use, they must be autoclaved and stored in
sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated.



      (c)   Only single-service pre-sterilized needles are to be
used on one (1) person, in one (1) sitting. Assemblies designed to be
disposable shall be used one (1) time, on one (1) person only, and then
discarded in the appropriate manner.



      (d)   All dyes or pigments used in tattooing shall meet the
United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) certification standards for
foods, drugs, and cosmetics as prescribed in the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, Title 21, U.S.C. and the Food and Drug Administration
Regulations as published in the Federal Register.



      (e)   Each tattoo artist shall be provided with adequate
storage cabinets for the exclusive storage of instruments, dyes, pigments,
carbon, stencils and other paraphernalia used in the parlor.



   (9)   Tattooing And Body Piercing Procedure: All tattoo artists
shall comply with the following.



      (a)   Hand Washing: Prior to performing tattooing or body
piercing individuals shall wash their hands, using good mechanical action
with soap or detergent and warm water, and shall dry their hands using clean
single service or single use towels or other approved method before and after
tattooing. Use of bar soap is prohibited.



      (b)   Protective Gloves: Tattooing or body piercing artists
shall observe and adhere to the following protective glove standards when
serving clients:



         1.   A fresh pair of disposable gloves should be worn
during the treatment of each client;



         2.   Hands must be washed in accordance with the hand
washing standards as stated in subsection (a) of the rule before putting on
gloves and immediately after gloves are removed.



      (c)   The area of the client’s skin to be tattooed or
pierced shall be adequately cleaned. Shaving, if done, shall be performed
with a single service razor.



      (d)   Before placing the design on the client’s skin, the
tattoo artist shall treat the skin area with seventy percent (70%) alcohol or
other effective germicidal solution, which shall be applied using aseptic
technique.



      (e)   If petroleum jelly or other substances are used in
applying stencil designs to the skin, they shall be dispensed from
collapsible metal or plastic tubes.



      (f)   Stencils for transferring the design to the skin shall
be single use and discarded after use.



      (g)   Only sterilized tubes or tips, in good condition, shall
be used for tattooing.



      (h)   Single service or individual portions of dyes or
pigments in sterilized containers or single service containers shall be used
for each client. After tattooing, the remaining unused dyes or pigments in
the single service or individual containers shall be discarded.



   (10)   Sterilization Procedure:



      (a)   Before Sterilization: All instruments requiring
sterilization shall be thoroughly washed to remove dyes, blood clots and
other foreign matter according to manufacturers’ and OSHA’s
recommendations; rinse instruments thoroughly; dry instruments. Cleansing
with ultrasonic cleaners should be the rule for removal of bacitracin or
other triple antibiotic solutions, blood and other particles from a used
contaminated implement (i.e. jewelry, forceps, insertion tapers, and pliers)
followed by steam autoclave.



      (b)   Steam autoclave must be used on all equipment that may
come in contact with the client or the jewelry (i.e. receiving tubes) rubber
bands, insertion tapers, forceps, files, gauge wheels, pliers, etc.).
Equipment shall be packed in packages approved for the sterilization unit.
Instruments shall be packed individually, or as a set provided, such set is
intended to be used for a single procedure. Each package shall be labeled
with the date of sterilization and the initials of the person sterilizing the
instruments. Packaged sterilized instruments shall be kept in a sterile
condition and stored in a clean dust-tight container when not in use. Spore
indicators shall be used with each load to ensure spore eradication.
Instruments shall be autoclaved at a temperature of:



         1.   One hundred twenty- one degrees (121°) Centigrade
(two hundred fifty degrees (250°) Fahrenheit) for not less than twenty (20)
minutes after the chamber of the autoclave has been evacuated of air and has
reached temperature; or



         2.   As specified in the manufacturer’s operator’s
manual.



         3.   Autoclaves shall be spore tested by independent
laboratories at least once every month to induce efficiency. Documentation of
spore test must be kept on file.



   (11)   Disposal Of Infectious Waste: Used tattoo needles and other
infectious waste shall be stored, treated and disposed of in accordance with
the provisions of Title XV of the Environmental Protection Act, which
regulates the management and disposal of infectious waste. Disposal
documentation shall be provided upon request to the health officer.



   (12)   Denial, Suspension, Revocation, Nonrenewal Of Licenses: A
license may be suspended, revoked or the renewal of a license may be denied
for any of the following reasons:



      (a)   Violation of any of the provisions of this section.



      (b)   Conviction of an applicant or licensee of an offense
arising from false, fraudulent, deceptive, or misleading advertising. The
record of conviction or a certified copy shall be conclusive evidence of the
conviction.



      (c)   Aiding or abetting an unlicensed person, knowingly
combining or conspiring with an unlicensed person, allowing one’s license
to be used by an unlicensed person, or acting as agent or associate of an
unlicensed person, in order to enable the unlicensed person to evade the
restrictions on use of title imposed by this division.



   Upon denial of an application, refusal to renew a license, suspension
of a license or revocation of a license, the village clerk shall notify the
applicant in writing. The notice shall specify the charges or reasons for the
contemplated action. If a license is suspended or revoked and such suspension
or revocation is disputed by the license holder, the license holder must
request a hearing within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice. Failure to
request a hearing within ten (10) days shall constitute a waiver of the right
to a hearing. The procedures set forth by the village of Justice for the
suspension or termination of a business license shall begin to run after the
complaint and investigation procedures have been performed by the village of
Justice health officer.



   (13)   Conduct Of Hearing:



      (a)   Upon suspension or revocation of a license, should a
license holder request a hearing, such hearing shall be conducted by the
village of Justice board of trustees or an individual designated in writing
by the village of Justice as a hearing officer. The village of Justice or
hearing officer may compel by subpoena or subpoena duces tecum, the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of books and papers,
and administer oaths to witnesses. The hearing shall be conducted at a place
designated by the village of Justice or hearing officer. The procedures
governing hearings in the issuance of final decisions under this division
shall be in accordance with rules adopted by the village of Justice.



      (b)   All subpoenas issued by the village of Justice or
hearing officer may be served as provided for in civil actions. The fees for
witnesses for attendance and travel shall be the same as the fees for witness
before the circuit court and shall be paid by the party to the proceedings at
whose request the subpoena is issued. If a subpoena is issued at the request
of the village of Justice or hearing officer, the witness fee shall be paid
as an administrative expense.



      (c)   In cases of refusal of a witness to attend or testify,
or to produce books or papers, concerning any matter upon which he might be
lawfully examined, the circuit court of the county wherein the hearing is
held, upon application of any parry to the proceeding, may compel obedience
by proceeding as for contempt as in cases of a like refusal to obey a similar
order of the court.



      (d)   The village of Justice or hearing officer shall make
findings of fact and conclusions of law in a hearing, and the village of
Justice or the hearing officer shall render a decision within forty-five (45)
days after the termination of the hearing. A copy of the final decision shall
be served upon the applicant or licensee in person or by certified mail.



      (e)   Upon the revocation of a license, a license holder shall
be required to surrender the license to the village of Justice and upon his
or her failure or refusal to do so, the village of Justice shall have the
right to seize the same.



   (14)   Penalty For Violation: The violation of any provision of this
section shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a term of imprisonment up to six
(6) months or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or both.



   The village of Justice shall refer to the appropriate district
attorney, attorney general, or other law enforcement official any incidents
of unauthorized practice of body art. Any person found by a court who has
been operating without a business license is subject to a business offense
with a fine up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or one (1) year in
prison. Any person who knowingly furnished false or misleading information to
the village’s health officer, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any one (1) offense.



   (15)   A valid business license shall be valid from the date of
issuance and shall automatically expire on December 31 of each year, unless
revoked sooner by the village. Renewals shall be in accordance with the
requirements of this section and submitted prior to the expiration date of
the current business license. A person who files a renewal application after
the expiration date must pay an additional one hundred dollars ($100.00) as a
delinquency fee. The business license shall be prominently placed in the
studio location. Business license fees shall be non-refundable for each place
of business. Business license fees shall be those that are established in
Chapter 13, Section 3-61 of this code.



   (16)   Number Of Licenses: No more than two (2) body art
establishments shall be licensed to do business in the village at the same
time.



(Ord. 2008-10, §§ 3, 4, 3-10-2008; Ord. 2010-17, §§ 2 - 7, 8-23-2010;
Ord. 2011-16, § 2, 10-17-2011)



Secs. 5-44-5-60.  Reserved:



ARTICLE III.  FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS1,2



1  See also chapter 3, "Business Regulations"; and chapter 11, "Utilities",
of this code.



2  65 ILCS 5/11-20-2, 5/11-42-5.



DIVISION 1 TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS



Sec. 5-61.   Temporary Food Service Establishments:



   A temporary food service establishment is any food service
establishment that operates at a fixed location for a period of time not to
exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days in conjunction with a single special
event or celebration.



   (a)   Application Required:



      1.   All operators of a temporary food service establishment
shall complete and submit an application as prescribed from time to time by
the health officer for such activities, to the village of Justice building
department. All information as requested in the application shall be
provided, including but not limited to, the date of the event,



         location dates and times of operation, vendor’s name,
business address, phone, vendor’s home address, number and expiration date
of food handlers certification and copies of food handlers certification,
foodstuffs to be served, names and address of all approved sources of
foodstuffs, equipment that will be used to maintain hot or cold temperatures
during the event, and the operators and organizer’s signature.



      2.   Approval shall be by the health officer.



   (b)   Fees:



      1.    A health inspection fee, as set forth in section 13-1 of
this code, shall be charged for each day that the temporary food service
establishment is in operation.



      2.   The health inspection fee shall be paid by the
organizer/event sponsor or the temporary food service establishment operator
as determined prior to the event and submitted with the application. Any
application received without the health inspection fee shall be denied.



   (c)   Application Deadline: All completed applications, with the
appropriate copies of licenses and fees attached, shall be filed in the
building department, no later than fourteen (14) days prior to the event.
Late entries shall be handled on a case by case basis by the health officer
whose decision shall be final.



(Ord. 2012-26, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 5-62.   Adoption Of State Regulation:



   The Illinois Food, Drugs, and Cosmetics Act, 410 ILCS 620; Food
Handling Regulation Enforcement Act, 410 ILCS 625; the Sanitary Food
Preparation Act, 410 ILCS 650; and Title 77 Public Health, Chapter 1:
Department of Public Health; Subchapter m: Food, Drugs, and Cosmetics, part
750 Food Service Sanitation Code of the Illinois Administrative Code, are
adopted as the regulations governing the sanitation procedures and controls
for the storage, preparation and display of food sold or offered for
consumption, within the village of Justice.



(Ord. 2012-26, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 5-63.   State Of Illinois Food Handler Certificate, Required:



   Temporary food service establishments, not staffed by a certified food
supervisor that are able to prove their identity, will be closed.



(Ord. 2012-26, § 1, 9-24-2012)



Secs. 5-64–5-70.   Reserved:



DIVISION 2. RETAIL FOOD DISPENSERS



Sec. 5-71.  Definitions:



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Food dispenser means any person that keeps for sale, sells and serves
to the public for consumption, on the premises or on the public way
contiguous to such premises, any article of food or drink for human
consumption. Restaurants, drive-in restaurants, coffeehouses, lunchrooms,
tearooms, lunch stands, box lunch deliveries, luncheonettes, cafeterias and
retail drugstores serving counter lunches and for drinks shall be included
among food dispensers.



   Serves means the placing of such food for the convenience of the patron
into any cup, glass, dish, plate or other receptacle from which the patron
may conveniently consume it.



   Service accommodations means the seating place whereon patrons or
customers to be served can be seated or, in lieu of seating space, two (2)
lineal feet of counter space which may be used or occupied by one (1) patron
or customer to be served while standing, provided that for the purpose of
computing the number of service accommodations at a counter where no fixed
seats or stools are provided, each such counter shall be considered as a
separate unit and any fractional part of two (2) lineal feet at a side or end
shall be excluded.



(Code 1972, §§ 3-5-1, 3-5-3)



Sec. 5-72.  License-Required:



   It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of a food dispenser
without first obtaining an annual license therefor.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-2)



Sec. 5-73.  Same-Application:



   Applications for a license under the division shall be made to the
village president, and shall be referred to the health officer for such
inspections as may be necessary to see that the provisions of this division
are complied with.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-3; Ord. 2009-15, § 24, 6-22-09)



Sec. 5-74.  Same-Revocation:



   Any restaurant license may be revoked by the president for repeated
violation of the provisions of this division, or for any violation of any
provision of this code, relating to the conduct of the business, the
condition of the premises, the article sold or to the license required.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-4)



Sec. 5-75.  Unwholesome Food:



   No person shall offer for sale or keep for the purpose of selling or
offering for sale any food of any kind intended for human consumption which
is spoiled or is unwholesome and unfit for human consumption, for any reason.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-5)



Sec. 5-76.  Employees:



   (a)   All persons engaged in handling or coming in contact with food
intended for sale for human consumption shall keep themselves clean, both as
to person and clothing, and shall be examined for all communicable infectious
and venereal diseases not less than once in any twelve (12)-month period or
whenever required by the board of health.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a
carrier of any infectious or contagious disease to handle or be engaged in
the care or preparation of any such food; and it shall be unlawful to permit
any such person to be employed in or about any premises where food is stored,
prepared or sold, or to deliver such food.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-6)



   State law reference-Person with contagious or venereal disease working
in food establishment, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56 1/2, § 76.



Sec. 5-77.  Examination Of Food And Drink; Condemnation:



   Samples of food, drink and other substances may be taken and examined
by the health officer as often as may be necessary for the detection of
unwholesomeness or adulteration. The health officer may condemn and forbid
the sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink which is
unwholesome or adulterated.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-7)



   State law reference-Inspection of food in municipalities, Ill. Rev.
Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-20-3.



Sec. 5-78.  Inspection Of Restaurants; Records:



   (a)   At least once every six (6) months the health officer shall
inspect every restaurant located within the village. In case the health
officer discovers the violation of any item of sanitation, he shall make a
second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems necessary for the
defect to be remedied. Any violation of the same requirement of this division
found on such second inspection shall authorize immediate revocation.



   (b)   One (1) copy of the inspection report shall be posted by the
health officer upon an inside wall of the restaurant, and the inspection
report shall not be defaced or removed by any person except the health
officer. Another copy of the inspection report shall be filed with the
records of the health department.



   (c)   The person operating the restaurant shall, upon request of the
health officer, permit access to all parts of the establishment and shall
permit copying any or all records of food purchased.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-8)



Sec. 5-79.  Toilet Facilities:



   Every restaurant shall be provided with adequate and conveniently
located toilet facilities for its employees, conforming with the provisions
of this code. In restaurants constructed after the effective date of the
ordinance from which this section derives, toilet rooms shall not open
directly into any room in which food, drink or utensils are handled or
stored. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-closing. Toilet rooms
shall be kept in a clean condition, in good repair, and well-lighted and
well-ventilated. Hand-washing signs shall be posted in each toilet room used
by employees.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-9)



   State law reference-Toilet rooms and lavatories in food establishments,
Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56 1/2, § 71.



Sec. 5-80.  Water Supply:



   Running water under pressure shall be easily accessible to all rooms in
which food is prepared or utensils are washed, and the water supply shall be
adequate and of a safe, sanitary quality.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-10)



Sec. 5-81.  Lavatory Facilities:



   Adequate and convenient hand-washing facilities shall be provided,
including hot and cold running water, soap and approved sanitary towels. The
use of a common towel is prohibited. No employee shall resume work after
using the toilet without first washing his hands.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-11)



   State law reference-Toilet rooms and lavatories in food establishments,
Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56 1/2, § 71.



Sec. 5-82.  Utensils, Equipment-Construction, Materials:



   All multiuse utensils and all show and display cases or windows,
counters, shelves, tables, refrigeration equipment, sinks and other equipment
or utensils used in connection with the operation of a restaurant shall be so
constructed as to be easily cleaned and shall be kept in good repair.
Utensils containing or plated with cadmium or lead shall not be used;
provided, that solder containing lead may be used for jointing.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-12)



Sec. 5-83.  Same-Cleaning.



   (a)   All equipment, including display cases or windows, counters,
shelves, tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods and sinks shall be kept clean
and free from dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating material. All
cloths used by waiters, chefs and other employees shall be clean.
Single-service containers shall be used only once.



   (b)   All multiuse eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly
cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process after
each usage. All multiuse utensils used in the preparation or serving of food
and drink shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an
approved bactericidal process immediately following the day's operation.
Drying cloths, if used, shall be clean and shall be used for no other purpose.



   (c)   No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide
preparation or other poisonous material shall be used for the cleaning or
polishing of utensils.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-13)



Sec. 5-84.  Same-Storage, Handling:



   After bactericidal treatment, utensils shall be stored in a clean, dry
place protected from flies, dust and other contamination, and shall be
handled in such a manner as to prevent contamination as far as practicable.
Single-service utensils shall be purchased only in sanitary containers, shall
be stored therein in a clean, dry place until used, and shall be handled in a
sanitary manner.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-14)



Sec. 5-85.  Disposal Of Wastes:



   All restaurant wastes shall be properly disposed of, and all garbage
and trash shall be kept in suitable receptacles, in such manner as not to
become a nuisance.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-15)



   State law reference-Removal of refuse from food establishments, Ill.
Rev. Stat. Ch. 56 1/2, § 68.



Sec. 5-86.  Refrigeration:



   All readily perishable food and drink shall be kept at or below fifty
(50) degrees Fahrenheit, except when being prepared or served. Wastewater
from refrigeration equipment shall be properly disposed of.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-16)



Sec. 5-87.  Serving Of Wholesome Food, Drink:



   All food and drink shall be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage, and
so prepared as to be safe for human consumption. All milk, fluid milk
products, ice cream and other frozen desserts served shall be from approved
sources. Milk and fluid milk products shall be served in the individual
original containers in which they were received from the distributor or from
a bulk container equipped with an approved dispensing device; provided, that
this requirement shall not apply to cream, which may be served from the
original bottle or from a dispenser approved for such service. All oysters,
clams and mussels shall be from approved sources and if shucked shall be kept
in the containers in which they were placed at the shucking plant until used.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-17)



Sec. 5-88.  Storage, Display Of Food, Drink:



   All food and drink shall be so stored, displayed and served as to be
protected from dust, flies, vermin, depredation and pollution by rodents,
unnecessary handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage and other
contamination. No animals or fowl shall be kept or allowed in any room in
which food or drink is prepared or stored. All means necessary for the
elimination of flies, roaches and rodents shall be used.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-18)



Sec. 5-89.  Premises.



   The premises shall be kept clean and free of litter or rubbish. None of
the operations connected with a food dispenser shall be conducted in any room
used as living or sleeping quarters. Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall
be provided for employees' clothing and shall be kept clean. Soiled linens,
coats, and aprons shall be kept in containers provided for this purpose.



(Code 1972, § 3-5-19)



   State law reference-Sleeping in workroom of food establishment, Ill.
Rev. Stat. Ch. 56 1/2, § 75.



Sec. 5-90.  License To Be Posted In Establishment:



   Every person licensed to engage in the business of food dispenser shall
immediately post the license, or cause it to be posted, and at all times keep
it posted in a conspicuous place within the premises where such business is
thereby authorized to be kept.



(Code 1969, Ch. 11, Art. 5; Code 1972, § 3-5-20)



Secs. 5-91-5-105.  Reserved:



DIVISION 3. FOOD DEALERS* 1



* State law reference—Municipal regulation of markets and markethouses,
III. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-20.1.



Sec. 5-106.  Definitions:



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Food means any food or beverage intended for human consumption.



   Food dealer means every person, firm or corporation engaged in
conducting or operating any or all of the following businesses: fruit store
or establishment for the retail sale of fresh fruits and berries; grocery
store or establishment for the sale of butter, cheese, vegetables or other
provisions; ice cream parlor; meat market or establishment for the retail
sale of fresh meats, poultry or fish; retail beverage store or establishment
for the sale at retail of any malted, cereal, carbonated or vinous
nonintoxicating beverages as defined by law; bakery as defined in section
5-131; confectionery store or establishment for the sale of candy and not for
human consumption on the premises.



(Code 1972, § 3-6-1)



Sec. 5-107.  License-Required:



   It shall be unlawful for any food dealer to engage in or do business in
the village without having first secured a license therefor. Applications for
such license shall be made in compliance with the general provisions of this
Code relating thereto, and shall state the kind of food intended to be sold
or handled.



(Code 1972, § 3-6-2)



Sec. 5-108.  Same-Application:



   All applications for a license to conduct a business connected with the
storage, handling, sale or preparation of food or drink intended for human
consumption shall be referred by the village to the health officer for
investigation before a license shall be issued. The health officer shall
inspect or cause to be inspected the premises used or intended to be used,
and shall report thereon, recommending or advising against the issuance of
the license.



(Code 1972, § 3-6-8; Ord. 2009-15, § 25, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 5-109.  Same-Revocation:



   Any such food dealers' licenses may be revoked by the village board for
any violation of the provisions of this division, or for any violation of any
other provisions relating to the conduct of the business, the condition of
the premises or the licenses.



(Code 1972, § 3-6-3)



Sec. 5-110.  Unwholesome Food:



   No person shall sell, offer for sale or keep for the purpose of selling
or offering for sale, any food of any kind which is spoiled or tainted or is
unwholesome and unfit for human consumption for any reason. All tainted or
unwholesome food intended for human consumption may be condemned by the board
of health, and shall thereupon be seized and destroyed by the board of health
or any police officer of the village.



(Code 1972, § 3-6-4)



Sec. 5-111.  Adulterations:



   It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale or keep for such purposes,
any food or drink intended for human consumption which has been adulterated
by any material harmful in any way, or which does not comply with the state
statutes governing the same.



(Code 1972, § 3-6-5)



Sec. 5-112.  Sanitation Of Premises:



   Premises used for the sale or storage of food intended for human
consumption must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be
unlawful to permit any accumulation of refuse, or waste of any kind thereon
for more than twenty-four (24) hours. It shall be unlawful to permit any
decaying animal or plant matter or waste to remain on any such premises at
all.



(Code 1972, § 3-6-6)



Sec. 5-113.  Inspections:



   The health officer shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, every
place, building or establishment used for the storage, handling, sale or
preparation of food or drink intended for human consumption. It shall be the
duty of every food dealer to give to the health officer such samples of such
food or drink as may be necessary for the purpose of making an analysis of
the same to determine whether it is clean and wholesome.



(Code 1972, § 3-6-7)



Sec. 5-114.  Flies, Vermin:



   Premises used for the storing of food intended for human consumption
shall be kept free from flies and vermin of all kinds.



(Code 1972, § 3-6-9)



Sec. 5-115.  Employees:



   All persons engaged in handling or coming in contact with food intended
for human consumption shall be clean and shall keep their clothes clean. It
shall be unlawful to permit any person afflicted with a contagious or
venereal disease to handle any food intended for sale for human consumption,
or for any such person to handle any such food.



(Code 1969, Ch. 11, Art. 6; Code 1972, § 3-6-10)



Sec. 5-116.  Mobile Food Vendors:



   (a)   Mobile food vending vehicles, including, but not limited to,
ice cream vendors, shall not approach or stop for the purpose of selling any
food or beverage closer than one block from any school building or school
playground while school is in session, including one hour before the school
day begins and one hour after the school day ends.



   (b)   Mobile food vending vehicles, including, but not limited to,
ice cream vendors, shall not stop closer than one hundred feet (100') from
the nearest intersecting road, street or highway for the purpose of selling
any food or beverage.



   (c)   Sales from such mobile food vending vehicles shall be made
from the right-hand curb side of the vehicle only when the vehicle is legally
parked. Any bells, whistles, horns, or musical noisemaking devices shall not
be sounded while the vehicle is parked. Stops shall be made only to service
customers and shall not exceed a total of thirty (30) minutes in any one
block.



   (d)   No mobile food vending vehicle shall park or stand within one
hundred feet (100') of any customer entrance to any retail or commercial
business.



   (e)   Sales from any mobile food vending vehicle are permitted only
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
In residential areas of the Village, sales from any mobile food vending
vehicle are permitted only between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon
and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.



   (f)   The penalty provisions of Section 1-7 of this Code shall apply
to any violation of this Section.



(Ord. 98-32, § 1, 7-27-1998)



Secs. 5-117-5-130.  Reserved:



DIVISION 4. BAKERIES



Sec. 5-131.  Definition:



   Any place or establishment used for any process of mixing, compounding
or making, for sale or the purpose of a restaurant, bakery or hotel, any
bread, biscuits, pretzels, crackers, buns, rolls, macaroni, cakes, pies or
any food product of which flour or meal is the principal ingredient, shall be
deemed a "bakery" for the purpose of this Division; provided, that
restaurants in which any of the foregoing food products are mixed and baked,
on or in an ordinary kitchen stove or range, shall not be considered to be
bakeries.



(Code 1972, § 3-7-1)



Sec. 5-132.  License Required:



   It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate a bakery in the Village
without having first obtained a license therefor. Applications for such
licenses shall be referred to the health officer for such inspections as may
be necessary to see that the provisions of this Division are complied with.



(Code 1972, § 3-7-2)



Sec. 5-133.  Sanitary Regulations; Lighting And Ventilation1:



   Every place used as a bakery shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition. All parts of the bakery shall be adequately lighted at all times
and shall be ventilated by means of windows or skylights or airshafts or
ducts or mechanical apparatus if necessary, to ensure a full circulation of
fresh air at all times. Such ventilation constructed and equipment shall be
of such character that a complete change of air in all parts of the bakery
may be made at least four (4) times each hour; provided, however, that it
shall not be necessary to ventilate at such times or in such a manner that
the process of mixing or raising dough shall of necessity be interfered with
or prevented.



(Code 1972, § 3-7-3)



1  410 ILCS 650/1.



Sec. 5-134.  Floors1:



   The floor of every place used as a bakery, if below street level, shall
be constructed of concrete, cement, asphalt or other impervious material or
of tile laid on cement. Such floors may if desired be covered with a hardwood
floor having tight joints or may be of any impervious material, as provided
in this Section.



(Code 1972, § 3-7-4)



1  410 ILCS 650/3.



Sec. 5-135.  Flies, Rodents, Vermin:



   Every place used as a bakery shall be kept free from flies, rodents and
vermin of all kinds.



(Code 1972, § 3-7-5)



Sec. 5-136.  Sleeping Facilities2:



   No person shall sleep, and no sleeping accommodations shall be
maintained, in any bakery or in the rooms where flour and meal used in
connection therewith, or the food products made therein, are handled or
stored.



(Code 1972, § 3-7-6)



2  410 ILCS 650/9.



Sec. 5-137.  Animals3:



   No animal shall be permitted in a bakery or where flour or meal is
stored in connection therewith.



(Code 1972, § 3-7-7)



3  See § 7-86 et seq., of this Code.



Sec. 5-138.  Employee Wearing Apparel:



   All workmen and employees, while engaged in the manufacturing or
handling of bakery products in a bakery, shall provide themselves with
slippers or shoes and a suit of washable material which shall be used for
that purpose only. These garments shall be kept clean at all times.



(Code 1972, § 3-7-8)



Sec. 5-139.  Use Of Tobacco4:



   The use of tobacco in any form in a bakery is prohibited. Notice to
this effect shall be placed in a prominent place in every bakery by the
proprietor thereof, but the absence of such notice shall not excuse any
person for such violation of this provision.



(Code 1972, § 3-7-10)



4  410 ILCS 650/8.



Sec. 5-140.  Storage Of Materials:



   All rooms for the storage of flour or meal for use in connection with
any bakery shall be dry and well ventilated, and every bakery and room used
for storage of materials and food products in connection therewith shall be
so arranged that shelves, cupboards, trays, triangles, bins and cases shall
be easily removed and cleaned.



(Code 1972, § 3-7-11)



Sec. 5-141.  Labels On Bread5:



   All bread sold or offered for sale at retail shall bear on each loaf a
tag or wrapper showing the true weight of such loaf.



(Code 1972, § 3-7-12)



5  225 ILCS 470/45.



Sec. 5-142.  Inspection:



   It shall be the duty of the health officer to make or cause to be made
such inspections as may be necessary to see to it that the provisions of this
Division are fully complied with.



(Code 1969, Ch. 11, Art. 7; Code 1972, § 3-7-13)



Secs. 5-143-5-155.  Reserved:



DIVISION 5. AUTOMATIC FOOD VENDING MACHINES



Sec. 5-156.  Definitions1:



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Division,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Automatic Food Vending Machine: Any mechanical container or device used
for the sale of any article of food, the operation of which is governed or
controlled by the deposit of a coin or token.



   Food: Any cooked or uncooked article of food, drink, condiment or
confection used for or intended to be used for human consumption.



   Multiple Automatic Food Vending Machine: An automatic food vending
machine equipped with or containing a plural number of magazines, columns,
shelves or other compartments for the holding of food.



   Single Automatic Food Vending Machine: An automatic food vending
machine equipped with or containing one magazine, column, shelf or other
compartment for the holding of food.



(Code 1972, § 3-8-1)



1  410 ILCS 620/2.29.



Sec. 5-157.  License-Required:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver or install any
automatic food vending machine within the Village without first having
obtained a license to do so.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, keep, maintain
or use or permit the installation, keeping, maintenance or use upon his
premises of any automatic food vending machine for which a license has not
been issued for the current year.



(Code 1972, § 3-8-2)



Sec. 5-158.  License-Application:



   An application for an automatic food vending machine license shall be
made in conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to
applications for licenses. In addition, the applicant shall set forth the
number of automatic food vending machines intended to be installed and a
description of each, which description shall contain the manufacturer's name,
the make and factory number thereof, whether a single or multiple machine,
together with the monetary value of the coin or coins used to operate the
machine. The application shall also set forth such further information as may
be required by the health officer in order to inform him fully as to the type
or types of machines and the kind or kinds of food to be dispensed therefrom.
Before any license shall be issued, the board of health shall cause an
inspection to be made to determine the character and fitness of the machine
or machines from the standpoint of ensuring protection of food from improper
handling, dust, dirt, flies, vermin or other contamination.



(Code 1972, § 3-8-3)



Sec. 5-159.  Installation Of Additional Machines:



   Upon the filing of a supplemental application and the payment of the
prescribed fees, a licensee shall be entitled to install additional machines
at the location or locations designated in such supplemental application.



(Code 1972, § 3-8-4)



Sec. 5-160.  Change Of Location:



   Change of location of any licensed vending machine during any license
period may be authorized by the village upon application therefor.



(Code 1972, § 3-8-5; Ord. 2009-15, § 26, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 5-161.  Location Of Machines:



   No automatic food vending machine shall be installed or kept for use in
any toilet room or washroom.



(Code 1972, § 3-8-6)



Sec. 5-162.  Condition Of Food In Machines; Periodic Inspection:



   (a)   All articles of food purveyed by means of automatic food
vending machines shall be clean, wholesome, free from taint, decay or
infection, and shall contain no poisonous, deleterious or injurious
ingredients in kind and quantities so as to render such article injurious or
detrimental to health.



   (b)   The health officer shall make periodic inspections of all
automatic food vending machines and articles of food purveyed therefrom for
the purpose of determining the purity and wholesomeness of the products
vended, the preparation, wrapping and handling of the same and to see that
all requirements of this division and the health provisions of this Code are
met and complied with, including the operation and use of such machines, to
guard against improper handling, distribution and contamination of food
purveyed thereby.



(Code 1969, Ch. 11, Art. 8; Code 1972, § 3-8-7)



Secs. 5-163-5-175.  Reserved:



DIVISION 6. DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS



Sec. 5-176.  Definition:



   The term "drive-in" as used in this division shall mean any
establishment as such where automobile parking is available on the premises
and food is served to such automobiles by attendants (carhops).



(Code 1972, § 3-17-1)



Sec. 5-177.  License-Required:



   It shall be unlawful to establish or operate any drive-in restaurant,
snack shop or refreshment stand in the village without first having secured a
license therefor as herein provided. Application for such license shall
comply with general provisions relating to applications for licenses and
permits.



(Code 1972, § 3-17-2)



Sec. 5-178.  Same-Fee:



   The license fee for a drive-in restaurant, snack shop or refreshment
stand shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00).



(Ord. No. 61-12, 10-5-1961; Code 1972, § 3-17-3)



Secs. 5-179-5-190.  Reserved:



DIVISION 7. MILK* 2



*  State law reference—Power of village to adopt by reference codes for
the production, pasteurization and sale of milk and milk products, Ill. Rev.
Stat. Ch. 85, § 1001 et seq.



Sec. 5-191.  Definition; Standards:



   (a)   Milk is the whole, fresh, clean lacteal secretion obtained
from the milking of one (1) or more cows. Unless the context otherwise
indicates, the term "milk" when used in this division shall include whole
milk, skimmed milk, sour milk, cream, sour cream, buttermilk, cultured
buttermilk and milk beverages.



   (b)   All milk shall conform to the standards fixed by the Grade A
Pasteurized Milk and Milk Products Act, as amended.



   (c)   It shall be unlawful under this division for anyone to sell,
offer for sale or have in his possession with intent to sell any milk not
conforming to such standards.



(Code 1972, § 7-3-1)



   State law references-Grade A Pasteurized Milk and Milk Products Act,
Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56 1/2, § 2201 et seq.; definitions relating to milk and
milk products, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56 1/2, § 2203.



Sec. 5-192.  Colostrum Prohibited:



   No milk that contains colostrum in any amount whatsoever shall be sold,
offered for sale, exposed for sale, delivered or distributed within the
village.



(Code 1972, § 7-3-2)



Sec. 5-193.  Sale In Original Container:



   (a)   No milk, cream, skimmed milk, buttermilk, sour milk or any
other milk product shall be peddled or sold at retail in quantities of one
(1) gallon or less except in original containers bearing the true name of the
article, the name and address of the producer, dealer or distributor and the
net volume of the contents.



   (b)   All milk must be sealed in sterilized containers immediately
after pasteurization and retained in these original containers until
delivered to the ultimate consumer.



   (c)   No person shall sell milk in any bottle or container other
than those bearing the seller's name or to which he has acquired title.



   (d)   It shall be unlawful to sell any milk containing any
artificial color or preservative or to which water or any foreign substance
has been added or which has been handled or transported in unclean or
unsanitary vessels or containers.



(Code 1972, § 7-3-3)



Sec. 5-194.  Contagion In Handling:



   All persons handling or in contact with the milk in dairies or other
places shall be free from contagious or infectious diseases, and shall not
have been exposed to any person having a contagious disease.



(Code 1972, § 7-3-4)



Sec. 5-195.  Contagion In Production:



   (a)   No person who is a typhoid, paratyphoid, diphtheria or septic
sore throat carrier shall be employed in the production of or handling of
milk.



   (b)   It shall be the duty of every person with the knowledge of the
facts to notify the committee on health or other legally qualified
authorities at once by telephone or otherwise of the occurrence of any
sickness in any person living or employed in any place where milk is
produced, handled or sold. Milk and milk derivatives which have been exposed
to contagion or which are suspected of having been so exposed, shall not be
shipped into or sold in the village unless the consent of the committee on
health or other legally qualified authority has been secured.



(Code 1972, § 7-3-5)



Sec. 5-196.  Pasteurization:



   (a)   The term "pasteurization" is hereby defined as a process by
which all milk is heated to a temperature of one hundred forty-three (143)
degrees to one hundred forty-five (145) degrees Fahrenheit and all held at
this temperature for a period of not less than thirty (30) minutes or heating
to at least one hundred sixty (160) degrees Fahrenheit and holding at such
temperature for thirty (30) seconds in pasteurizers approved by the committee
on health. Pasteurized milk shall be promptly cooled to a temperature of
fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit or below and shall be held at or below fifty
(50) degrees Fahrenheit until delivered to the consumer.



   (b)   There shall be attached to each milk pasteurizing machine an
automatic recording device by which the temperature of the milk and the
length of time heated shall be recorded upon a chart. These charts shall be
available for inspection by the committee on health. Each pasteurizer shall
be equipped with an accurate indicating thermometer with which the recording
device must be frequently checked.



   (c)   All pasteurized milk or cream shall carry a label on which
plainly appears the word "pasteurized," the date of pasteurization in
conjunction with the words "milk," "cream," "buttermilk" or "skimmed milk,"
as the case may be.



   (d)   All bottling and capping must be done by a machine of an
approved type.



(Code 1972, § 7-3-6)



Sec. 5-197.  Sale Of Milk:



   (a)   No milk, cream, buttermilk, or other milk products shall be
sold in the village which have not been pasteurized according to this
division and which do not conform to the standards set by the Grade A
Pasteurized Milk and Milk Products Act, as amended.



   (b)   No milk shall be sold that has more than a perceptible amount
of sediment or stain other than that of natural butterfat when one (1) pint
is filtered through a cotton disc one (1) inch in diameter.



   (c)   No milk or milk products shall be put into bottles or other
containers except those which have been subjected to boiling water or live
steam or other approved methods sufficient to destroy pathogenic bacteria.



(Code 1972, § 7-3-7)



   State law reference-Grade A Pasteurized Milk and Milk Products Act,
Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56 1/2, § 2201 et seq.



Sec. 5-198.  Cleaning Of Containers; Quarantined Premises:



   (a)   Any person licensed under this division who receives from any
other person any fresh milk in cans, bottles or other containers of any kind
shall cause the cans, bottles or other containers to be emptied before the
milk contained therein shall become sour, and shall cause the cans, bottles
or other containers to be immediately washed and thoroughly cleaned and aired.



   (b)   When a communicable disease appears on premises where milk is
produced, handled or sold, the exchange, removal or distribution in any
manner whatsoever of milk, cream or milk products found, produced or handled
on such premises is strictly prohibited, until the quarantine has been
terminated and the premises and contents thereof, including all milk
utensils, have been disinfected under the supervision of the health officer.



   (c)   Milk may be delivered at quarantined premises, provided that
there is no contact of any kind between the inmates and contents of the
quarantined premises and the delivery agents.



   (d)   The householder may place a thoroughly clean container (a
freshly scalded bottle or pail) to receive the milk at some convenient place
outside the house out of reach of dogs or cats. The milkman shall then place
the milk therein without handling the receiving container. No milk bottle,
basket or any other article whatsoever shall be taken out of or away from the
quarantined premises during the period of quarantine. Before milk bottles are
removed from the premises after the quarantine is raised, they must be
sterilized under the direction of the health officer.



(Code 1972, § 7-3-8)



Sec. 5-199.  Milk Plants:



   (a)   All milk and milk products must be handled in a milk plant
approved by the village health officer. This plant is to be properly lighted,
screened and ventilated, with watertight floor, smooth and tight side walls
and ceilings, good drainage, proper toilet facilities, with equipment so
constructed as to permit easy cleaning and sterilizing daily. Such premises
shall not be directly connected with any dwelling house or stable. Such milk
plant shall meet the requirements laid down in the Grade A Pasteurized Milk
and Milk Products Act, as amended.



   (b)   All premises where milk is handled must be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition, free from contaminating surroundings, and all equipment
used for handling of the milk to be cleaned daily as prescribed by the health
officer.



   (c)   No such place shall employ any operative, clerk or other
employee who has a communicable disease or who is a carrier of such disease.
Persons who have previously had typhoid or paratyphoid fever must show to the
satisfaction of the health authorities that they are not carriers of typhoid
or paratyphoid bacilli.



(Code 1972, § 7-3-9)



   State law reference-Grade A Pasteurized Milk and Milk Products Act,
Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56 1/2, § 2201 et seq.



Sec. 5-200.  Delivery Vehicles:



   (a)   Any person who shall engage in the wholesale or retail milk
business shall have each vehicle from which milk is vended conspicuously
marked with the name and address of the vendor on both sides of the vehicle
and shall have attached to the vehicle the license tag issued for the purpose
by the health officer.



   (b)   All vehicles in which milk is transported must be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition and no bottling shall be done in transit.



(Code 1972, § 7-3-10)



Sec. 5-201.  Violation; Hearing:



   When it appears from the records that this division has been violated,
the health officer or other legally qualified authority shall cause notice of
such fact to be given to the party or parties concerned. The party or parties
so notified shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The notice shall
specify the date, hour and place of the hearing, which shall be private. If,
after such hearing the health officer or other legally qualified authority
shall believe this division has been violated, the health officer or other
authority shall cause the party or parties concerned to be prosecuted.



(Code 1972, § 7-3-11)



Sec. 5-202.  License Required:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a store known
as a milk store or a vehicle or vehicles for the delivery of milk without
first obtaining a license to do so.



   (b)   The owner or the representative of the firm or corporation
shall make application to the village in writing. The village shall refer the
application to the health officer. If the health officer is satisfied that
the owner has met with all requirements of the state and village health laws,
he shall recommend at the next regular board meeting the issuing of a license.



   (c)   The fee for the license for a milk store or a milk delivery
vehicle shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year for each store or
vehicle. The fee for a milk pasteurization plant shall be two hundred dollars
($200.00) a year.



(Code 1969, Ch. 11, Art. 9; Code 1972, § 7-3-12; Ord. 2009-15, § 27,
6-22-2009)



Secs. 5-203-5-220.  Reserved:



ARTICLE IV. AIR POLLUTION CONTROL*



*  Cross reference—Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 4.



State law references—Municipal air contamination control, Ill. Rev. Stat.
Ch. 24, § 11-19.1-11; air pollution generally, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 1111/2,
§ 1008 et seq.; municipal waste incineration emission standards, III. Rev.
Stat. Ch. 111%, § 1009.4.



Sec. 5-221.  Purpose:



   The intent and purpose of this article is to promote and to protect the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and the general welfare of the
people; to protect the village from the harmful effects of airborne
pollutants; to ensure high standards of light and air in areas where people
live and work; to maintain and improve accepted air pollution control
practices; to control emissions from all potential hazards or nuisances.



(Code 1972, § 7-4-1)



Sec. 5-222.  Smoke And Particulate Matter:



   (a)   Compliance with standards. Any use of equipment, devices or
processes which emits smoke and/or particulate matter into the atmosphere
shall comply with the performance standards governing smoke and particulate
matter set forth hereinafter for the control zone in which such use shall be
located, as established in section 5-223. In addition to the performance
standards specified herein, the smoke and particulate matter shall meet the
standards for toxic matter and noxious and odorous matter indicated in
sections 5-224 and 5-225 respectively.



   (b)   Smoke density opacity standards; method of measurement.
Density or equivalent opacity of smoke shall be measured by the Ringelmann
chart, published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines. Measurements
shall be taken at the point of greatest density, which shall usually be at
the point of emission.



      (1)   Maximum density allowed. The emission of smoke or
particulate matter of a density greater than No. 2 on the Ringelmann chart is
prohibited at all times, except as provided for hereinafter.



      (2)   Performance standards by control zone. Smoke density
emission shall conform to the requirements of section 5-223 according to the
control zone location of the source.



   (c)   Particulate matter standards. Particulate matter emission into
the atmosphere shall be relative to lot size and location.



      (1)    Size limitations. The emission from all sources within
any lot area of particulate matter containing more than ten (10) percent by
weight of particles having a diameter larger than forty-four (44) microns is
prohibited.



      (2)    Maximum weight of emission. The total emission weight
of particulate matter from all fuel-burning, combustion or process equipment
or devices within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed those values
given in section 5-223. In addition, the dust loading of gas leaving an air
pollution source, when measured in accordance with the provisions of ASME PTC
27-Determining Dust Concentrations in a Gas Stream, 1957 Edition, shall not
exceed thirty-five hundredths grain per cubic foot of gas (S.T.P.). For
combustion processes this measurement shall be computed at fifty (50) percent
excess air.



      (3)    Method of measurement. Determination of the total net
rate of emission of particulate matter within the boundaries of any lot shall
be made as follows:



         a.    Determine the maximum emission in pounds per hour
from each source of emission and divide this figure by the number of acres of
lot area, thereby obtaining the gross hourly rate of emission in pounds per
acre.



         b.    From each gross hourly rate of emission derived in
paragraph a. above, deduct the correction factor (interpolating as required)
for height of emission set forth in section 5-223, thereby obtaining the net
rate of emission in pounds per acre per hour from each source of emission.



         c.    Add together the individual net rates of emission
derived in paragraph b. above, to obtain the total net rate of emission from
all sources of emission within the boundaries of the lot. Such total shall
not exceed the limitations established in section 5-223.



   (d)   Open fires. The open burning of refuse, paint, oil,
automobiles, debris or any other combustible material within the village
shall be prohibited, with holiday and festive celebrations and other special
occasions, or the burning of dead or diseased vegetation or similar debris
when no other method of disposal is feasible, set and attended by personnel
trained in firefighting techniques, fire containment and the use of
firefighting equipment. Such fires shall be allowed only by special permit
issued by the village board.



   (e)   Materials subject to becoming windborne.



      (1)    Generally. Dusts and other types of air pollution borne
by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads and so forth
within lot boundaries shall be kept to a minimum by such measures as wetting
piles, landscaping, paving, oiling or other acceptable means.



      (2)    Handling. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause
or permit the handling, loading, unloading, reloading, storing, transferring,
transporting, placing, depositing, throwing, discarding or scattering of any
ashes, fly ash, cinders, slag or dust collected from any combustion process,
any dust, dirt, chaff, wastepaper, trash, rubbish, waste or refuse matter of
any kind or any other substance or material whatever which is likely to be
scattered by the wind, or is susceptible to being windborne without taking
reasonable measures or precautions so as to minimize atmospheric pollution or
nuisance to other property.



      (3)    Storage. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
or maintain or cause to be operated or maintained any building, structure or
premises, open area, right-of-way, storage pile of materials, vessel or
vehicle, or construction, alteration, building, demolition or wrecking
operation or any other enterprise which has or involves any matter, material
or substance likely to be scattered by the wind or susceptible to being
windborne, without taking reasonable precautions or measures so as to
minimize atmospheric pollution nuisance to other property.



      (4)    Surfacing of roads and vehicle areas. No person shall
maintain or conduct, or cause to be maintained or conducted, any parking or
automotive or machinery sales lot or any private roadway unless such real
property is covered or treated with a surface or substance or otherwise
maintained in such manner as to minimize atmospheric pollution or nuisance to
other property.



      (5)    Trucking. Trucks carrying material subject to becoming
airborne shall be operated in such a manner as to keep such airborne
materials to a minimum by such measures as wetting the load, covering the
load with canvas, lessening the load or other acceptable means.



(Code 1972, § 7-4-2)



   State law reference-Acts causing air pollution prohibited, Ill. Rev.
Stat. Ch. 111 1/2, § 1009.



Sec. 5-223.  Performance standards by control zone.



   In all residential and business districts and the industrial district,
as established and defined in Chapter 12 of this Code:



      (1)    The emission of more than twenty (20) smoke units per
hour per stack is prohibited, including smoke of a density in excess of
Ringelmann No. 2. However, once during any six-hour period each stack may
emit up to thirty-five (35) smoke units, not to exceed Ringelmann No. 2, when
blowing soot or cleaning fires. Only during fire-cleaning periods, however,
shall smoke of Ringelmann No. 3 be permitted, and then for not more than four
(4) minutes per period.



      (2)    The rate of emission of particulate matter from all
sources within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one
(1) pound per acre of lot area during any one (1) hour, after deducting from
the gross hourly emission per acre the correction factor set forth in the
following table:



 




Allowance for Height of Emissions*




Height of Emission

 

Correction




Above Grade (feet)

 

(pounds per hour per acre)




50

 

0.01




100

 

0.06




150

 

0.10




200

 

0.16




300

 

0.30




400

 

0.50



*Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table.




 



(Code 1972, Tit. 7, Ch. 4, Table 1)



Sec. 5-224.  Toxic matter.



   No activity or operation shall cause, at any time, the discharge of
toxic matter into the atmosphere in such concentrations as to be detrimental
to or endanger the public health, safety or welfare, or cause injury or
damage to property or business or be needlessly destructive of any insect,
plant or animal life which contributes to the general welfare.



(Code 1972, § 7-4-3)



Sec. 5-225.  Noxious and odorous matter.



   (a)   Generally. The emission of noxious and odorous matter in such
manner or quantity as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
comfort or welfare is prohibited.



   (b)   Odor-performance standards.



      (1)    In addition to the requirements of section 5-221, in
all business districts and the industrial district the emission of matter in
such quantities as to be readily detectible as odorous matter at any point
along lot lines is prohibited.



      (2)   The odor of growing trees, shrubs, plants, flowers,
grass and cut grass left in place shall not be considered odorous within the
meaning of this Article.



      (3)   Odors, smoke and fumes incidental to domestic gardening,
such as fertilizers and insecticides (but not compost piles) shall not be
considered odorous or noxious within the meaning of this Article.



   (c)   Internal-Combustion Engines: No person shall operate or cause
to be operated upon any street, highway, public place, stream or waterway or
any private premises any internal-combustion engine of any motor vehicle,
boat or other vehicle, while stationary or moving, which emits from any
source unreasonable and/or excessive smoke, obnoxious or noxious gases, fumes
or vapors.



   (d)   Smoking In Village Buildings: Smoking in any area of any
building owned or operated by the Village is hereby prohibited except where
designated as a permitted smoking area and listed herein as follows:



      (1)   Any private office occupied only by the person who
smokes.



      (2)   The Village Board by executive order may, from time to
time, designate other areas where smoking is prohibited or permitted1.



(Code 1972, § 7-4-4; Ord. 2000-04, § 1, 1-10-2000)



1  See § 3-131 of this Code.



Sec. 5-226.  Penalty:



   Any person, firm or corporation, or agents, employees or contractors of
such, who violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to comply with or who
resist enforcement of any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in this Code.



(Code 1969, Ch. 15; Code 1972, § 7-4-5)



Sec. 5-227.  Smoking Ban—Public Places:



   (a)   Definitions:



      Main Entrance: Any public entryway into or out of an enclosed
indoor area used by the general public and/or to which the general public is
invited or permitted or which serves as a place of employment.  A main
entrance does not include an entryway to or from an outdoor dining area, a
delivery/storage entrance or an entryway limited only to employees working
within the enclosed indoor area.



      Outdoor Venue:  Any outdoor theater, amphitheater, plaza,
street, or other improved area that is used as a public venue or forum to
which members of the general public are invited to listen, view or otherwise
participate in an outdoor event within the village.



      Park: Any public park or recreation area within the village that
is open to and used by the general public.



      Public Place:  Park (as defined herein), outdoor venue (as
defined herein), or enclosed indoor area used by the general public and/or to
which the general public is invited or permitted, or which serves as a place
of employment, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Health care facilities, nursing homes (except as
hereinafter provided), food service establishments, restaurant and beverage
and liquor establishments that do not provide for sit-down service, retail
food stores, commercial establishments, indoor theaters, libraries, museums,
concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, auditoriums,
arenas, common or public areas of condominium buildings and health care
facilities (including nursing home care facilities, except as hereinafter
provided), laundromats, public transportation facilities, marketing
establishments, educational facilities, retail stores, convention facilities,
bingo facilities, galleries, shopping malls, arenas and meeting rooms,
polling places, schools, Village of Justice or other government buildings,
offices and office buildings, factories, warehouses and other places of work.



      (2)   Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, offices,
elevators, and other common areas.



      (3)   Meeting places, meeting or conference rooms, cafeterias,
room chambers, places of public assembly, offices used by more than one (1)
employee, residences used as a licensed child care facility, adult day care
facility, health care facility or a home-based business of any kind open to
the public.



      (4)   Taxis, vehicles of public conveyance and vehicles owned,
leased or operated by the village.



      (5)   Facilities used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage,
drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance.



   A Public Place does NOT include:



      (1)   Food and beverage establishments: Any indoor seating
area in, and outdoor seating area within the village open to the air that is
accessory to, a restaurant, hotel, cafeteria, club, or other public place
engaged in purveying commercial food or beverage service, whether liquor
beverage or otherwise, where members of the public, members or guests are
invited to sit and receive food or beverage service for a consideration.



      (2)   Private residences, except when used as a licensed
childcare facility, adult day care facility, health care facility or a
home-based business of any kind open to the public.



      (3)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests
and are designated as smoking rooms provided, however, that not more than
twenty-five (25) percent of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel
may be so designated.



      (4)   Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and
long-term care facilities that are occupied by one (1) or more persons, all
of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain,
as the case may be, in a room where smoking is permitted.



   Smoke or Smoking: The carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or
cigarette of any kind or any other lighted smoking equipment or the lighting
or emitting or exhaling of the smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any
kind. Smoke also means the gaseous products and particles created by the use
of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind or any other lighted
smoking equipment.



   (b)   Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places:  Smoking shall be
prohibited in all public places within the village.  The owner or other
person in control of a public place shall post a clear and conspicuous sign,
in form and content approved by the village, at every main entrance to the
public place stating that smoking therein is prohibited.



   (c)   Prohibition of Smoking in Outdoor Venues and Events:



      (1)   It is unlawful to smoke in the following outdoor venues
and/or events:



         a.   Public parks and recreation areas within fifteen
(15) feet of any play area, any playground, or any scheduled activity group
of any kind including but not limited to a game, show, party, event or
similar activity, but excluding, however, parades and picnics.



         b.   Public or private school grounds.



         c.   Public sidewalks within fifteen (15) feet of a main
entrance to a public place, but excluding any person who is temporarily in
such area for the purpose of walking or traversing through such area.



         d.   At any scheduled outdoor event to which the public
is permitted or invited, including but not limited to games, shows,
festivals, parties or any similar event or activity, excluding, however,
parades and picnics.



      (2)   It is unlawful to smoke in or within fifteen (15) feet
of an outdoor venue during the time that an outdoor event (as described in
(c)(1) d. above) is taking place.



   (d)   Area:



      (1)   Reasonable distance. Smoking is prohibited within
fifteen (15) feet of any main entrance to a public place.



      (2)   Food and beverage establishments. Food and beverage
establishments must abide by any and all rules and regulations imposed by the
State of Illinois or the Federal Government.



      (3)   Non-retaliation.  No person or employer shall
discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against an employee,
applicant for employment or customer because that employee, applicant or
customer exercises any rights afforded by this section or reports or attempts
to prosecute a violation of this section.



   (e)   Violations and penalties:



      (1)   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is
prohibited by this section shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a
fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation,
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the second violation and two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for each subsequent violation.



      (2)   A person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise
controls a public place and who fails to comply with the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by:



         a.   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for the first violation;



         b.   A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for the second violation occurring within one (1) year of the first violation;



         c.   A fine not exceeding one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) for the third violation occurring within one (1) year of
the first violation; and



         d.   Upon a fourth and subsequent violation,
irrespective of the time between violations, a fine not exceeding two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and a mandatory sixty (60) day
suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for
the premises on which the violation occurred.



      (3)   Each day on which a violation of this section occurs
shall be considered a separate and distinct violation.



   (f)   Other Applicable Laws:  This section shall not be interpreted
or be construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other
applicable laws. 



(Ord. 2007-04, § 1, 2-26-2007)



Secs. 5-228-5-240.  Reserved:



ARTICLE V.  LANDFILLS1,2



1  See § 3-381 et seq., and § 7-314 of this Code.



2  415 ILCS 5/20 et seq., 5/22.6, 5/22.8, 5/22.17.



Sec. 5-241.  Definitions3:



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Cover Material: Solid materials, substances or compounds consisting
solely of dirt, slag, clay, ashes or cinders, pulverized, spread and
compacted so as to form an effective cover seal over such fill.



   Fill: Any solid materials, substances or compounds, including (but not
by way of limitation of the generality of the foregoing) wood, concrete,
plaster, dirt, slag, clay, bricks, ashes, cinders, stone, gravel, glass,
rubber, and metal scrap, subject, however, to the following limitations:



      (1)   The term "fill" shall not include highly flammable,
toxic, explosive or odorous materials and specifically, the following:
"oxidizing materials", "radioactive materials", "flammable solids",
"potentially explosive chemicals" or "highly toxic materials" as such terms
are used in the national fire codes;



      (2)   The term "fill" shall not include "garbage" as defined
in section 11-19-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, as amended, and in section
3 et seq., of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, as amended, or any
other organic matter whatsoever, excepting such as may be incidentally a part
of any substance, material or compound permitted as fill hereunder; provided
that in no event shall any such garbage or other organic matter comprise in
amount more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate of such permitted fill at
any time.



   Fill Site: The location or place at or upon which any fill is deposited
or any landfill is established and operated.



   Person: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association
or corporation, in his, her or its own capacity or as administrator,
conservator, executor, trustee, receiver or other legal representative.



   Sanitary Landfill: The method of operation or process whereby fill is
deposited in any pit, hole, excavation, pond or other low place and then
compacted by mechanical equipment and covered by a layer of cover material.



(Code 1972, § 7-6-1)



3  65 ILCS 5/11-19-2; 415 ILCS 5/3 et seq.



Sec. 5-242.  Enforcement:



   The chief of police is hereby charged with the enforcement of this
article. In the exercise of his duties hereunder, he shall be governed by the
standards set forth in section 5-252 of this article.



(Code 1972, § 7-6-12)



Sec. 5-243.  Permit-Required:



   No person shall maintain or operate any sanitary landfill or place for
the disposal of fill within the village or all waters within or bordering
upon the municipalities to the extent of three (3) miles beyond the corporate
limits of the village without first having obtained a permit to do so 1.



(Code 1972, § 7-6-2)



1  65 ILCS 5/7-4-4; 415 ILCS 5/11 et seq.



Sec. 5-244.  Permit-Application2:



   (a)   Every application for a permit under this article shall be
made in writing to the village on a form to be provided for that purpose.
Such application shall contain the name and place of business of the
applicant. If the applicant is a partnership or firm, the application shall
contain the names and addresses of each of its general partners and limited
partners; if a corporation, the names and residence addresses of its
officers, directors and shareholders; if a trustee, the names and residence
addresses of the beneficiaries of the trust.



   (b)   The application shall also be accompanied by the following:



      (1)   Plat of survey of the proposed fill site showing the
location of all existing roadways and easements;



      (2)   Legal description of the subject property, and a
statement of the ownership thereof which statement shall disclose the names
and residence addresses of all parties having an interest in such property;



      (3)   Description of the plan of filling the land or method of
operation of the proposed sanitary landfill, including a detailed description
of the types, capacities, and kinds of equipment and apparatus proposed to be
used;



      (4)   Topographic map or survey showing all existing grades
and drainage courses on the land proposed to be filled;



      (5)   Diagrams and a written description of the location and
extent of all proposed earthwork, access roads, fill operations, equipment,
personnel and the estimated daily or weekly volume of fill to be deposited;



      (6)   Such other information, including geological data, as
may be required by the board of trustees.



(Code 1972, § 7-6-3; Ord. 2009-15, § 28, 6-22-2009)



2  415 ILCS 5/12.



Sec. 5-245.  Permit–Issuance:



   (a)   Every application under this article shall be transmitted by
the village to the zoning and planning board, which shall recommend approval
or denial thereof and such written recommendation shall be transmitted to the
president and board of trustees for final approval or denial. No permit which
has been recommended for approval by the zoning and planning board shall be
granted to any applicant therefor except upon approval by a majority vote of
the corporate authorities and no permit which has been recommended for denial
by the zoning and planning board, shall be granted to any applicant therefor
except upon approval by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the corporate authorities,
and pursuant to the investigation and report required under this article.



   (b)   Every permit granted under this article shall be issued by the
village and shall be made subject expressly to all of the provisions of this
article.



(Code 1972, § 7-6-4; Ord. 2009-15, § 28, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 5-246.  Investigation Of Permit Applicants; Report:



   (a)   The Zoning and Planning Board shall fully investigate all
matters and things disclosed in the application for permit and the
accompanying data and documentary materials. Such Board shall examine the
proposed fill site and shall coordinate all of its investigations and
inquiries with the proper officers of the Municipal, County and State
Departments of Public Health.



   (b)   Pursuant to its investigation aforesaid, the zoning and
planning board shall prepare and file with the board of trustees its report
containing its findings, conclusions and recommendations for approval or
denial respecting the proposed plan for conducting any sanitary landfill
under this article. In the making of such report, such board shall be
governed by the standards and regulations set forth in section 5-252.



(Code 1972, § 7-6-5)



Sec. 5-247.  Bond.



   Every permittee under this article shall execute a bond unto the
village with such good and sufficient sureties thereon as may be approved by
the board of trustees, in such penal sum as the board of trustees may from
time to time prescribe, for the term of the permit issued hereunder, or any
renewal thereof, conditioned upon the faithful performance by the permittee,
its contractors, agents and employees of all duties imposed by state law or
the provisions of this Code. The bond shall further indemnify and hold
harmless the village from any loss or expense incurred by reason of the
failure of the permittee, its contractors, agents and employees to conform
fully with the requirements of this article in and about the operation and
maintenance of any sanitary landfill under this article.



(Code 1972, § 7-8-6)



   State law reference-Bond required by state, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 111
1/2, § 1021.1.



Sec. 5-248.  Insurance coverage.



   (a)   Every applicant under this article shall submit satisfactory
proof in the form of a certificate or certificates of insurance issued by an
insurer authorized to transact business in the state, showing that the
applicant has procured comprehensive public liability insurance fully
protecting the village against any loss, damage or liability that may result
from the applicant's proposed operations in the village. Such insurance shall
provide for limits of coverage of not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) for bodily injury to any one (1) person; not less than three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injury to any group of
persons resulting from any one (1) accident.



   (b)   The applicant shall also furnish proper proof in the form of a
certificate or certificates of insurance issued by an insurer authorized to
transact business in the state, evidencing that the applicant has obtained
workmen's compensation and occupational disease insurance fully protecting
the village against any and all claims of employees, subcontractors and other
persons, by reason of bodily injury or death, that may result from the
applicant's proposed operations in the village.



   (c)   The applicant shall also furnish evidence of the expiration
dates of the insurance coverages required under this section, and shall
certify that such coverage shall not be cancelled or modified except upon ten
(10) days' prior written notice given to the village. Upon the cancellation,
expiration or modification of any coverages required hereunder without prior
consent of the village, any permit issued hereunder to the applicant shall
become void.



(Code 1972, § 7-6-7)



Sec. 5-249.  Permit term.



   Every permit granted under this article shall be in force for the term
of one (1) year, beginning on May 1 and continuing until April 30 of the
following year. The annual fees provided under this article shall be paid
irrespective of when the permit is issued, and no such fees shall be prorated
or refunded.



(Code 1972, § 7-6-8)



Sec. 5-250.  Annual fees.



   The annual fee for any permit issued under this article shall be
computed in accordance with the following:



 

      (1)    For the operation of any sanitary landfill upon any
fill site of one (1) acre or more, but less than five (5) acres
 
$200.00


      (2)    For the operation of any sanitary landfill upon any
fill site of five (5) acres or more, but less than twenty-five (25) acres
 
450.00


      (3)    For the operation of any sanitary landfill upon any
fill site of twenty-five (25) acres or more
 
750.00



 



(Code 1972, § 7-6-9)



Sec. 5-251.  Inspections.



   The village, through its proper officers, agents or employees, shall
have the right to enter upon the fill site at any time for the purpose of
making such inspections as may be necessary to determine if the land is being
filled or the sanitary landfill is being operated and maintained in
accordance with the requirements of this article.



(Code 1972, § 7-6-10)



Sec. 5-252.  Operation and maintenance.



   The following regulations shall govern with respect to the filling of
any land or the operation and maintenance of any sanitary landfill for which
a permit is issued or required under this article:



      (1)    The permittee shall provide adequate drainage for the
fill site and construct all necessary ditches, culverts and drainage
structures, so that surface waters and other drainage will not flood the fill
site or erode or wash away any cover material.



      (2)    The permittee shall not fill in or obstruct in any
manner any existing drainage ditches, courses, channels or structures.



      (3)    The permittee shall not fill any land to a grade higher
than that of land adjoining the fill site.



      (4)    The permittee will not be permitted to fill any land
when the seepage, drainage or pumpage therefrom will cause any water supply
in the vicinity to become polluted or contaminated.



      (5)    The permittee will not deposit in, at or upon the fill
site any materials or substances other than fill as defined in this article.



      (6)    All land shall be so filled and every sanitary landfill
for which a permit is issued under this article shall be so maintained and
operated as not to create any nuisance, or any hazard or menace to the public
health, comfort, safety and general welfare.



      (7)    No sanitary landfill shall be conducted upon any tract
of land having an area of less than one (1) acre.



      (8)    All land shall be filled and every sanitary landfill
shall be operated and maintained in strict accordance with the requirements
of this article and all reasonable regulations promulgated in pursuance
hereof, and the provisions of Chapter 12 of this Code.



      (9)    Materials may be salvaged from the fill by the
permittee provided that such salvaged materials shall not be kept or stored
on the fill site, and shall be removed therefrom not less frequently than
weekly and, pending their removal from the fill site, shall be stored in a
neat and orderly manner.



      (10)    No materials deposited upon the fill site shall be
burned. Adequate firefighting protection shall be provided by the permittee
at all times on the fill site.



      (11)    The fill deposited at the fill site shall be
continuously compacted throughout each working day in layers of not to exceed
two (2) feet; compaction shall be required to the extent that, after settling
and weathering, the compacted fill and cover material will be substantially
equivalent to but not to exceed grade of land adjoining the fill site.



      (12)    Cover material shall be spread and compacted
continuously during each working day over the compacted fill to a depth of
not less than two (2) feet; such cover material shall be graded and seeded in
such manner as to prevent erosion.



      (13)    The permittee shall provide such equipment and
machinery and competent personnel as shall be necessary to haul and transport
fill and cover material to the fill site to fill such site as required
hereunder, to continuously and sufficiently compact the fill and to
continuously accumulate, spread and compact the necessary cover material over
such fill.



      (14)    The permittee shall provide a ductless access road to
the fill site, which shall be constructed and maintained by the permittee in
a state of good repair at all times.



      (15)    The permittee shall erect and maintain, subject to the
approval of the building commissioner, such temporary or permanent gates and
fences as may be required to prevent the entry of unauthorized persons upon
the fill site.



      (16)    Any and all operations connected with any sanitary
landfill or the filling of any land hereunder may be carried on only between
the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any
day, excepting Sunday, and at other such time or times as the board of
trustees may approve.



      (17)    The filling of any land and the operation of any
landfill shall be subject to such further regulations as may be deemed
necessary by the board of trustees to ensure compliance by the permittee with
the standards set forth hereunder.



(Code 1972, § 7-6-11)



Sec. 5-253.  Revocation Of Permit:



   Any permit issued under this article may be revoked by the president at
any time upon any violation by the permittee of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to the filling of any land or the operation or
maintenance of any landfill in the village.



(Code 1972, § 7-6-13)



Sec. 5-254.  Dumping Or Disposal Of Garbage:



   It shall be unlawful to dump or deposit garbage as defined under the
Illinois municipal code1, as amended, and the Illinois environmental
protection act2, as amended, upon any land within the village or within one
mile of the corporate limits thereof, excepting in a sanitary landfill
licensed under this article.



(Ord. 70-3, 3-5-1970; Code 1972, § 7-6-14)



1  65 ILCS 5/11-19-2.



2  415 ILCS 5/3 et seq.



Secs. 5-255-5-259.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VI.  GARBAGE COLLECTION3 3



3  65 ILCS 5/11-19-1 et seq.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 5-260.  Garbage Collection Rules:



   (a)   The village has designated a specific contractor that shall
have the exclusive authority to collect and dispose of all garbage, landscape
waste, and recyclables from all single-family and multi-family (three (3)
units or less) residences in the village. The village will notify all
property owners and/or tenants by mail as to the contractor who must be
utilized. If any property owners and/or tenants fail to utilize the services
of said contractor they will still be billed for garbage collection by the
village.



   (b)   No later than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the next
bill, any owner-occupant, aged sixty-two (62) or older (for purposes of this
section "seniors") may apply to receive a reduced collection rate as set
forth in section 13-1 of this code, commencing on the following billing
cycle. Each senior must complete and submit an application to the finance
office. Proof of age, in the form of a driver's license, state identification
card or birth certificate, as well as a copy of the senior's most recent
property tax bill, must be submitted with the application. The reduced rate
shall only be available to owner-occupants of single-family residential
dwellings who do not owe any delinquent charges to the village. From time to
time, the village may require renewal of the senior discount.



(Ord. 91-25, § 1, 8-12-1991; Ord. 93-31, § 1, 9-13-1993; Ord. 2004-5, § 3,
3-22-2004; Ord. 2009-15, § 29, 6-22-2009; Ord. 2010-26, § 2, 12-14-2010;
Ord. 2014-09, § 1, 8-11-2014; Ord. 2014-10, § 1, 8-11-2014)



Sec. 5-261.  Charges:



   The village hereby imposes a monthly fee as set forth in section 13-1
of this code for garbage collection. A late charge as set forth in section
13-1 of this code is hereby imposed on all accounts which fail to pay the
garbage bill by the twentieth day of the billing month. Thereafter all past
due accounts shall incur a bimonthly interest charge as set forth in section
13-1 of this code on all amounts past due and owing. Said rate shall be
increased in accordance to costs of operation upon an ordinance approved by a
majority of the board of trustees with the increase rates posted at the
village of Justice clerk's office and with a revised schedule sent to each
customer upon the next available account billing period.



(Ord. 91-25, § 2, 8-12-1991; Ord. 97-28, § 1, 9-8-1997; Ord. 2003-33, § 2,
8-25-2003; Ord. 2004-5, § 1, 3-22-2004; Ord. 2006-04, §§ 1, 2, 2-13-2006)



Sec. 5-262.  Apartment Buildings:



   The village hereby imposes a monthly fee as set forth in section 13-1
of this code per each dwelling unit in two-flat and three-flat buildings for
garbage collection. A late charge as set forth in section 13-1 of this code
is hereby imposed on all accounts which fail to pay the garbage bill by the
twentieth day of the billing month. Thereafter all past due accounts shall
incur a bimonthly interest charge as set forth in section 13-1 of this code
on all amounts past due and owing. Said rate shall be increased in accordance
to costs of operation upon an ordinance approved by a majority of the board
of trustees with the increase rates posted at the village of Justice clerk's
office and with a revised schedule sent to each customer upon the next
available account billing period.



(Ord. 91-25, § 3, 8-12-1991; Ord. 97-28, § 2, 9-8-1997; Ord. 2004-5, § 2,
3-22-2004; Ord. 2006-04, §§ 3, 4, 2-13-2006)



Sec. 5-263.  Delinquent Bills-Creation Of Lien; Notice:



   (a)   Whenever a bill for garbage service remains unpaid for thirty
(30) days after it has been rendered, the village attorney shall file with
the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the
unpaid bill, and a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount as
well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill and all
fees and costs incurred as a result of filing such lien.



   (b)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises and the village attorney has notice of this, notice shall be mailed
to the owner of the premises, if his address be known to the village,
whenever such bill remains unpaid for the period of thirty (30) days after it
has been rendered.



   (c)   The failure of the village to record such lien or to mail such
notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect
the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in subsection
(a) of this section.



(Ord. 93-13, § 1, 6-28-1993; Ord. 2009-14, § 4, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 5-264.  Recycling:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except under the
provisions of a franchise agreement, to collect or take any material from a
recycling bin or container from the public streets or alleys or by means of
any vehicle operated on the public streets or alleys. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to collection on private property from a commercial
building. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or take any recycling
bin or container from the public streets or alleys.



   (b)   The violation of this section may subject the offender to the
penalty provisions of section 1-7 of this code or the general theft statute
of the Illinois criminal code.



(Ord. 96-31, § 1, 9-9-1996)



Secs. 5-265-5-269.  Reserved:



DIVISION 2. REFUSE CONTAINERS



Sec. 5-270.  Definition:



   A "refuse container" is a moveable metal or plastic container for the
deposit of garbage and waste.



(Ord. 98-2, § 1, 1-12-1998)



Sec. 5-271.  Regulations:



   (a)   No refuse containers may be placed or located on a village
street, parkway or alley, or beyond a building setback line, at any time
except for collection and subject to the following regulations.



   (b)   Residential buildings using the village contracted refuse
service may move their privately owned refuse containers to the street for
pick up no sooner than seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of the day preceding pick
up. The containers must be moved from the street no later than twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight of the day of pick up.



   (c)   Multi-family residential units of three (3) units or more and
industrial and commercial buildings must enclose the refuse containers with
an opaque fence or other structure on three (3) sides. This enclosure must be
approved by the building commissioner and permits must be secured prior to
construction. The dimensions of the enclosure will be established by the
building commissioner. The effective date for enclosures is September 1, 1998.



   (d)   All rodent attracting refuse, such as food waste, must be in a
covered steel or plastic refuse container designed for that purpose. Plastic
bags containing such refuse may not be placed outside of a container or on
the ground at any time.



   (e)   Large household items, boxed household rubbish, and bundled or
bagged yard waste may be placed on the ground with the same restrictions as
to location and enclosure as refuse containers.



   (f)   Commercially owned containers moved to or located beyond the
restricted areas in subsection (a) of this section, will be ticketed and
removed by the village. The ticket may be issued to both the owner of the
container and the property owner. Containers may be retrieved during normal
business hours after payment of the ticket fine and a removal fee of two
hundred dollars ($200.00). Fees may be increased for large containers, such
as roll off boxes, if extra time or labor is needed, and will be set by the
public works director at an hourly rate per worker.



   (g)   Multi-family residential buildings containing more than three
(3) residential units must provide a covered, metal refuse container,
commonly known as a dumpster, with a capacity of at least one-half (1/2)
cubic yard per unit.



   (h)   All refuse containers located on non-residential property
designated with any “B” (business), “C” (planned commercial and
office development) or “I” (industrial) zoning classification shall be
located no less than two feet (20') from the lot line of: (i) any property
designated with any “R” (residential) zoning classification, and (ii) any
property designated with any “B” zoning classification but used for
residential purposes (including, without limitation, manufactured housing
communities and mobile home parks). If there is less than twenty feet (20')
separating the structure served by said refuse container an the lot line of
the property used for residential purposes, then the subject refuse container
shall be located and maintained at the maximum possible distance from the lot
line of the property used for residential purposes. 



(Ord. 98-2, § 1, 1-12-1998; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001; Ord. 2010-12, §
2, 7-12-2010)



Sec. 5-272.  Construction:



   During construction, remodeling, rebuilding, landscaping or general
cleanup, a large container, such as a roll off box, may be temporarily
located in front of the building setback on private property by permit only.
At no time shall such container be located on a street, parkway, or alley.
The permit will be for one week at a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
Renewal will be weekly at a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per week. Permits
will be issued by the building department. Violators will be subject to
tickets and removal as described in subsection 5-271(f) of this division.



(Ord. 98-2, § 1, 1-12-1998)



Sec. 5-273.  Penalty:



   The penalty provisions of section 1-7 of this code shall apply to all
violations of the aforesaid sections.



(Ord. 98-2, § 1, 1-12-1998)



Sec. 5-274.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VII.  NUCLEAR FREE ZONE



Sec. 5-275.  Definitions:



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:



   Direct Activities Of The Federal Government: Actions of the federal
government or any agency thereof created by statute, but does not include
actions of independent contractors.



   Nuclear Weapon: Any device, the purpose of which is use as a weapon, a
weapon prototype or a weapon test device, the intended detonation of which
results from the energy released by fission and/or fusion reactions involving
atomic nuclei. "Nuclear weapon" includes the weapon's guidance and propulsion
system and triggering mechanism, i.e., the means of transporting, guiding,
propelling, triggering or detonating the weapon; provided, that such means is
destroyed or rendered useless in the normal transporting, guiding,
propelling, triggering or detonation of the weapon.



   Person: A natural person, as well as a corporation, institution or
other entity.



   Radioactive Materials: Any radioactive waste products or materials
generated, refined or made radioactive by any government agency or pursuant
to federal or state government contract or license, and including that which
the United States nuclear regulatory commission classified as low level
radioactive waste as of January 1, 1989, but which may be classified as below
regulatory waste after that date.



(Ord. 93-12, § 1, 6-28-1993)



Sec. 5-276.  Prohibition Of Storage, Use, Transport Or Disposal Of
Radioactive Materials:



   Except as specifically exempted in this chapter, no person shall
import, store, incinerate, treat, process, transport within or through, or
dispose of radioactive materials, for any purpose, within the village.



(Ord. 93-12, § 1, 6-28-1993)



Sec. 5-277.  Prohibition Of Nuclear Weapons Work:



   Except for the direct activities of the federal government, or its
employees, or as specifically exempted in this chapter, no person shall
knowingly, within the village, design, test, produce, deploy, launch,
maintain or store nuclear weapons or components of nuclear weapons.



(Ord. 93-12, § 1, 6-28-1993)



Sec. 5-278.  Prohibition Of Nuclear Reactors:



   Except as specifically exempted in this chapter, no person shall
construct or operate a nuclear reactor within the village.



(Ord. 93-12, § 1, 6-28-1993)



Sec. 5-279.  Exclusions:



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit:



      (1)    Any activity not specifically described in this chapter;



      (2)    Basic research and/or any writing or speech devoted to
public commentary or debate or other speech protected by the first amendment
of the United States constitution;



      (3)    The research, application or temporary storage of
radioactive materials used in medicine;



      (4)    Consumer uses of radioactive material for smoke
detectors, light emitting watches or clocks, and other similar incidental
applications; and



      (5)    Industrial radiography and tracer processes, including
radioactive material used in construction and/or engineering testing
equipment.



(Ord. 93-12, § 1, 6-28-1993)



Sec. 5-280.  Nuclear Free Zone Signs:



   The village shall post and maintain appropriate signs at recognized
entrances to the village and at the village hall proclaiming the village's
status as a nuclear free zone. Such signs shall conform to the standards set
forth in the federal highway administration's "Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways".



(Ord. 93-12, § 1, 6-28-1993)



Secs. 5-281-5-289.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VIII.  STORAGE CONTAINERS



Sec. 5-290.  Definition; Prohibition Of Cargo Containers:



   A "storage container" is any receptacle, box or holder, with all sides,
top and bottom enclosed, used to store any items.



   Examples of such containers are: railroad "piggyback" module; or ship
container. No existing trailer bodies shall be allowed. Effective May 1,
2001, no new cargo containers shall be allowed and existing cargo containers
must be removed from the business premises no later than May 1, 2003, with
notice of this ordinance given to all businesses no later than at the time of
their yearly business license renewal.



(Ord. 94-19, § 1, 10-10-1994; Ord. 2001-07, § 1, 3-26-2001)



Sec. 5-291.  Prohibited:



   Storage containers are prohibited in any residential zoning district.
Any such containers located in a residential area must be removed by December
31, 1994.



   No new storage containers will be allowed in any zoning district in the
village after the effective date of this article.



(Ord. 94-19, § 2, 10-10-1994)



Sec. 5-292.  Licensing:



   All storage containers located in commercial or industrial zoning
districts must be inspected and licensed by the village. The inspection shall
be conducted by the building department and the building department shall
notify the fire department on inspection results. The annual fee for such
license and inspection shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per
container per year. All licenses shall be obtained by January 1, 1995, and
shall be renewed on a yearly basis. The license must be displayed on such
container.



(Ord. 94-19, § 3, 10-10-1994; Ord. 95-15, § 1, 6-26-1995; Ord. 2000-40, §
1, 8-28-2000)



Sec. 5-293.  Regulations:



   The following regulations shall apply to all such storage containers:



      (1)    A fire extinguisher shall be located in each container.



      (2)    The container must be securely locked when not open for
use.



      (3)    For the safety and well being of the residents, a six
foot (6') fence may be required, at the discretion of the building
commissioner, to enclose such container.



      (4)    No flammable materials shall be stored in such
container.



      (5)    No overhead wiring to such container is allowed. If
electrified, a hard wire, underground power source must be used.



(Ord. 94-19, § 4, 10-10-1994; Ord. 2000-40, § 1, 8-28-2000)



Sec. 5-294.  Nonusable Containers:



   Once a container becomes nonusable, or does not pass inspection by the
fire and building departments, it must be immediately removed.



(Ord. 94-19, § 5, 10-10-1994; Ord. 2000-40, § 1, 8-28-2000)



Sec. 5-295.  Penalty:



   Except as otherwise provided in this code, any person convicted of a
violation of section 5-290 of this article shall be fined in a sum not to
exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) a day for each individual
container. For all other violations of this article the penalty provisions of
section 1-7 of this code shall apply.



(Ord. 94-19, § 6, 10-10-1994; Ord. 2000-40, § 1, 8-28-2000; Ord. 2001-07,
§ 2, 3-26-2001)



Secs. 5-296-5-300.  Reserved:



ARTICLE IX.  OCCUPANCY STANDARDS



Sec. 5-301.  Title, Purpose And Scope:



   (a)   Title: This article shall be known as the OCCUPANCY STANDARDS
ORDINANCE.



   (b)   Purpose: The preambles of this ordinance are hereby adopted
and incorporated as if fully set forth herein.



   (c)   Construction: This article shall be liberally construed and
applied to promote its purposes and policies.



   (d)   Scope: This article applies to all dwelling units within the
village.



   (e)   Exclusions: Unless created to avoid the application of this
article, the following arrangements are not governed by this article:



      (1)    Residence at a public or private medical, geriatric,
educational or religious institution;



      (2)    Transient occupancy in a hotel or motel.



(Ord. 97-2, § 1, 1-27-1997)



Sec. 5-302.  General Definitions; Principles Of Interpretation:



   (a)   General Definitions: Subject to additional definitions
contained in subsequent sections of this Article.



      Code: Includes any ordinance or governmental regulation
concerning fitness for habitation, or the construction, maintenance,
operation, occupancy, use or appearance of any premises or dwelling unit.



      Dwelling Unit: A structure or the part of a structure that is
used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one or more persons who
maintain a household.



      Landlord: The owner, lessor or sublessor of the dwelling unit or
the building of which it is a part. An owner is one or more persons, jointly
or severally, in whom is vested all or part of the legal title to property,
or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and
enjoyment of the premises, including a mortgagee in possession.



      Person: An individual or a corporation, government, governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or
association or any other legal or commercial entity.



      Premises: A dwelling unit and the structure of which it is a
part, and facilities and appurtenances therein, and grounds, areas and
facilities held out for the uses of tenants.



      Rental Agreement: All agreements and valid rules and regulations
embodying the terms and conditions concerning the use and occupancy of a
dwelling unit and premises.



      Tenant: A person entitled under a rental agreement to occupy a
dwelling unit to the exclusion of others.



   (b)   Notice: A person has notice of a fact if:



      (1)    He has actual knowledge of it;



      (2)    He has received notice of it; or



      (3)    From all of the facts and circumstances known to him at
the time in question, he has reason to know that it exists. A person gives
notice to another by taking steps reasonably calculated to inform the other
in ordinary course whether or not the other actually comes to know of it.



(Ord. 97-2, § 2, 1-27-1997)



Sec. 5-303.  Rental Agreements:



   All rental agreements for leases of dwelling units subject to this
Article which are newly executed and/or renewed on or after March 1, 1997,
shall be in writing and shall contain the full names and birth dates of all
occupants of the dwelling unit leased or to be leased under the rental
agreement. The individual occupancy of the dwelling unit may not be changed
without an amendment to the existing rental agreement reflecting the change
in occupancy and shall in no case exceed the maximum occupancy permitted
elsewhere in this Code for that size unit.



(Ord. 97-2, § 3, 1-27-1997)



Sec. 5-304.  Tenant Obligations:



   The tenant shall:



      (1)   Comply with all obligations imposed upon tenants by
provisions of the codes applicable to the dwelling unit;



      (2)    Keep that part of the premises that he occupies and
uses as safe as the condition of the premises permits;



      (3)    Dispose from his dwelling unit all ashes, rubbish,
garbage and other waste in a clean and safe manner;



      (4)    Keep all plumbing fixtures in the dwelling unit or used
by the tenants as clean as their condition permits;



      (5)    Use in a reasonable manner all electrical, plumbing,
sanitary, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other facilities and
appliances, including elevators, in the premises;



      (6)    Not deliberately or negligently destroy, deface,
damage, impair or remove any part of the premises or knowingly permit any
person to do so; and



      (7)    Conduct himself and require other persons on the
premises with his consent to conduct themselves in a manner that will not
disturb his neighbor's peaceful enjoyment of the premises.



(Ord. 97-2, § 4, 1-27-1997)



Sec. 5-305.  Rules And Regulations:



   (a)   The landlord, from time to time, may adopt general rules or
regulations concerning the tenant's use and occupancy of the premises. They
are enforceable only if:



      (1)    Their purpose is to promote the convenience, safety or
welfare of the tenants in the premises, preserve the landlord's property from
abusive use or make a fair distribution of services and facilities among
tenants;



      (2)    They are reasonably related to the purpose for which
they are adopted;



      (3)    They apply to all tenants in the premises in a fair
manner;



      (4)    They are sufficiently explicit to fairly inform the
tenant of what he must or must not do to comply;



      (5)    They are not for the purpose of evading the obligations
of the landlord; and



      (6)    The tenant has notice of them at the time he enters
into the rental agreement.



   (b)   A rule or regulation adopted after the tenant enters into the
rental agreement that substantially modifies his bargain is not enforceable
unless the tenant consents to it in writing.



(Ord. 97-2, § 5, 1-27-1997)



Sec. 5-306.  Access:



   (a)   The tenant shall not unreasonably withhold consent to the
landlord to enter the dwelling unit in order to inspect the premises, make
necessary or agreed repairs, decorations, alterations or improvements, supply
necessary or agreed services or show the dwelling unit to prospective or
actual purchasers, mortgagees, tenants or workmen.



   (b)   The landlord may enter the dwelling unit without consent of
the tenant in case of emergency.



   (c)   The landlord shall not abuse the right of access or use it to
harass the tenant. Except in cases of emergency, or unless it is
impracticable to do so, the landlord shall give the tenant at least two (2)
days' notice of his intent to enter and may enter only at reasonable times.



(Ord. 97-2, § 6, 1-27-1997)



Sec. 5-307.  Tenant's Use And Occupancy Of Dwelling Unit:



   Unless otherwise agreed, the tenant shall occupy his unit only as a
dwelling unit.



(Ord. 97-2, § 7, 1-27-1997)



Sec. 5-308.  Maintain Fit Premises:



   (a)   The landlord shall maintain the premises in substantial
compliance with the applicable codes of the Village and shall promptly make
any and all repairs necessary to fulfill this obligation.



   (b)   The landlord and tenant of any dwelling unit may agree that
the tenant is to perform specific repairs, maintenance tasks, alterations or
remodeling only if:



      (1)    The agreement of the parties is entered into in good
faith and not for the purpose of evading the obligations of the landlord and
is set forth in a separate writing signed by the parties and supported by
adequate consideration; and



      (2)    The agreement does not diminish or affect the
obligation of the landlord to other tenants in the premises.



(Ord. 97-2, § 8, 1-27-1997)



Sec. 5-309.  Occupancy Limits:



   The maximum number of occupants allowed in a dwelling unit shall be two
(2) persons and one child under the age of five (5) years for each existing
bedroom.



(Ord. 97-2, § 9, 1-27-1997)



Sec. 5-310.  Maintenance Of The Rental Agreement:



   Each landlord shall maintain a file for each rental unit. Upon demand
of the Village in writing, the landlord shall produce such file including the
rental agreement at the offices of the Village Clerk within forty eight (48)
hours for review and copying by Village personnel.



(Ord. 97-2, § 10, 1-27-1997)



Secs. 5-311-5-324.  Reserved:



ARTICLE X.  AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT



Sec. 5-325.  ADA Requirements:



   The standards and requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act
and all future amendments are hereby adopted in this Code, by reference in
full.



(Ord. 97-3, § 1, 2-10-1997)



Sec. 5-326.  Existing Facilities:



   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of Section 5-325 of this Article,
all existing restaurants and businesses must provide one ADA approved toilet
facility.



(Ord. 97-3, § 2, 2-10-1997)



Sec. 5-327.  Toilet Facilities:



   Every restaurant and business which sells prepared or ready-to-eat food
as its primary business shall provide a public restroom for each sex. Every
gasoline filling station with mini-mart facilities shall provide a public
restroom for each sex.



   All other retail businesses that sell prepared food, but not as a
primary business, shall provide one public restroom.



   Any restroom required in any business or office must be in compliance
with ADA standards.



   The deadline for compliance with the requirements of Section 5-325 of
this Article shall be May 1, 1997.



(Ord. 97-3, § 3, 2-10-1997)



Sec. 5-328.  Parking Requirements:



   Compliance with ADA parking requirements shall be made by May 1, 1997.
A plan shall be submitted to the Village by the owner of the parking lot to
ensure compliance with ADA standards. This plan shall include all required
signage and parking lot striping according to ADA standards. The plan shall
be approved by the Village Building Commissioner. The owners that do not
enforce ADA compliance will be subject to the same penalties and fines
imposed on violators under Section 1-7 of this Code, unless the owner enters
into an agreement with the Justice Police Department for enforcement of the
parking requirements.



(Ord. 97-3, § 4, 2-10-1997)



Sec. 5-329.  Penalty:



   Failure to comply with the requirements of this Article shall subject
the owner to the penalty provisions of Section 1-7 of this Code.



(Ord. 97-3, § 5, 2-10-1997)



Secs. 5-330-5-339.  Reserved:



 


Notes

1 
State law reference—Municipal regulation of markets and markethouses, III.
Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-20.1.

2 
State law reference—Power of village to adopt by reference codes for the
production, pasteurization and sale of milk and milk products, Ill. Rev.
Stat. Ch. 85, § 1001 et seq.

3 
65 ILCS 5/11-19-1 et seq.



CHAPTER 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 1,2



   Art. I.   In General, §§ 6-1-6-20



   Art. II.   Vehicle Licenses, §§ 6-21-6-40



   Art. III.   Abandoned Vehicles, §§ 6-41-6-59



   Art. IV.   DUI Emergency Response Fees, §§ 6-60-6-70



   Art. V.    Adjudication Of Vehicular Regulation Violations, §§
6-71-6-90



   Art. VI.   Local Traffic, §§ 6-91-6-100



   Art. VII.   Motorized Scooters, Pedalcycles And Similar Devices,
6-101



   Art. VIII.   Automated Traffic Enforcement, §§ 6-105—6-119



   Art. IX.   Motor Vehicle Regulations in Private Parking Lots, §§
6-120—6-124



1 See also chapter 3, "Business Regulations"; chapter 4, "Fire Prevention And
Protection"; chapter 9, "Police Department"; chapter 10, "Streets, Sidewalks,
Driveways And Parking Lots"; § 2-499, "Mobile Support Team"; § 3-321,
taxicabs; § 4-26, "Driving Over Fire Hose"; § 4-30, "Ambulance Service"; §
5-176 et seq., drive-in restaurants; § 7-197 et seq., school vehicles; §
7-253, "Transporting Loose Materials"; § 8-121 et seq., moving buildings; §
10-16, barricades on streets, etc.; § 10-28, parking on village property, of
this code.



2  625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., 5/16-101, 5/16-104 et seq., 5/11-207 et seq.;
ILCS S. Ct. Rule 526, 529, 551.



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



Sec. 6-1.  State Vehicle Code Adopted1:



   (a)   The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100, et seq., is
hereby adopted and incorporated as though fully set out at length herein.



   (b)   A peace officer issuing a uniform traffic citation for a
violation of this section shall be issue the citation in the name of the
Village of Justice and include the following information: (i) name of the
defendant; (ii) name of the offense committed; (iii) date and location of the
offense; (iv) a citation to this section and, for reference, that section of
the Illinois Vehicle Code corresponding thereto; (v) a mark in the box [T.R.
Ord.]; and (vi) a brief description of the manner in which defendant
committed the offense.



   (c)   The penalty provisions and fine schedules of the Illinois
Vehicle Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as though fully set forth
herein. The penalty for violating this section shall be the same as, and
correspond to, the penalties governing violations of each respective
statutory counter-part of the Illinois Vehicle Code.



(Code 1972, § 9-1-1; Ord. 84-1, 1-15-1984; Ord. 2013-05, § 1, 4-22-2013)



1 625 ILCS 5/1-100-5/20-402.



Sec. 6-2.  Parking Restrictions:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked a
motor vehicle on the following: 1) public thoroughfares; 2) the right of way;
or 3) within ten feet (10') of the curb.



      (1)    Seventy-Ninth Street from Roberts Road on the east to
the village limits on the west;



      (2)    Archer Road from Seventy-First Street to the U.S. Route
45 interchange;



      (3)    Archer Road from Eighty-Eighth Avenue to Seventy-First
Street;



      (4)    Eighty-Third Street from Roberts Road to Eighty-First
Avenue.



(Code 1972, § 9-1-2; Ord. 84-22, 6-21-1984; Ord. 87-26, § 1, 9-14-1987;
Ord. 99-11, § 1, 4-12-1999; Ord. 2000-37, § 1, 8-14-2000; Ord. 2001-16, §
1, 5-14-2001)



Sec. 6-3.  Vehicle Weight Limit2:



   (a)   The gross weight of any vehicle, or any combination of
vehicles, and their load operated on a residential street in the village
shall not exceed sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds.



   (b)   The public works department of the village is authorized to
post appropriate warning signs of this weight limitation in appropriate
locations.



(Code 1972, § 9-1-3; Ord. 2000-31, § 3, 7-10-2000)



2  625 ILCS 5/15-316.



Sec. 6-4.  Operation Of Motorcycles, Etc., By Persons Under Sixteen Years Of
Age:



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) years
to operate on the streets of the village a motorcycle, powercycle, bicycle
with motor attached, or power scooter, with a motor which produces more than
five (5) brake horsepower.



(Code 1972, § 9-1-1)



Sec. 6-5.  Violations Of Certain Specified Traffic Offenses:



   (a)   An officer, upon observing and stopping a vehicle that is in
violation of an offense listed below, may, in lieu of an arrest, issue a
minor ordinance violation notice (P-Ticket). The officer shall advise the
person of the violation, request the person to make payment of a fine as
stated in subsection 6-5(b) of this section and inform the person that a
complaint will be filed in the village MSI court, pursuant to the
requirements of section 6-74 of this article, if the violation is not settled
as specified at the village police department.



   Specified Offenses:



 


Illinois Vehicle Code Section

 
Description


11-1406
 
Obstruction to driver’s view or control


11-1407
 

Improper opening of door into traffic



11-1410
 
Coasting on downgrade



 



 




Illinois Vehicle Code Section

 
Description


11-1411
 
Following fire apparatus


11-1419.01
 
Motor fuel tax identification card


12-101
 
Unsafe motor vehicle


12-201(a)
 
Driving without lighted lamp (motorcycle)


12-201(b)
 
Driving without lights when required


12-201(b)
 
No taillights


12-201(b)
 
No red taillight


12-201(b)
 
Only one (1) red taillight


12-201(c)
 
No rear registration light


12-202
 
Clearance, identification and side marker lamps


12-205.1
 
No lights when required (specific vehicle)


12-208
 
No signal lamp or device


12-211
 
Improper lighting


12-212
 
Illegal lights (red or flashing)


12-215
 
Illegal use of oscillating, rotating or flashing lights


12-301
 
Defective or no brakes


12-401
 
Use of illegal tires (studs)


12-405(c)
 
Use of unsafe tire


12-501
 
No safety glass


12-502
 
Mirrors


12-503(a,c,e)
 
Obstruction of driver’s view


12-503(d)
 
No windshield wiper or cleaning device


12-601
 
Defective horn


12-602
 
Muffler (loud, excessive noise; no muffler)


12-603
 
No seat belts* (maximum fine $25.00)


12-606
 
Tow trucks (identification)


12-607
 
Vehicle suspension system


12-608
 
Vehicle bumpers


12-610
 
Wearing headset receiver while driving


12-702(a)
 
No flags, flares, warning devices carried


12-702(c)
 
No flags, flares, warning devices displayed


12-703
 
Dripping oil on roadway


12-704
 
Improper or no equipment markings (explosive carrier)


12-704.1
 
Improper or no equipment markings (radioactive carrier)


12-705
 
Flammable carrier


12-710
 
Inadequate or no splash guards




 



or any of the following sections of this chapter:



 


Municipal Code Section

 
Description


6-2
 
Parking


6-21
 
No vehicle sticker


6-24
 
No vehicle sticker displayed


6-22
 
Improper transfer of vehicle sticker


6-3
 
Weight limit



 



   (b)   A person accused of violating any of the Illinois vehicle code
or municipal code sections listed in section 6-5(a), may settle and
compromise the claim by paying to the village police department on or before
the due date noted on the ticket, a fine amount as noted in section 6-79(a)
step 1 of this article and showing proof of correction of the violations. If
the fine is not paid by the due date, then the ticket shall be transferred to
the village of Justice haring officer for placement on the court docket and a
notice shall be sent to the offender of the hearing date.



   (c)   If the offender does not appear on his court date, after the
third hearing date, the village may request that hearing officer find the
offender is in default, and if so ordered, the fees and fines shall be sent
for collection.



   (d)   Remittance: The police department shall issue a receipt for
the money so received and shall promptly remit such amount to the village.



(Code 1972, § 9-1-5; Ord. 84-2, 1-5-1984; Ord. 2009-15, § 30, 6-22-2009;
Ord. 2009-17, § 2, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 6-6.  Seizure And Impoundment Of Motor Vehicles:



   (a)   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      (1)   The term hearing officer means a licensed attorney who
is not an officer or employee of the village.



      (2)   The term owner of record means the record titleholder to
a motor vehicle.



   (b)   Public Nuisance Declared: A motor vehicle shall be declared a
public nuisance and subject to seizure and impoundment under this section
where such motor vehicle is used in the commission of any of the violations
set forth in this section. It shall not be necessary for criminal charges to
be filed, prosecuted, and/or proven in order to demonstrate that one (1) of
the following violations has been committed:



      (1)   Violations of section 7-4, Discharge Of Firearms, of
this Code; section 7-38, Assault, of this Code; or section 7-39, Battery, of
this Code.



      (2)   A violation of 625 ILCS 5/6-303, "Driving While Driver's
License, Permit or Privilege to Operate a Motor Vehicle is Suspended or
Revoked" of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended, except a person whose
driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended
only for a violation of 625 ILCS 5/13 et seq., "The Emissions Inspection
Law," of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended.



      (3)   A violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-204, "Fleeing or Attempting
to Elude a Peace Officer," of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended, 625 ILCS
5/11-501, "Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, Other Drug or Drugs,
Intoxicating Compound or Compounds or any Combination Thereof," of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended, 625 ILCS 5/11-503, "Reckless Driving or
Aggravated Reckless Driving," of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended, or
625 ILCS 5/11-504, "Drag Racing," of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended,
or against whom a warrant has been issued by a circuit court for failing to
appear to answer charges that the person was 1) operating a motor vehicle
while that person's license was suspended or revoked or 2) operating a motor
vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs,
intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof.



      (4)   A violation of 720 ILCS 5/11-6, "Indecent Solicitation
of a Child," of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, 720 ILCS
5/12-2, "Aggravated Assault," of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as
amended, 720 ILCS 5/12-4, "Aggravated Battery," of the Illinois Criminal Code
of 1961, as amended, 720 ILCS 5/12-4.2, "Aggravated Battery with a Firearm,"
of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, 720 ILCS 5/12-4.3,
"Aggravated Battery of a Child," of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as
amended, 720 ILCS 5/12-4.6, "Aggravated Battery of a Senior Citizen," of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, 720 ILCS 5/16A-3, "Retail Theft,"
of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, when the value of the
merchandise exceeds one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), 720 ILCS 5/18-1,
"Robbery," all of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, 720 ILCS
5/18-2, "Armed Robbery," of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended,
720 ILCS 5/19-1, "Burglary," of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as
amended, 720 ILCS 5/19-3, "Residential Burglary," of the Illinois Criminal
Code of 1961, as amended, 720 ILCS 5/20-1, "Arson," of the Illinois Criminal
Code of 1961, as amended, 720 ILCS 5/20-1.1, "Aggravated Arson," of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, 720 ILCS 5/20-2, "Possession of
Explosives or Explosive or Incendiary Devices," of the Illinois Criminal Code
of 1961, as amended, 720 ILCS 5/12-1, "Criminal Damage to Property," of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 as amended, or 720 ILCS 5/25-1, "Mob Action,"
of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961.



      (5)   A violation of 720 ILCS 570/401, "Manufacture or
Delivery of a Controlled Substance," of the Illinois Controlled Substances
Act, as amended, 720 ILCS 570/401.1, "Controlled Substance Trafficking," of
the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, as amended, or 720 ILCS 570/402,
"Possession of a Controlled Substance," of the Illinois Controlled Substances
Act, as amended.



      (6)   A violation of 720 ILCS 550/4, "Possession of More than
10 Grams of Any Substance Containing Cannabis," of the Illinois Cannabis
Control Act, as amended, 720 ILCS 550/5, "Manufacture or Delivery of
Cannabis," of the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, as amended, 720 ILCS
550/5.1, "Cannabis Trafficking," Illinois Cannabis Control Act, as amended,
720 ILCS 550/5.2, "Delivery of Cannabis on School Grounds," of the Illinois
Cannabis Control Act, as amended, or 720 ILCS 550/8, "Unauthorized Production
or Possession of Cannabis Sativa Plant," of the Illinois Cannabis Control
Act, as amended.



      (7)   A violation of 720 ILCS 600/3.5, "Possession of Drug
Paraphernalia," of the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia Control Act, as amended.



      (8)   A violation of 720 ILCS 5/24-1, "Unlawful Use of
Weapons," of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, 720 ILCS
5/24-3.1, "Unlawful Possession of Firearms and Firearm Ammunition," of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, or 720 ILCS 5/24-3.3, "Unlawful
Sale or Delivery of Firearms on the Premises of any School," of the Illinois
Criminal Code of 1961, as amended. This subsection shall not apply when any
of the exemptions set forth in 720 ILCS 5/24-2 of the Illinois Criminal Code
of 1961, as amended, are met.



      (9)   A violation of 720 ILCS 5/11-14, "Prostitution," of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, 720 ILCS 5/11-14.1, "Solicitation
of a Sexual Act," of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, 720 ILCS
5/11-15, "Soliciting for a Prostitute," of the Illinois Criminal Code of
1961, as amended, 720 1LCS 5/11-15.1, "Soliciting for a Juvenile Prostitute,"
of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, 720 ILCS 5/11-18,
"Patronizing a Prostitute," of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as
amended, or 720 ILCS 5/11-18.1, "Patronizing a Juvenile Prostitute," of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended.



      (10)   The motor vehicle is otherwise subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to 720 ILCS 5/26-1, "Seizure," of the Illinois Criminal
Code, as amended.



      (11)   A violation of 625 ILCS 5/6-101, "Drivers Must Have
Licenses or Permits," of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended.



      (12)   A violation of 625 ILCS 5/7-601, "Required Liability
Insurance Policy," of the Illinois Vehicle Code, and/or 625 ILCS 5/7-602,
"Insurance Card," of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended.



   (c)   Probable Cause For Seizure And Impoundment Of Motor Vehicles:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall cause the motor vehicle to be towed to a facility controlled by
the village or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer
shall notify any person identifying himself or herself as the owner of the
vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the
seizure and of the vehicle owner’s right to request a preliminary hearing
as provided in this section. 



   If the owner of the vehicle is not present at the scene, the village
shall send the owner of record written notice of the tow and the impoundment
by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address listed on the
owner’s vehicle registration, within forty-eight (48) hours of the
impoundment, excluding Saturdays, Sundays or village holidays. Said notice
shall inform the vehicle’s owner that he or she has the right to request a
preliminary hearing within forty-eight (48) hours of the owner’s receipt of
the notice in accordance with subsection (c) of this section.



   Said motor vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the
hearings provided for in this section, unless the owner of the motor vehicle
posts with the village a cash bond as set forth in subsection (d) below.



      (1)   A police officer who has probable cause to believe that
a motor vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this
section shall first ascertain whether the seizure and impoundment is
necessary and reasonable under the circumstances. If the motor vehicle is
capable of being removed from the scene by an individual who is present on
the scene, and who has permission from the owner of the motor vehicle to
drive the motor vehicle, and the individual is otherwise fully capable of
lawfully operating a motor vehicle in the state, the police officer shall
allow that individual to remove the motor vehicle without it being subject to
seizure and impoundment if seizure and impoundment of the motor vehicle is
discretionary pursuant to subsection (b)(10) above or seizure and impoundment
of the motor vehicle is contemplated pursuant to subsections (b)(11) and (12)
above.



      (2)   Similarly, if the motor vehicle is parked legally and
will not present a hazard to the public safety or otherwise jeopardize the
efficient movement of vehicular traffic at its location, the police officer
shall permit the motor vehicle to remain at its location without it being
seized and impounded if seizure and impoundment of the motor vehicle is
discretionary pursuant to subsection (b)(10) above or seizure and impoundment
of the motor vehicle is contemplated pursuant to subsections (b)(11) and (12)
above.



      (3)   The determination required by this section is not
required to be made when a motor vehicle is required to be seized and
impounded due to investigative measures or when a motor vehicle is seized and
impounded pursuant to another lawful purpose, including if the motor vehicle
is determined to be a public nuisance pursuant to subsections (b)(1) through
(12) above.



   (d)   Posting A Bond: If a bond in the amount of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) is posted with the village, the impounded vehicle shall be
released to the owner of record, upon the payment by the owner of record of
the towing and storage costs. If a fee is imposed for a violation of this
section, the bond will be forfeited to the village; provided, in the event
that a violation of this section is not proven, the bond shall be returned to
the person posting the bond. All bond money posted pursuant to this section
shall be held by the village until the hearing officer issues a decision, or,
if there is a judicial review, until a reviewing court issues a final
decision.



   (e)   Preliminary Hearing: Where the owner of a motor vehicle towed
and impounded pursuant to this section desires to appeal said seizure, said
owner shall request a preliminary hearing within forty-eight (48) hours of
the seizure of the motor vehicle, or within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt
by the owner of notice of the seizure if the owner was not present at the
time of the seizure. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be filed with
the chief of police or the chief of police’s designee, who shall conduct
said preliminary hearing within forty-eight (48) hours after the request for
a preliminary hearing is received, excluding Saturdays, Sundays or village
holidays. For purposes of this section, the following shall apply:



      (1)   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing.



      (2)   The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the
hearing, and hearsay testimony shall be allowed, and shall be admissible.



      (3)   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the chief of
police or the chief of police's designee determines that there is probable
cause to believe that the vehicle was used as hereinabove provided in
subsection (b), he or she shall order the continued impoundment of the
vehicle, unless the owner of the vehicle posts a cash bond with the village
in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus the towing and storage
costs.



         a.   At the conclusion of the preliminary hearing, the
vehicle owner may appeal the outcome of the preliminary hearing or file a
request for a final hearing. The chief of police or his or her designee shall
serve the owner of record immediate notice of the date and time of the final
hearing.



      (4)   If the chief of police or the chief of police's designee
determines that there is not probable cause to believe that the vehicle was
used as hereinabove provided in subsection (b), the motor vehicle shall be
returned to the owner of record of the vehicle without any fees or other
costs, but the owner of record shall be responsible for any towing or storage
charges.



   (f)   Final Hearing:



      (1)   Requesting a hearing. A person whose vehicle is seized
pursuant to this article may apply for a hearing to assert that he or she or
the person driving the vehicle was not in violation of this article at the
time the vehicle was seized. The application for a hearing shall be made no
later than five (5) days after notice has been given either personally or by
certified mail, whichever is applicable in the given circumstance. The
application to request a hearing shall be provided by the village at the time
notice is given. The bond shall be forfeited in the event a hearing is not
requested as provided for in this section. After an application for hearing
is received by the village, a subsequent notice shall be sent to the person
that requested the hearing notifying the person of the date, time and
location of the hearing.



      (2)   Notice of hearing. Unless the owner of the motor vehicle
prevails at a preliminary hearing held pursuant to subsection (e) of this
section, or the owner affirmatively requests or waives his or her right to a
final administrative hearing, the village shall notify the owner of record
within ten (10) business days after the vehicle is towed and impounded, by
personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, of the date,
time and location of a hearing being conducted pursuant to this section. Said
notice shall state the fees that may be imposed by the village, and shall
further state that a motor vehicle not released by cash bond or other form of
acceptable payment may be sold or disposed of by the village in accordance
with applicable law.



      (3)   Hearing. For purposes of this section, the following
shall apply at an owner's final hearing:



         a.   Unless continued by order of the hearing officer,
the hearing shall be held within forty-five (45) days after the motor vehicle
was seized.



         b.   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall
not apply at the hearing, and hearsay testimony shall be allowed, and shall
be admissible.



         c.   The violation citation shall be prima facie
evidence that the violation was committed as provided in the citation, and
the burden of proof shall be upon the defendant to prove that the violation
was not committed. If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was
used as hereinabove provided in subsection (b), the hearing officer shall
order the continued impoundment of the vehicle until the owner of the vehicle
pays to the village a fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00),
plus the towing and storage costs. The fee and costs shall be a debt due to
the village.



         d.   If the owner of record fails to appear at the
hearing, the hearing officer shall enter an order of default in favor of the
village, which order shall require the payment to the village of an
administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).



         e.   If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle
was not used as provided in subsection (b), the motor vehicle shall be
returned to the owner of record of the vehicle without any fee or other
costs, or, if a cash bond had previously been posted, the cash bond shall be
returned, but the owner of record shall be responsible for any towing or
storage charges.



   (g)   Unclaimed Vehicles:



      (1)   If the administrative fee and any other applicable fees
are not paid within thirty (30) days after said fees are imposed against an
owner of record who has defaulted by failing to appear at the hearing, the
vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner
provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles.



      (2)   In all other cases, if the administrative fee and any
other applicable fees are not paid within thirty (30) days after the
expiration of time in which judicial review of the hearing officer’s
determination may be sought, or within thirty (30) days after an action
seeking judicial review has been resolved in favor of the village, whichever
is applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of
in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles under
the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1 et seq.), as may be amended from time
to time.



   (h)   Liability For Fees And Costs:



      (1)   The owner of record of a motor vehicle that is seized or
impounded shall be liable to the village for a fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00) in addition to any fees for the towing and storage of the motor
vehicle.



      (2)   Fees for towing and storage are established by the
towing company and not by the village, except where the motor vehicle is
stored on village property, in which case the storage cost shall be
established by the village president or chief of police.



      (3)   A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall
remain impounded until the earlier of the following occurs:



         a.   The fee is paid to the village, and all towing and
storage costs are paid to the towing company, in which case possession of the
motor vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess
the motor vehicle, or the motor vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to
satisfy a judgment to enforce a lien as provided by law.



         b.   A bond in amount equal to the liability of the
owner as herein provided in subsection (h)(1) above is posted with the
village and all applicable towing and storage costs are paid to the towing
company.



         c.   The vehicle is deemed abandoned, in which case the
vehicle shall be disposed on in the manner provided by law for the
disposition of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles.



         d.   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law,
no owner, lien holder, or any other person shall be legally entitled to take
possession of a motor vehicle impounded under this section until the fee and
all towing and storage costs applicable under this section have been paid in
full.



   (i)   Applicability Of Other Laws: This section is in addition to
and shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state or federal
laws or any ordinance that relates to the seizure impoundment of motor
vehicles, and any fee in this section shall be in addition to any and all
penalties that may be assessed or imposed by a court for any criminal
charges. This section shall not apply: 1) if the motor vehicle used in the
violation was stolen at the time of the violation and the theft was reported
to the appropriate police authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the
theft was discovered; 2) if the motor vehicle is operated as a common carrier
as defined by applicable law and the violation occurs without the knowledge
of the person in control of the motor vehicle; or 3) if the motor vehicle is
subject to successful forfeiture proceedings under 725 ILCS 150/1 et seq., as
amended (“Drug Asset Forfeiture Procedure Act”), 720 ILCS 5/36-1 et seq.,
as amended (“Seizure and Forfeiture of Vessels, Vehicles and Aircraft”),
or state or federal forfeiture laws.



(Ord. 2007-13, § 1, 9-10-2007; Ord. 2008-14, § 1, 3-24-2008)



Secs. 6-7–6-20.  Reserved:



ARTICLE II.  VEHICLE LICENSES1



1  65 ILCS 5/8-11-4; 625 ILCS 5/2-121.



Sec. 6-21.  Required:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any vehicle, residing
within the village, to use, or to cause or permit any of his or her agents,
employees, lessees, licensees or bailees to use, any vehicle owned by the
owner referred to in this section, upon the public ways of the village,
unless such vehicle is licensed as provided in this article.  This
subsection shall also apply to every vehicle which has its situs or base in
the village.



   (b)   No owner of a vehicle described in subsection (a) of this
section shall be exempt from the operation of this section, or released from
the payment of the license fee required, by reason of the registering of an
automobile or other vehicle in another state or sovereignty beyond the
jurisdiction of the state. If such automobile or other vehicle is sited or
based in the village it shall be subject to the provisions of this section,
even though it has been registered in some other jurisdiction outside of the
village or state.



   (c)   For purposes of this article, a vehicle shall be deemed to
have it situs or base in the village if it has been housed in the village
over fifty percent (50%) of the time for a period of at least sixty (60) days.



   (d)   All vehicles housed, stored or kept in the village must
display a valid vehicle license from either the village of Justice or from
the municipality where the vehicle is registered, if such municipality issues
vehicle licenses. Second division vehicles, as defined by the Illinois
vehicle code2, legally licensed or registered elsewhere must display a
parking permit in order to be parked or stored for more than twenty-four (24)
hours in the village of Justice unless such vehicle is being kept for the
purpose of executing a current repair order. A village of Justice vehicle
sticker may be issued in place of a parking permit. Parking permit fees shall
be at a rate equal to the regular rate of a village vehicle sticker for each
class of second division vehicle.



   (e)   No person shall house, store or keep any vehicle in the
village unless the vehicle is duly licensed as prescribed herein, with a
license displayed from either the village of Justice or from the municipality
where the vehicle is registered.



(Code 1972, § 9-2-1; Ord. 95-23, § 1, 10-9-1995; Ord. 99-11, § 2,
4-12-1999; Ord. 2000-31, § 4, 7-10-2000; Ord. 2012-01, § 2, 1-9-2012)



2  625 ILCS 5/1-217.



Sec. 6-22.  Application; Issuance; Transfer:



   (a)   Licenses shall be available beginning May 1 of each year for
the next license term, with licenses to be effective from July 1 of the
current year to June 30 of the following year. Any person required by this
article to obtain a license for any vehicle shall file an application
therefor with the village upon a form provided by the village, setting forth
the name and address of the applicant, the description of the vehicle, and
such information as may be prescribed. Such license shall be issued upon the
payment to the village  by the applicant of a license fee as hereinafter
provided.



   (b)   The village shall issue, or cause to be issued, a license
authorizing the use or storage of such vehicle within the village until the
expiration of such license. No vehicle license shall be transferable to
another vehicle. Any new vehicle shall require a new vehicle license at a
transfer fee of five dollars ($5.00), if a valid license has already been
purchased. Owners of vehicles who move into the village or relocate their
vehicle so the vehicle is sited or based in the village shall have thirty
(30) days to obtain a village vehicle license. New residents who have a valid
municipal or county vehicle license from another jurisdiction must apply for
a transfer to a village vehicle license within thirty (30) days. The transfer
fee shall be five dollars ($5.00).



(Code 1972, § 9-2-2; Ord. 74-4, 2-7-1974; Ord. 94-10, § 2, 6-14-1994; Ord.
99-11, § 3, 4-12-1999; Ord. 2009-15, § 31, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 6-23.  License Fee; Term:



   (a)   Annual License Fees: Annual license fees for vehicles,
passenger automobiles, motorcycles, trucks and trailers of various
classifications shall be as follows:



 

Type Of Vehicle
 
Annual License Fee


Passenger automobiles, including ambulances, hearses and recreational
vehicles which can be driven (RV plates)
 
$ 35.00


Motor bicycles, motor tricycles or motorcycles
 
20.00


Senior citizens age 62 or over passenger automobile, class B truck,
recreational vehicles which can be driven (RV plates)
 
10.00


Handicapped vehicles (with plates)
 
5.00


Vehicles with antique plates
 
10.00


Disabled veterans, municipally owned vehicles and vehicles with CV plates
 
No fee



 



   Motor trucks, tractor/semitrailer units and motorbuses:



 

Class
 
Annual License Fee


Class B
 
$ 40.00


Class D
 
60.00


Class F
 
65.00


Class H
 
75.00


Buses
 
85.00


All other classifications
 
170.00



 



   Trailers: (nonmotorized vehicles):



 

Class
 
Annual License Fee


TB, RT over 3,000 lbs.
 
$ 20.00


TC-TE
 
35.00


Above TE
 
170.00



 



   (b)   Terms Of Licenses: All licenses issued under the provisions of
this section for motorcycles, motor bicycles and motor tricycles shall be for
a calendar year and shall begin January 1 and expire December 31 following
their issuance. Effective January 1, 2000, licenses issued for motorcycles,
motor bicycles, and motor tricycles shall be effective for eighteen (18)
months, until June 30, 2001, the fee for which will be one hundred fifty
percent (150%) of the regular annual fee. Effective July 1, 2000, the term of
licenses for motorcycles, motor bicycles and motor tricycles shall be from
July 1 and expire on June 30, following their issuance. All licenses issued
under the provisions of this section for trucks, passenger cars and
recreational vehicles and trailers shall be for one year that shall begin
July 1 and expire June 30 following their issuance.



   (c)   Late Registration Penalty: An additional fee in an amount
equal to the cost of the annual license fee shall be charged as a late
registration penalty and shall be collected by the village clerk from any
applicant applying for a license on or after July 1 of the current year.



   (d)   Rates On Licenses Purchased After January 1: Any person
applying for a vehicle after January 1 of each year for a vehicle which was
not required to be licensed by the village prior to January 1 shall be
charged one-half (1/2) the rate of the annual license.



(Code 1972, § 9-2-3; Ord. 78-20, 5-4-1978; Ord. 84-3, 1-19-1984; Ord. 88-6,
§ 1, 3-28-1988; Ord. 91-15, §§ 1-3, 6-24-1991; Ord. 93-7, § 1, 3-22-1993;
Ord. 94-10, § 1, 6-14-1994; Ord. 97-8, § 1, 3-24-1997, eff. 7-31-1997; Ord.
97-16, §§ 1-3, 5-27-1997; Ord. 98-20, § 1, 5-26-1998; Ord. 99-11, § 4,
4-12-1999; Ord. 99-38, § 1, 11-8-1999; Ord. 2009-15, § 31, 6-22-2009; Ord.
2012-01, § 3, 1-9-2012)



Sec. 6-24.  Tags, Stickers On Vehicles:



   Upon the issuance of a license under this article, the village shall
deliver to the applicant a gummed tag or sticker upon which shall appear the
word “Justice” and a number identical with the number of such license and
the year for which such license is issued. It shall be the duty of the
applicant to affix such gummed tag or sticker upon the lower passenger side
corner of the windshield of the motor vehicle or, if there is no windshield,
then in a conspicuous place upon the vehicle where it can be readily seen. It
shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle, although duly licensed, to be used
upon the streets, avenues or alleys of the village or to be kept, housed or
stored anywhere in the village unless such tag or sticker is attached
thereto. However, a resident owner shall not be required to display on his or
her vehicle the gummed tag or sticker issued by the village if his or her
vehicle is displaying the plate or tag or license number issued by the place
wherein the vehicle has its situs or base.



(Code 1972, § 9-2-4; Ord. 99-11, § 5, 4-12-1999; Ord. 2009-15, § 31,
6-22-2009)



Sec. 6-25.  Sale Or Transfer Of Vehicle:



   Immediately upon the sale or transfer of any vehicle which has been
licensed as required by this code prior to its date of sale or transfer, the
license tag or sticker shall be removed from the vehicle, and the license
previously issued for that vehicle shall cease to apply to the motor vehicle
from that date. Upon a showing to the village that the tag or sticker has
been removed from any sold or transferred vehicle, the village may issue, for
a fee of five dollars ($5.00), a new tag bearing a new number, which shall
apply to and be assigned to any other vehicle of the same class owned by the
transferor.



(Code 1969, Ch. 20, Art. 2; Code 1972, §9-2-5; Ord. 99-11, § 6, 4-12-1999;
Ord. 2009-15, § 31, 6-22-2009)



Secs. 6-26-6-40.  Reserved:



ARTICLE III.  ABANDONED VEHICLES1,2 1



1  See § 3-271 et seq., § 5-2, and § 9-171 et seq., of this Code.



2  65 ILCS 5/11-40-3; 415 ILCS 105/7; 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.



Sec. 6-41.  Definitions3:



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Abandoned Vehicle: All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of
disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition;
or any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for
seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.



   Antique Vehicle: A motor vehicle that is more than twenty-five (25)
years of age or a bona fide replica thereof and which is driven on the
highways only going to and returning from an antique auto show or an
exhibition, or for servicing or demonstration, or a fire-fighting vehicle
more than twenty (20) years old which is not used as fire-fighting equipment
but is used only for the purpose of exhibition or demonstration.



   Highway: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or located on public school property.



(Code 1972, § 6-7-1; Ord. 2009-29, § 4, 11-23-2009)



3  625 ILCS 5/4-100.



Sec. 6-42.  Prohibitions:



   The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof
on any highway in the village is unlawful and subject to penalties as set
forth in section 1-7 of this code. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or
other vehicle or any part thereof on private or public property, other than a
highway, in view of the general public, anywhere in the village is unlawful
except on property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle. A motor
vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property
may be authorized for removal by or upon the order of the chief of police of
the village, after a waiting period of seven (7) days or more.



(Code 1972, § 6-7-2)



Sec. 6-43.  Notice To Police; Removal By Tow Service:



   When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in this
village, not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify
the village police department. Upon receipt of such notification, the chief
of the police department shall authorize a towing service to remove and take
possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle. The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its
contents, maintain a record of the tow as set forth in section 6-45 of this
article for the police department until the vehicle is claimed by the owner
or any other person legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is
disposed of as provided in this article.



(Code 1972, § 6-7-3)



Sec. 6-44.  Removal From Highway:



   (a)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a
highway in the village ten (10) hours or more, its removal by a towing
service may be authorized by order of the chief of the police department of
the village.



   (b)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially
dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard
because of its position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance
is causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway or
private property adjacent  to the highway by a towing service may be
authorized by order of the chief of the police department.



   (c)   A vehicle may be removed from public or private property as
provided in section 4-203(e) of the Illinois Vehicle Code1, as amended.



(Code 1972, § 6-7-4)



1  625 ILCS 5/4-203, 5/4-204.



Sec. 6-45.  Police Department Records1,2:



   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away as
provided in this Article, the police department shall keep and maintain a
record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, year of manufacture,
manufacturer’s trade name, manufacturer’s series name, body style,
vehicle identification number, license plate year and number, and
registration sticker year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record
shall also include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location
towed to, reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.



(Code 1972, § 6-7-5)



1  625 ILCS 5/4-203, 5/4-204.



2  See Ch. 9 of this Code.



Sec. 6-46.  Record Search To Ascertain Identity Of Owner1:



   (a)   When the Village Police Department does not know the identity
of the registered owner, lien holder or other legally entitled person, it
will cause the motor vehicle registration records of the State to be searched
by a directed communication to the Secretary of State for the purpose of
obtaining the required ownership information.



   (b)   The Police Department will cause the stolen motor vehicle
files of the State police to be searched by a directed communication to the
State police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the State
police files are searched with negative results, the information contained in
the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the
State police. The information determined from these record searches will be
used by the Police Department in sending a notification by certified mail to
the registered owner, lien holder and other legally entitled persons advising
where the vehicle is held, requesting that a disposition be made and setting
forth public sale information. The notification shall comply with the
requirements of section 4-205 of the Illinois Vehicle Code1, as amended.



(Code 1972, § 6-7-6)



1  625 ILCS 5/4-203, 5/4-204.



Sec. 6-47.  Cases Referred To State Police1:



   When the registered owner, lien holder or other person legally entitled
to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified
from the registration files of this State or from the registration files of a
foreign state, if applicable, the Police Department shall notify the State
police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained
by the State police will be immediately forwarded to the Police Department
for notification purposes as set forth in Section 6-46 of this Article.



(Code 1972, § 6-7-7)



1  625 ILCS 5/4-203, 5/4-204.



Sec. 6-48.  Reclaiming Vehicle Prior To Sale1:



   Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale
or disposed of as provided in Section 6-49 of this Article, the owner, lien
holder or other person legally entitled to its possession may reclaim the
vehicle by presenting to the Police Department proof of ownership or proof of
the right to possession of the vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the
owner, lien holder or other person under this Section until all towing and
storage charges have been paid.



(Code 1972, § 6-7-8)



1  625 ILCS 5/4-203, 5/4-204.



Sec. 6-49.  Sale At Public Auction:



   When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle, seven (7) years of age or newer, remains unclaimed by the registered
owner, lien holder or other person legally entitled to its possession for a
period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given as provided in this
Article, the Police Department shall cause the vehicle to be sold at public
auction to the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall
be given pursuant to section 5/4-208 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as
amended1.



(Code 1972, § 6-7-9)



1  625 ILCS 5/4-208, 5/4-209.



Sec. 6-50.  Disposal1:



   (a)   When the identity of the registered owner, lien holder or
other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or
unclaimed vehicle of seven (7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by
any means provided for in this Article, the vehicle may be sold as provided
in Section 6-49 of this Article or disposed of in the manner authorized by
this Chapter without notice to any person whose identity cannot be determined.



   (b)   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age
is impounded as specified by this Article, it will be kept in custody for a
minimum of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining ownership, the
contacting of the registered owner by the United States mail, public service
or in person for a determination of disposition, and an examination of the
State police stolen vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the
expiration of the ten (10) day period, without the benefit of disposition
information being received from the registered owner or the lien holder, the
Chief of Police will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk.



   (c)   A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an antique
vehicle is excluded from this Section.



(Code 1972, § 6-7-10)



1  625 ILCS 5/4-208, 5/4-209.



Sec. 6-51.  Report Of Sale, Disposal:



   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the Police
Department is reclaimed by the registered owner, lien holder or other legally
entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise
disposed of as provided in this Article, a report of the transaction will be
maintained by the Police Department for a period of one year from the date of
the sale or disposal.



(Code 1972, § 6-7-11)



Sec. 6-52.  Proceeds Of Sale:



   When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the Village is
authorized to be towed away by the Chief of Police and disposed of as set
forth in this Article, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after
the deduction of towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in
the Treasury of the Village.



(Code 1972, § 6-7-12)



Sec. 6-53.  Liability For Damages:



   Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall
not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the
registered owner, former registered owner or his legal representative, lien
holder or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor
vehicle or other vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed
of as provided by this Article.



(Code 1972, § 6-7-13)



Sec. 6-54.  Restrictions On Purchasers:



   No police officer, Village official or Village employee or any
immediate members of their families or any towing service owner, operator or
employee or immediate members of their families shall be eligible to purchase
or acquire any vehicle sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with the
terms of this Article.



(Ord. 70-7, 7-16-1970; Code 1972, § 6-7-14)



Sec. 6-55.  Penalty:



   Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be fined not
more than twenty five dollars ($25.00).



(Ord. 91-17, § 1, 6-24-1991)



Secs. 6-56-6-59.  Reserved:



ARTICLE IV.  DUI EMERGENCY RESPONSE FEES1 2



1  See also section 4-30.1 of this code.



Sec. 6-60.  DUI Emergency Response Fees:



   The village president and board of trustees will determine an
established rate of costs and charges for the response of emergency vehicles
and personnel in regard to DUI cases. The cost and charges will be changed
from time to time as needed by recommendation of the police chief and fire
chief.



   The costs and charges will include:



      (1)    Each on scene police officer and squad car.



      (2)    Each fire department response with a fire report.



      (3)    Each fire department ambulance.



      (4)    Each fire department unit for rescue or extrication.



      (5)    Each additional unit of fire department equipment or
vehicle required (i.e., command vehicle, pumper, wash down, etc.).



(Ord. 91-17, § 1, 6-24-1991; Ord. 96-9, § 1, 3-11-1996)



Secs. 6-61-6-70.  Reserved:



ARTICLE V.  ADJUDICATION OF VEHICULAR REGULATION VIOLATIONS



Sec. 6-71.  Purpose:



   (a)   Scope: The stated purpose of this article is to provide a fair
and efficient enforcement of municipal vehicular standing, parking, and
condition of vehicle regulation violation(s) and other municipal regulation
violation(s) as may be allowed by law, through an administrative adjudication
of violation(s) of municipal ordinances regulating the standing, parking and
condition of vehicles within the geographic boundaries of this municipality
and a schedule of uniform fines and penalties and authority and procedures
for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.



   (b)   Definition: For purposes of this article "compliance
violation" means a violation of a municipal regulation governing the
condition or use of equipment on a vehicle or governing the display of a
municipal vehicle license.



(Ord. 94-16, 8-2-1994)



Sec. 6-72.  Administrative Composition:



   The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing,
parking, and compliance, regulation violation(s) shall provide for a traffic
compliance administrator, hearing officer, computer operator/system
coordinator and hearing room personnel (deputy), with the power, authority
and limitations as are hereinafter set forth:



      (1)    Traffic Compliance Administrator: The traffic
compliance administrator shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and
directed to:



         a.   Operate and manage the system of administrative
adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation
violation(s).



         b.    Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking,
and compliance violation notices and other notices as may be required under
this article or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of
this article.



         c.    Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties
assessed after a final determination of vehicular standing, parking or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability. Such money and penalties shall
be turned over to the village.



         d.    Conduct hearings, as a hearing officer with the
same power and authority as is hereinafter set forth, during the absence of
the appointed hearing officer.



         e.    Certify copies of final determination(s) of
standing, parking and compliance regulation violation(s) liability and
factual report(s) verifying that the final determination of standing, parking
and compliance regulation violation(s) liability was issued in accordance
with this article and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3.



         f.    Certify reports to the secretary of state
concerning initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with
the provisions of this article, hereinafter set forth, and those of 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5.



         g.    Review final determination(s) of vehicular
standing, parking and compliance regulation violation(s) liability, validity
of notices of impending impoundment or validity of notice of impending
driver's license suspension, in an administrative review capacity in
accordance with the provisions of this article hereinafter set forth.



         h.    Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably
required to operate and maintain the administrative adjudication system
hereby created.



         i.    Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing
complaints in the circuit court or selecting or appointing an individual or
agency to act on behalf of this municipality in filing complaints seeking
judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and pursuit of all postjudgment
remedies available by current law.



         j.    Utilize the agency or tow firm designated by the
village board and/or chief of police to tow and impound vehicles in
accordance with the provisions of this article.



      (2)    Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall be empowered
and is hereby authorized and directed to:



         a.    Preside over the administrative hearings,
established herein, as the adjudicator.



         b.    Administer oaths.



         c.    Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of
witnesses and production of relevant papers or documentation.



         d.    Assess fines and penalties for the violation of
vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s) as are
established in section 6-79 of this article.



         e.    Make final determination of:



            1.    Vehicular standing, parking and compliance
regulation violation(s) liability.



            2.    Validity of notice of impending impoundment.



            3.    Validity of notice of impending driver's
license suspension in accordance with the provisions of this article,
hereinafter set forth.



         f.    Provide for the accurate recordation of the
administrative adjudication hearing(s).



      (3)    System Coordinator/Computer Operator: The system
coordinator/computer operator is hereby authorized and directed to operate
and maintain the computer program(s) for the administrative adjudication
system hereby created, on a day to day basis, including, but not limited to:



         a.    Input of violation notice information.



         b.    Hearing date(s) and notice dates.



         c.    Fine and penalty assessments and payment(s) and
immediately turn over all monies to the village collector.



         d.    Issue payment receipts.



         e.    Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates, final
determination of liability, notice of impending impoundment and notice of
impending driver's license suspension, as directed by the traffic compliance
administrator in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.



         f.    Keep accurate records of appearances and
nonappearances at administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties
assessed and paid.



      (4)    Hearing Room Personnel: The hearing room personnel are
hereby authorized and directed to:



         a.    Maintain hearing room decorum.



         b.    Have and execute authority as is granted to
courtroom deputies of the circuit court.



         c.    Perform such other duties or acts as may
reasonably be required and as directed by the hearing officer or traffic
compliance administrator.



         d.    This position is limited to off duty, full time,
part time or auxiliary police officers.



      (5)    Appointments: The village president, with the advice
and consent of the village board, is hereby authorized to appoint persons to
hold the positions above set forth. One person may hold and fulfill the
requirements of one or more of the above stated positions.



      (6)    Compensation: Compensation to be paid for each of the
above stated positions shall be in accordance with section 2-34 of this code.



(Ord. 94-16, 8-2-1994; Ord. 2009-14, § 5, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 6-73.  Procedure:



   The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing,
parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) shall be in accordance with
the following procedures and final determination(s) of vehicular standing,
parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) liability, validity of notice
of impending impoundment, validity of notice of impending driver's license
suspension, impoundment of vehicle and collections shall be made only in
accordance with the provisions set forth below:



      (1)    Violation Notice: Vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s) ("violation notice"(s)) shall be
issued by the person(s) authorized herein and shall contain information and
shall be served, certified and have evidentiary admissibility as is
hereinafter set forth.



      (2)    Authorization: All full time, part time, auxiliary
police and community service officers, as well as other specifically
appointed individuals shall have the authority to issue violation(s) notices.



      (3)    Detection Of Violations: Any individual authorized
hereby to issue violation(s) notices and who detects a violation of any
section of any applicable municipal ordinance, shall issue a notice of
violation thereof and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth.



      (4)    Violation Notice: The vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violation notice shall contain, but shall not be
limited to, the following information:



         a.    The date, time and place of the violation (date of
issuance).



         b.    The particular vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violated.



         c.    Vehicle make and State registration number.



         d.    The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for
late payment.



         e.    The signature and identification number of the
person issuing the notice.



         f.    A section entitled "Request for Hearing" which
shall clearly set forth that the registered owner or lessee may appear at the
initial administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation
notice on the date and at the time and place as specified in the violation
notice by:



            1.    Checking or placing a mark in a space
provided and clearly identified, "Request for Hearing".



            2.    Placing his/her name and current address in
the place provided.



            3.    Signing his/her name in the appropriate
indicated place.



            4.    Filing the violation notice with the
"Request for Hearing" portion fully completed; with the Traffic Compliance
Administrator postmarked by the twenty fifth of the month, if the violation
notice was issued between the first through the fifteenth day of the month;
or postmarked by the tenth of the month, if the violation notice was issued
between the sixteenth and the end of the prior month. The request shall be
deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.



         g.    The date, time and place of an administrative
hearing at which the violation may be contested on its merits.



         h.    That payment of the indicated fine and any late
payment penalty shall operate as a final disposition of the violation.



         i.    A Section entitled, "Non-Resident Request for
Hearing - Non-Appearance", which clearly sets forth that a nonresident
registered owner or lessee may appear at the initial administrative hearing
to contest the validity of the violation notice without personally appearing
by:



            1.    Checking or placing a mark in a space
provided and clearly identified, "Non-Resident Request for Hearing -
Nonappearance".



            2.    Placing his/her name and current address in
the place provided.



            3.    Signing his/her name in the appropriate
indicated place.



            4.    Filing the violation notice with the
"Non-Resident Request for Hearing" portion fully completed, with the Traffic
Compliance Administrator postmarked by the twenty fifth of the month, if the
violation notice was issued between the first through the fifteenth day of
the month; or postmarked by the tenth of the month, if the violation notice
was issued between the sixteenth and the end of the prior month. The request
shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.



            5.    Filing a notarized statement of facts
specifying the grounds for challenging the violation notice which must be
filed with the Traffic Compliance Administrator postmarked by the twenty
fifth of the month, if the violation notice was issued between the first
through the fifteenth day of the month; or postmarked by the tenth of the
month, if the violation notice was issued between the sixteenth and the end
of the prior month. The request shall be deemed filed, if postmarked by the
due dates herein specified.



            6.    A clearly marked statement that execution of
the nonresident request for hearing is a waiver of the nonresident's right to
a personal appearance and that the adjudication will be made based upon the
notarized statement of facts submitted by the nonresident and the facts
contained in the violation(s) notice(s).



      (5)    Service. Service of the violation(s) notice(s) shall be
made by the person issuing such notice by:



         a.    Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice
to an unlawfully standing or parked vehicle, or



         b.    Handing the notice to the registered owner,
operator or lessee of the vehicle, if present.



      (6)    Notice certified. The correctness of facts contained in
the vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s)
notice(s) shall be certified by the person issuing said notice by:



         a.    Signing his/her name to the notice(s) at the time
of service, or



         b.    In the case of a notice produced by a computer
device, by signing a single certificate, to be kept by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the
device while under his/her control.



      (7)    Record kept. The original or a facsimile of the
violation(s) notice(s) shall be retained by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator and kept as a record in the ordinary course of business.



      (8)    Prima facie evidence of correctness. Any violation(s)
notice(s) issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the
notice, shall be prima facia correct and shall be prima facia evidence of the
correctness of the facts shown on the notice.



      (9)    Admissibility. The violation(s) notice(s) or a copy(s)
shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding.



(Ord. No. 94-16, 8-2-94)



Sec. 6-74.  Administrative hearings.



   An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) on its merits:



      (1)    Right to hearing. Shall be granted to the registered
owner or operator of the cited vehicle, pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-208.3 or the lessee of the cited vehicle, pursuant to 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306, incorporated herein by reference.



      (2)    Date. Hearing dates shall be at the date, time and
place as is set forth in the violation notice issued and served, or such
additional notices issued in accordance with this Article. Violators shall be
given no less than three (3) opportunities to appear, and failure to appear
by the third scheduled hearing date will result in a final determination of
liability as hereinafter set forth.



      (3)    Recorded. Shall be tape recorded.



      (4)    Decision. Shall culminate in a determination of
liability or nonliability, made by the Hearing Officer, who shall consider
testimony and other evidence without the application of the formal or
technical rules of evidence. The Hearing Officer shall, upon a determination
of liability, assess fines and penalties in accordance with Section 6-79
hereof.



      (5)    Representation by attorney. Persons appearing to
contest the alleged standing, parking, or compliance violation on its merit
may be represented by counsel at their own expense.



      (6)    Review. The final determination of any matter which may
be decided by the Hearing Officer may be reviewed as is hereinafter set forth.



(Ord. No. 94-16, 8-2-94)



Sec. 6-75.  Additional notices.



   Upon failure of the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle to
appear at the administrative hearing indicated in the vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), or upon final
determination of violation liability, the Traffic Compliance Administrator
shall send or cause to be sent additional notices which:



      (1)    Shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee of the
cited vehicle at the address as is recorded with the Secretary of State.



      (2)    Shall be sent to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the
address last known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the
lease.



      (3)    Shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.



      (4)    Service of additional notices sent in accordance
herewith shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States
mail.



      (5)    The additional notices sent in accordance herewith
shall be in the following sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the
following information:



         a.    Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee
of the cited vehicle to appear at the hearing set forth in the vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s),
additional notice(s) shall be sent, as above set forth, and shall contain,
but not be limited to the following information:



            1.    Date and location of violation cited in the
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s).



            2.    Particular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violated.



            3.    Vehicle make and State registration.



            4.    Fine and any penalty that may be assessed
for late payment.



            5.    Notice to the registered owner or lessee of
their current status, other than paid in full.



            6.    Date, time and place of the administrative
hearing at which the alleged violation may be contested on its merits.



            7.    Statement that failure to either pay fine
and any applicable penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits
on the date and at the time and place specified, will result in a final
determination of vehicle standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s) liability for the cited violation in the amount of the fine and
penalty indicated.



            8.    Statement that upon the occurrence of a
final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
violation(s) liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure
to exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any
unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the Municipality.



         b.    A notice of final determination of vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall be
sent following an appearance by the violator and a determination of
liability, or the failure to appear by the violator by the third and final
hearing date upon conclusion of any administrative and/or judicial review, as
is hereinafter set forth, and the notice shall contain but not be limited to
the following information and warnings:



            1.    A statement that the unpaid fine and any
penalty assessed is a debt due and owing the Municipality.



            2.    A warning that failure to pay the fine and
any penalty due and owing the Municipality within the time specified may
result in the Municipality's filing a complaint in the Circuit Court to have
the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a judgement in accordance with 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3(f), incorporated herein by reference.



            3.    A warning that the vehicle owned by the
person and located within the Municipality may be impounded for failure to
pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violations.



            4.    A warning that the person's drivers license
may be suspended for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more
vehicular standing or parking violations under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-306.5, incorporated herein by reference.



         c.    A notice of impending suspension of a person's
drivers license shall be sent to any person determined to be liable for the
payment of any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more
vehicular standing or parking regulation violation(s):



            1.    The notice shall state that the failure to
pay the fine or penalty owing within forty five (45) days of the date of the
notice will result in the Municipality notifying the Secretary of State that
the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5 incorporated herein by reference.



            2.    The notice of impending driver's license
suspension shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address
recorded with the Secretary of State.



(Ord. No. 94-16, 8-2-94)



Sec. 6-76.  Final determination of liability.



   A final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation(s) liability shall:



      (1)    Occur following the failure to pay the total assessed
fine or penalty after the Hearing Officer's determination of vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability and the
exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures
hereinafter set forth, or



      (2)    Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by
the third and final administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged
violation(s) on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior
served or mailed notice, the hearing officer’s determination of vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall
become final:



         a.   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that
determination, or



         b.   Upon the expiration of the period for filing
petition without a filing having been made.



(Ord. No. 94-16, 8-2-94)



Sec. 6-77.  Administrative Review:



   A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) liability may be filed by a person
owing an unpaid fine or penalty in the manner and subject to the restrictions
and grounds hereinafter set forth:



      (1)   A written petition to set aside a determination of
liability must be filed in the office of the traffic compliance administrator
within, but not later than, fourteen (14) days from the date the
determination of liability is made.



      (2)   The traffic compliance administrator shall act upon the
petition(s) timely filed and render a decision thereon within fourteen (14)
days of the date filed.



      (3)   The grounds for setting aside a determination of
liability shall be limited to the following:



         a.   The person against whom the determination of
liability is made was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the
date the vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s)
notice(s) was issued.



         b.   The person’s having paid the fine or penalty
prior to the determination of liability for the violation(s) in question.



         c.   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new
date for a hearing.



      (4)   Should the determination of liability be set aside, the
traffic compliance administrator shall:



         a.   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case
may be, that the determination of liability has been set aside.



         b.   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case
may be, of a date, time and place for a hearing on the merits of the
violation for which determination of liability has been set aside.



         c.   Notice of setting aside of the determination of
liability and the notice of the hearing date shall be by first class mail,
postage prepaid to the address set forth on the petition to set aside the
determination of liability.



         d.   Service of the notice(s) shall be complete on the
date the notice(s) is deposited in the United States mail.



(Ord. No. 94-16, 8-2-94)



Sec. 6-78.  Nonresident Procedures:



   Nonresidents of this municipality who have been served vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), in
accordance with this article, may contest the alleged violation on its
merits, as could a resident, or may contest the validity without personally
appearing at an administrative hearing by:



      (1)   Completing, in full, the “non-resident request for
hearing” section of the violation notice, served upon him or her pursuant
to this article.



      (2)   Signing the nonresident request for hearing in the space
specified in the violation notice, and acknowledging that his or her personal
appearance is waived and submitting to an adjudication based upon the
notarized statement filed by him or her and the facts contained in the
violation notice.



      (3)   Filing the violation notice with the “request for
hearing” section fully completed with the traffic compliance administrator
postmarked by the twenty fifth of the month, if the violation notice was
issued between the first through the fifteenth day of the month; or
postmarked by the tenth of the month, if the violation notice was issued
between the sixteenth and the end of the prior month. The request shall be
deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator.



      (4)   Filing a notarized a statement of facts specifying the
grounds for challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the
traffic compliance administrator postmarked by the twenty fifth of the month,
if the violation notice was issued between the first through the fifteenth
day of the month; or postmarked by the tenth of the month, if the violation
notice was issued between the sixteenth and the end of the prior month. The
request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance
administrator. The acceptance of a nonresident request for hearing after the
due date or with cause, at the discretion of the traffic compliance
administrator, be accepted for hearing consideration and decision.



      (5)   The hearing officer shall make an adjudication based
upon the facts set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the
nonresident as is contained in the violation notice.



      (6)   Notice of the determination of the hearing officer shall
be served upon the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of
facts submitted.



      (7)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the
notice is placed in the United States mail.



      (8)   All other provisions of this article shall apply equally
to nonresidents of this municipality.



(Ord. No. 94-16, 8-2-94)



Sec. 6-79.  Schedule Of Fines/Penalties:



   (a)   The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the
violation of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s) shall be as follows:



   FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE



 


STEP

 
FINE SCHEDULE
 
GENERAL FINE AMOUNT
 
HANDICAPPED FINE AMOUNT
(Violation of Section 11-1301.3(a) of the Vehicle Code)


1
 
Upon service of a “violation notice” issued and paid prior to the
commencement of the first hearing date, the fine amount will be:
 

$50.00

 

$250.00



2
 
Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in step #1, prior to the first
hearing date, the fine amount, if paid prior to the second hearing date will
be:
 

$100.00

 

$300.00



3
 
Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in step #2, prior to the
second hearing date, the fine amount, if paid on the second hearing date or
prior to the third hearing date will be:
 

$175.00

 

$325.00



4
 
Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in step #3, prior to the third
hearing date, the fine amount, if paid on the third hearing date or upon the
finding of liability for the violation, or failure to appear at the third
hearing, will be:
 

$250.00

 

$350.00




 



   (b)   The fines and penalties herein set forth shall be uniformly
applied for each violation of any applicable municipal ordinance.



   (c)   The municipality adopts by reference all current and future
local standing, parking or condition of vehicle ordinances, and those
provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes governing the standing, parking,
or condition of vehicles, for its enforcement and adjudication within the
geographical boundaries of the municipality and in those areas subject to
off-street parking agreements.



   (d)   Any fine or penalty amount imposed in accordance with the
schedule in subsection (a) of this section, by a hearing officer upon a
determination of liability for violation of vehicle regulations pursuant to
the requirements of section 6-74 of this article, shall include an additional
administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each violation that is
a subject of the hearing to reimburse the village for the costs of the
hearing.



(Ord. 94-16, 8-2-1994; Ord. 97-20, § 1, 6-9-1997; Ord. 97-36, § 1,
11-10-1997; Ord. 2009-17, §§ 3, 4, 6-22-2009; Ord. 2010-27, § 2,
12-14-2010)



Sec. 6-80.  Certified Report And Contesting Certified Report:



   (a)   Upon a failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing
the village after the exhaustion of administrative procedures set forth
herein for ten (10) or more vehicular parking regulation violations, the
traffic compliance administrator shall make a certified report to the
Secretary of State stating that the owner of a registered vehicle has failed
to pay any fine or penalty due and owing the village as a result of ten (10)
or more violations of municipal vehicular standing or parking regulations and
thereby cause the suspension of that person’s driver’s license.



   (b)   The traffic compliance administrator shall take no further
action unless and until the fines and penalties due and owing the village are
paid or upon determination that the inclusion of the person’s name on the
certified report was in error. At such time, the traffic compliance
administrator shall submit to the Secretary of State a notification which
shall result in the halting of a driver’s license suspension proceedings.
The person named therein shall receive a certified copy of such notification
upon request and at no charge.



   (c)   Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report by
completing a form provided by the office of the traffic compliance
administrator. The form shall specify the grounds on which such challenge is
based. Grounds for challenge shall be limited to the following:



      (1)   The person was neither the owner nor the lessee of the
vehicle so receiving ten (10) or more violation notices on the date or dates
such notices were issued; or



      (2)   The person has paid the fine and/or penalty for the ten
(10) or more violations indicated on the certified report.



   (d)    The traffic compliance administrator shall render a
determination within fourteen (14) business days of receipt of the objection
form and shall notify the objector of the determination.



(Ord. 94-16, 8-2-1994)



Sec. 6-81.  Immobilization/Towing And Impoundment:



   (a)   Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined
to be liable for three (3) or more vehicular standing, parking, compliance
regulation or automated traffic law violation(s), for which the fines or
penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be immobilized or towed and impounded
if:



      (1)   The traffic compliance administrator has determined that
a person has been determined to be liable for three (3) or more vehicular
standing, parking, compliance regulation or automated traffic law
violation(s), the fines or penalties for which remain unpaid.



      (2)   The person determined to be liable for three (3) or more
violations is the registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the
municipality geographical boundaries.



      (3)   A notice of impending vehicle immobilization and right
to challenge the validity of said notice by disproving liability for the
unpaid final determinations of parking, standing, compliance or automated
traffic law liability set forth on the notice has been sent to the registered
owner of the motor vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the
municipality which contains, but shall not be limited to, the following:



         a.   A final determination has been made on three (3) or
more vehicular standing, parking, compliance regulation or automated traffic
law violations, the fines and penalties of which remain unpaid.



         b.   A listing of the violations for which the person
has been determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:



            1.   The vehicular standing, parking, compliance
regulation or automated traffic law violation notice number.



            2.   Date of issuance.



            3.   Total amount of fines and penalties assessed.



         c.   The motor vehicle(s) owned by the person and
located within the municipality is subject to immobilization and/or towing
and impoundment if the fines and penalties are not paid within fourteen (14)
days of the date of the notice.



         d.   The registered owner may contest the validity of
the notice by fully completing and signing the request for hearing portion of
one notice and by filing the request for hearing with the traffic compliance
administrator within, but not later than, fourteen (14) days of the date of
the notice. The request for hearing shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the
traffic compliance administrator.



      (4)   The motor vehicle(s) of the registered owner to whom
notice is sent has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as
specified in the notice, and no timely request for hearing has been filed
with the traffic compliance administrator to contest the validity of the
notice.



      (5)   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest
the validity of the notice of impending immobilization or towing and
impoundment, the traffic compliance administrator shall schedule an
administrative hearing to contest the validity of said notice, by disproving
liability for the unpaid final determinations of parking, standing,
compliance or automated traffic law violation liability listed on the notice,
on the next available hearing date, but in no case shall the hearing be
scheduled later than sixty (60) days after the request for hearing is filed.



         a.   The traffic compliance administrator shall serve
notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner.



         b.   Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage
prepaid, to the address as is set forth on the request for hearing.



         c.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date
it is placed in the United States mail.



   (b)   The registered owner of a vehicle(s) immobilized or towed and
impounded under this section shall have the right to an administrative
hearing to be held at the next regularly scheduled administrative court
session without the requirement of payment of outstanding fines and penalties
for which final determination has been made.



      (1)   The traffic compliance administrator shall serve a post-
immobilization and post-towing notice upon the registered owner of a vehicle
immobilized or towed and impounded under this section which notice shall
advise the registered owner of the vehicle of the right to a hearing to
challenge the validity of the immobilization or impoundment and which shall
contain, but not be limited to, the following information:



         a.   Date of immobilization or towing and date of
impoundment.



         b.   Location of vehicle.



         c.   That the vehicle was immobilized under this section
for nonpayment of fines or penalties assessed for the violation of three (3)
or more violations of vehicular standing, parking,  compliance or automated
traffic law regulation(s) for which the registered owner has been determined
liable and notified of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment.



         d.   Date that the notice of impending immobilization or
towing and impoundment was issued.



         e.   That the registered owner may contest the validity
of the immobilization or towing and impoundment by completing and signing the
request for hearing portion of the notice and filing the request for hearing
with the traffic compliance administrator within, but not later than,
fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice which shall be deemed filed upon
receipt by the traffic compliance administrator.



      (2)   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest
the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment, the traffic
compliance administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest
the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment on the next
available hearing date or sooner if scheduled by the traffic compliance
administrator for good cause shown, but in no case shall the hearing be
scheduled later than sixty (60) days after the request for hearing is filed.



         a.   The traffic compliance administrator shall serve
notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner.



         b.   Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage
prepaid, to the address as is set forth on the request for hearing.



         c.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date
it is placed in the United States mail.



      (3)   An order entered after the hearing to contest the
validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment is a final
administrative decision within the meaning of 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.,
incorporated herein by reference.



   (c)   A vehicle immobilized or impounded pursuant to this section
shall be released to the registered owner thereof, or his or her agent, upon
payment of the fines and penalties due and owing the municipality as
specified in the notice sent in accordance with subsection (a)(3) of this
section, and upon payment of a fee of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for the
installation and removal of an immobilization device, if any, and upon
payment of towing charges and accrued daily impound charges, if any, or upon
order of the hearing officer following the hearing contesting the validity of
the impoundment.



   (d)   The village shall appoint or retain the services of an
individual agency or company to tow and impound vehicles in accordance
herewith, provided:



      (1)   The individual, agency or company is fully licensed
according to local and state law.



      (2)   The individual, agency or company is fully insured.



      (3)   The individual, agency or company has available a
secured impound area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For
the purpose of this section, a “secured area” shall mean an area bounded
by a fence, chainlink or otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking
gates so as to minimize or prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded
vehicles.



(Ord. 94-16, 8-2-1994; Ord. 98-33, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-1998 Ord. 2011-14, § 2,
9-12-2011)



Sec. 6-82.  Judicial Review:



   Judicial review of final determinations of vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) and final administrative decisions
issued after hearing(s) regarding vehicle immobilization or towing and
impoundment made under this Section shall be subject to the provisions of the
Administrative Review Law as is set forth in 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.,
incorporated herein by reference.



(Ord. 94-16, 8-2-1994)



Sec. 6-83.  Debt To Municipality:



   Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in
accordance with the provisions of this article and remaining unpaid after the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative remedies created
under this article and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures,
shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and, as such, may be collected
in accordance with the applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty
resulting from a standing, parking, or compliance violation shall constitute
a final disposition of that violation.



(Ord. 94-16, 8-2-1994)



Sec. 6-84.  Judgment:



   (a)   The traffic compliance administrator shall, following the
expiration of the period within which administrative or judicial review may
be sought for a final determination of violation, take all necessary
action(s), execute all required documents and appoint or retain any
individual or agency deemed appropriate to obtain a judgment against and
collect monies from the person(s) who has been assessed fines or penalties
which remain unpaid and have become a debt due and owing the municipality in
accordance with the provisions of this article and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 by:



      (1)    Filing a complaint in the circuit court praying for the
entry of a judgment against the person for whom a final determination of
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability has been
made.



      (2)    The complaint filed by the traffic compliance
administrator or individual or agency on behalf of the municipality seeking
entry of a judgment against an individual for unpaid fines and/or penalties
pursuant to a final determination of standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation(s) shall have appended:



         a.    A certified copy of the final determination of the
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s).



         b.    A certification that recites facts sufficient to
show that the final determination of standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation(s) was issued in accordance with this article and 625
ILCS 5/11-208.3.



      (3)    Nothing shall prevent the municipality from
consolidating multiple final determinations of standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability in an action in the circuit
court against an individual.



      (4)    Pursuing all available remedies, allowed by law, to
collect money judgments.



   (b)   Service of summons and a copy of the complaint may be served
upon the person against whom a judgment is sought under the provisions of
this article by any method provided under 735 ILCS 5/2-203, incorporated by
reference, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided the total
amount of fines and penalties for final determination of standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) does not exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00).



(Ord. 94-16, 8-2-1994)



Secs. 6-85-6-90.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VI.  LOCAL TRAFFIC



Sec. 6-91.  Local Traffic Only Signs:



   The chief of police is hereby authorized to enact or cause to be
enacted "Local Traffic Only" signs whenever construction within the village
causes vehicles traveling on a through street to use local village streets to
avoid traffic delays. These signs shall be erected in prominent positions so
that motorists can easily observe and obey said signs.



(Ord. 95-8, § 2, 5-22-1995)



Sec. 6-92.  Enforcement:



   The police are authorized to issue appropriate citations whenever
vehicles violate such signs.



(Ord. 95-8, § 3, 5-22-1995)



Sec. 6-93.  Penalties:



   The penalty provisions of section 1-7 of this code shall apply to such
violations.



(Ord. 95-8, § 4, 5-22-1995)



Sec. 6-94.  Seat Belts:



   (a)   All persons within the municipal boundaries are required by
law to wear seat belts in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/12-603 and 603.1 which
shall be enforced by the village of Justice police department.



   (b)   A violation of this section shall be a petty offense and
subject to the provisions of section 6-79 of this chapter with an initial
fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00).



   (c)   A law enforcement officer may not search or inspect a motor
vehicle, its contents, the driver, or a passenger solely because of a
violation of this section.



(Ord. 2002-23, § 1, 7-8-2002; Ord. 2009-17, § 7, 6-22-2009)



Secs. 6-95-6-100.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VII.  MOTORIZED SCOOTERS, PEDALCYCLES AND SIMILAR DEVICES



Sec. 6-101.  Motorized Scooters Or Pedalcycles:



   (a)   The vehicle code for the state of Illinois, 625 ILCS 5/1 et
seq., provides that riders of any motorized scooter or pedalcycle must have a
valid Illinois driver’s license, license plate and insurance. No passengers
are allowed on the motorized scooters or pedalcycles unless they are sitting
in a separate seat.



   (b)   No person shall operate a motor driven scooter or pedalcycle
upon any public street, sidewalk, parking lot, bike path, park or on any
other public property.



      (1)    Exemptions: The following shall be exempt from the
prohibitions contained in this subsection (b):



         a.    Any police vehicle, fire vehicle, municipal
vehicle, special district vehicle, county vehicle, forest preserve district
vehicle, or state vehicle operated by an employee in the course of his or her
duties.



         b.    Motorized wheelchairs. For purposes of this
subsection (b), a "motorized wheelchair" means any motorized vehicle designed
for and used by a person with disabilities.



         c.    Electric personal assistance mobility devices, as
defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-117.7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.



   (c)   Violators of the statute are subject to a village of Justice
citation and fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court
costs, plus the cost of impoundment of the scooter which shall be no less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover the cost of impoundment.



(Ord. 2003-27, § 2, 7-28-2003; Ord. 2005-06, §§ 2, 3, 4, 2-14-2005)



Secs. 6-102–6-104:   Reserved:



ARTICLE VIII.  AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT



Sec. 6-105.  Definitions:



   As used in this article, words or terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context or usage clearly indicates that another meaning
was intended:



   (a)   Administrator means the village’s traffic control
administrator and/or his or her designee.



   (b)   Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System means a device within
the village of Justice with one (1) or more motor vehicle sensors working in
conjunction with a red light signal to produce recorded images of motor
vehicles entering an intersection against a steady or flashing red signal
indication in violation of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code
(“Code”), 625 ILCS 5/11-306, or similar violation of the Justice
Municipal Code. The automated traffic law enforcement system shall not be
used to enforce speed regulations.



   (c)   Automated Traffic Law Violation means a “disregarding a
traffic control device” violation or a “no turn on red” violation, as
those terms are defined in this section.



   (d)   Certified Report means a report to the Illinois Secretary of
State concerning five (5) or more unsatisfied  automated traffic law
violations.



   (e)   Code means Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.



   (f)   Determination Notice means a notice of final determination of
an automated traffic law violation liability.



   (g)   Disregarding A Traffic Control Device means a failure to stop
and remain stopped before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal
as provided for in Section 11-306 of the Code. Disregarding a traffic control
device, for purposes of the automated traffic law enforcement system, shall
not include: 1) those instances when a motor vehicle comes to a complete stop
and does not enter the intersection, as defined by Section 1-132 of the Code,
during the cycle of the red signal unless one or more pedestrians or
bicyclists are present, even if the motor vehicle stops at a point past a
stop line or crosswalk where the driver is required to stop, as specified in
Section 11-306(c) of the Code, or similar violation of the Justice Municipal
Code; or 2) those instances where a motorcyclist enters an intersection
against a red signal indication when the red signal fails to change to green
within a reasonable period of time because of a signal malfunction or because
the signal has failed to detect the arrival of the motorcycle due to the
motorcycle’s size or weight.



   (h)   No Turn On Red means failure to stop and remain stopped, and
not proceeding to turn right at, an intersection controlled by both a sign
indicating “No turn on red,” or other similar language, and a red signal
as provided for in Section 11-306 of the Code.



   (i)    Recorded Images means images produced by the automated
traffic law enforcement system, which consist of either: two (2) or more
photographs; two (2) or more microphotographs; two (2) or more electronic
images; or a video recording showing the motor vehicle and, on at least one
(1) image or portion of the recording, clearly identifying the registration
plate number of the motor vehicle.



   (j)   Suspension Notice means a notice of impending driver’s
license suspension.



   (k)   Village means the village of Justice, Cook County, Illinois.



   (l)   Violation Notice means an automated traffic law violation
notice.



(Ord. 2008-31, § 2, 10-27-2008; Ord. 2011-15, § 2, 9-12-2011; Ord. 2012-09,
§ 1, 3-12-2012; Ord. 2012-19, § 1, 7-23-2012)



Sec. 6-106.  System Establishment:



   (a)   There is established within the village an automated traffic
law enforcement system program.



   (b)   The village shall have the discretion to locate individual
automated traffic law enforcement systems at such intersections as may be
deemed appropriate.



   (c)   An intersection equipped with an automated traffic law
enforcement system shall be posted with a sign visible to approaching traffic
indicating that the intersection is being monitored by an automated traffic
law enforcement system.



   (d)   The village shall provide notice to drivers on its website of
the location of all intersections equipped with an automated traffic law
enforcement system.



   (e)   Any intersection equipped with an automated traffic law
enforcement system shall have a yellow change interval that conforms to the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (IMUTCD) published by the
Illinois Department of Transportation.



   (f)   The village shall conduct a statistical analysis to assess the
safety impact of each automated traffic law enforcement system at an in
intersection following installation of the system. The statistical analysis
shall be based upon the best available crash, traffic, and other data, and
shall cover a period of time before and after installation of the system
sufficient to provide a statistically valid comparison of safety impact. The
statistical analysis shall be consistent with professional judgment and
acceptable industry practice. The statistical analysis also shall be
consistent with the data required for valid comparisons of before and after
conditions and shall be conducted within a reasonable time period following
the installation of the automated traffic law enforcement system. If the
statistical analysis for the thirty-six (36) month period following
installation of the system indicates that there has been an increase in the
rate of accidents at the approach to the intersection monitored, additional
studies shall be undertaken to determine the cause and severity of the
accidents, and the village may take any action that it determines is
necessary or appropriate to reduce the number or severity of the accidents at
the intersection.



(Ord. 2008-31, § 3, 10-27-2008; Ord. 2011-15, § 2, 9-12-2011; Ord. 2012-09,
§ 1, 3-12-2012)



Sec. 6-107.  Authorization For Agreement:



   Any agreement entered into by the village and a third party for the
design and implementation of a automated traffic law enforcement system, or
services related thereto, shall be approved by the corporate authorities of
the village of Justice. The compensation paid for an automated traffic law
enforcement system must be based on the value of the equipment or the
services provided and may not be based on the number of traffic citations
issued or revenue generated by the system.



(Ord. 2008-31, § 4, 10- 27-2008; Ord. 2012-09, § 1, 3-12-2012)



Sec. 6-108.  Administrator:



   There is hereby established the office of administrator, which shall be
filled by appointment of the village president with the advice and consent of
the board of trustees. The administrator, or his or her designee, shall be
authorized to adopt, distribute and process violation notices and other
notices required by this article and the Code, collect money paid as fines
and penalties for automated traffic law violations, and administer the
administrative adjudication system for automated traffic law violations. The
administrator is also authorized to draft and issue any certified reports to
the Illinois Secretary of State as required by this article and the Code. The
administrator shall make the recorded images of a violation accessible to an
alleged violator by providing the alleged violator with a website address,
accessible through the internet.



(Ord. 2008- 31, § 5, 10-27-2008; Ord. 2011-15, § 2, 9-12-2011; Ord.
2012-09, § 1, 3-12-2012)



Sec. 6-109.  Automated Traffic Law Violation:



   It shall be unlawful to “disregard a traffic control device” or
violate a “no turn on red” as those terms are defined in this article.



(Ord. 2012-09, § 1, 3-12-2012)



Sec. 6-110.  Violation Notice:



   (a)   When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a
motor vehicle violating section 6-109 of this article, the administrator
shall issue a written violation notice to the registered owner of the
vehicle, which shall be delivered by U.S. mail within thirty (30) days after
the Illinois Secretary of State notifies the village of the identity of the
registered owner of the vehicle, and in no event later than ninety (90) days
following the violation. If any notice to an addressee is returned as
undeliverable, a second notice shall be sent to the last known address
recorded in a United States Post Office approved database of the owner of the
cited vehicle. The second notice shall be made by first class mail postage
prepaid.



   (b)   No person who is the lessor of a motor vehicle pursuant to a
written lease agreement shall be liable for an automated traffic law
enforcement system violation involving such motor vehicle during the period
of the lease; provided that upon the request of the administrator received
within one hundred twenty (120) days after the violation occurred, the lessor
provides within sixty (60) days after such receipt the name and address of
the lessee. The driver’s license number of a lessee may be subsequently
individually requested by the administrator if needed for enforcement
purposes. Upon the provision of information by the lessor, the administrator
shall issue the violation notice to the lessee of the vehicle in the same
manner as it would issue a violation notice to a registered owner, and the
lessee may be held liable for the violation, and all other provisions
applicable to owners in this article shall apply to the lessee.



   (c)   Before a violation notice is issued, a determination must be
made by a technician employed or contracted by the village that, based on the
inspection of recorded images generated by the system, the motor vehicle was
being operated in violation of section 6-109 of this article. Upon
determination that the recorded image captures a violation, a violation
notice shall be issued and served upon the registered vehicle owner in the
manner provided for above. If the technician determines that the vehicle
entered the intersection as part of a funeral procession or in order to yield
the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle, a citation shall not be issued. The
administrator, or his or her designee shall retain a copy of all violation
notices, recorded images and other correspondence mailed to the registered
owner of the motor vehicle. Such documents shall be kept in the ordinary
course of business. Each violation notice and the recorded images shall
constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in
any proceeding relative to the violation, and shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation.



   (d)   The violation notice shall include the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the registered owner or lessee
of the vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State, or, if
such information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address
recorded in a United States Post Office approved database;



      (2)   The make (only if discernable) and registration number
of the motor vehicle involved in the violation;



      (3)   The violation charged;



      (4)   The location where the violation occurred;



      (5)   The date and time of the violation;



      (6)   A copy of the recorded images;



      (7)   The amount of the civil fine imposed or the requirements
of any traffic education program imposed, or both, and the date on which the
civil fine should be paid or the traffic education program should be
completed, or both;



      (8)   A statement that recorded images constitute prima facie
evidence of a violation;



      (9)   A statement that a failure to pay the civil fine, to
complete a required traffic education program, or both, or to contest
liability in a timely fashion, is an admission of liability and may result in
the suspension of driving privileges of the registered owner of the vehicle,
as well as the imposition of additional penalty of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for failure to pay the original fine or to complete a required
traffic education program, or both, in a timely manner;



      (10)   A statement that the person may elect to proceed by:
paying the fine or completing a required traffic education program, or both;
or challenging the charge in court, by mail, or by administrative hearing;



      (11)   A statement that completion of any traffic education
program, the payment of any fine, and the payment of any applicable penalty
for late payment, or both, shall operate as a final disposition of the
violation;



      (12)   A statement of how an administrative hearing may be
requested; and



      (13)   A website address, accessible through the internet,
where the person may view the recorded images of the violation.



(Ord. 2008-31, § 6, 10-27-2008; Ord. 2011-15, § 2, 9-11-2011; Ord. 2012-09,
§ 1, 3-12-2012; Ord. 2012-19, § 2, 7-23-2012)



Sec. 6-111.  Hearing:



   (a)   The registered owner or lessee of a motor vehicle being
operated in violation of section 6-109 of this article may request a hearing
in persona to challenge the evidence or contest the citation by mail. The
violation notice shall be prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to
rebuttal on the basis of applicable defenses. Formal rules of evidence will
not apply at the hearing. Hearings shall be recorded, and the hearing officer
shall be empowered to administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant book and
papers. Persons appearing at the hearing may be represented by counsel at
their own expense. A registered owner or lessee that fails to appear at a
hearing which he or she has requested will be found in default and a final
determination will be entered.



   (b)   The following may be considered defenses by the hearing
officer for a violation of section 6-109 of this article:



      (1)   The operator of the vehicle was issued a uniform traffic
control citation by a police officer for the same incident;



      (2)   The motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor
vehicle were stolen before the violation occurred and not under the control
of or in the possession of the owner at the time of the violation. Provided,
however, to demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates
were stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the control or
possession of the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit
proof that a report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration
plates was filed with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner.



      (3)   The vehicle was leased to another, and within sixty (60)
days after the citation was mailed to the lessor, lessor submitted to the
village, together with a copy of the lease agreement, the lessee’s
driver’s license number, and any additional information as may be required;



      (4)   The vehicle was an authorized emergency vehicle;



      (5)   the operator of the vehicle passed through the
intersection when the light was red in order to yield the right-of-way to an
emergency vehicle or as part of a funeral procession; or



      (6)   The respondent was not the registered vehicle owner or
lessee of the cited vehicle at the time of the violation. To demonstrate that
the motor vehicle or the registration plates were stolen before the violation
occurred and were not under the control or possession of the owner at the
time of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a report concerning
the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed with a law
enforcement agency in a timely manner.



   (c)   Any person challenging a citation by mail shall send a signed
statement, together with any supporting documentation, to the administrator
via certified mail, return receipt requested, within ten (10) days after
service of the violation notice. Such statement shall set forth the reasons
why a finding of liability should not be entered. The administrator shall
forward all timely-submitted materials to the hearing officer for review and
determination. Notice of the hearing officer’s determination shall be sent
by mail to the owner.



   (d)   No additional fee shall be charged to an alleged violator for
exercising the right to an administrative hearing.



(Ord. 2008-31, § 8, 10-27-2008; Ord. 2011-15, § 2, 9-12-2011; Ord. 2012-09,
§ 1, 3-12-2012; Ord. 2012-19, § 3, 7-23-2012)



Sec. 6-112.  Final Determination Of Liability:



   A final determination of an automated traffic law violation liability
shall occur under the following circumstances:



      (1)   Upon the failure to complete the required traffic
education program or to pay the fine or penalty, or both, after the hearing
officer’s determination of liability and the exhaustion of or failure to
exhaust administrative review; or



      (2)   Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest
the alleged violation in the time and manner specified, the hearing
officer’s determination shall become final upon the denial of a timely
petition to set aside a determination, or upon the expiration of the time
period for filing the petition without a filing having been made.



(Ord. 2008-31, § 9, 10-27-2008; Ord. 2011-15, § 2, 9-12-2011; Ord. 2012-09,
§ 1, 3-12-2012)



Sec. 6-113.  Final Determination Of Violation Liability Notice:



   A final determination of an automated traffic law violation notice
shall be sent following the final determination of automated traffic law
violation liability and the conclusion of judicial review. The notice shall
include the following information:



      (1)   A statement that the incomplete traffic education
program or the unpaid fine or penalty, or both, is a debt due and owing the
village of Justice; and



      (2)   A warning that a failure to complete any required
traffic education program or to pay any fine or penalty due and owing the
village of Justice, or both, within ten (10) days may result in the filing of
a petition in the Circuit Court of Cook County to have the incomplete traffic
education program or unpaid fine or penalty, or both, rendered as a judgment
or may result in the suspension of the person’s driver’s license for
failure to complete a traffic education program or to pay fines or penalties,
or both, for five (5) or more automated traffic law violations.



(Ord. 2008-31,§ 10, 10-27-2008; Ord. 2011-15, § 2, 9-12-2011; Ord. 2012-09,
§ 1, 3-12-2012; Ord. 2012-19, § 4, 7-23-2012)



Sec. 6-114.  Petition To Set Aside Determination:



   A petition to set aside determination of an automated traffic law
violation must be filed with or mailed to the administrator within ten (10)
days of the date of mailing of the determination notice. The grounds for the
petition are limited to:



      (1)   The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited
vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued;



      (2)   The person has completed the required traffic education
program or paid the fine or penalty, or both, for the violation in question;
or



      (3)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for
a hearing.



   (b)   Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the
determination of liability, the hearing officer shall review the petition to
determine if cause has been shown to set aside the determination. If cause
has been shown, the administrator shall forward to the petitioner a new
hearing date on which the petitioner must appear to present his case on the
underlying violation. The administrator shall notify the petitioner of the
hearing officer’s decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within
fourteen (14) days of the hearing officer’s decision.



(Ord. 2008-31, § 11, 10-27-2008; Ord. 2011-15, § 2, 9-12-2011; Ord.
2012-09, § 1, 3-12-2012)



Sec. 6-115.  Suspension Notice:



   (a)   A suspension notice shall be sent to the person liable for
failing to complete a required traffic education program or pay any fine or
penalty that remains due and owing, or both, on five (5) or more automated
traffic law violations. The suspension notice shall state the following
information:



      (1)   The failure to complete a required traffic education
program or to pay the fine or penalty owing, or both, within forty-five (45)
days of the notice’s date will result in the administrator notifying the
Illinois Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of
suspension proceedings under Section 6-306.5 of the Code; and



      (2)   A statement that the person may obtain a photostatic
copy of the original ticket imposing a traffic education program or a fine or
penalty, or both, by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the
administrator along with a request for the copy.



   (b)   The suspension notice shall be sent by first class mail,
postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Illinois Secretary of State
or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last
known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database.



(Ord. 2008-31, § 12, 10-27-2008; Ord. 2011-15, § 2, 9-12-2011; Ord.
2012-09, § 1, 3-12-2012)



Sec. 6-116.  Driver’s License Suspension:



   (a)   The administrator, by certified report, shall request that the
Illinois Secretary of State suspend the driving privileges of an owner of a
registered vehicle or lessee who has failed to complete a required traffic
education program or pay any fine or penalty due and owing the village of
Justice, or both, as a result of five (5) automated traffic law violations.
The report shall be certified and contain the following information:



      (1)   The name, last known address as recorded with the
Illinois Secretary of State, as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle
at the time of lease, or as recorded in a United States post office approved
database if any notice sent under this section is returned as undeliverable,
and driver’s license number of the person who failed to complete a required
traffic education program or pay the fine or penalty, or both, or who has
defaulted in a payment plan, and the registration number of any vehicle known
to be registered to such person in the State of Illinois;



      (2)   The name of the municipality making the report;



      (3)   A statement that a suspension notice has been sent to
the person named in the report at the address recorded with the Illinois
Secretary of State or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited
vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice is returned as
undeliverable, at the last known address recorded at a United States Post
office approved database; the date on which such notice was sent; and address
to which such notice was sent; and



      (4)   A unique identifying reference number for each request
of suspension.



   (b)   The administrator shall notify the Illinois Secretary of State
whenever a person named in the certified report has completed the required
traffic education program or paid the previously recorded fine or penalty, or
both, whenever the person has entered into a payment plan pursuant to which
the village has agreed to terminate the suspension, or whenever the village
determines that the original report was in error. A certified copy of such
notification shall also be given to the person named therein upon request and
at no additional charge.



(Ord. 2012-09, § 2, 3-12-2012)



Sec. 6-117.  Challenging The Accuracy Of Certified Report:



   (a)   If the administrator provides a suspension notice and
subsequently makes a certified report to the Illinois Secretary of State, the
vehicle owner may challenge the accuracy of the certified report in writing.



   (b)   The vehicle owner shall submit to the administrator a written
statement under oath, together with any supporting documentation,
establishing one of the following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the
certified report:



      (1)   That the person was not the owner or lessee of the
subject vehicle or vehicles receiving five (5) or more automated traffic law
violations on the date or dates such violation notices were issued; or



      (2)   That the person already completed the required traffic
education program or paid the fine or penalty owing, or both, indicated on
the certified report.



   (c)   A statement challenging the accuracy of a certified report
shall be sent to the administrator by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or hand-delivered to the administrator within five (5) days after
the person receives notice from the Illinois Secretary of State that the
person’s driver’s license will be suspended at the end of a specified
period of time unless the Secretary is presented with notice from the village
certifying that the traffic education program or that the fines or penalties
due and owing, or both, have been satisfied or that the inclusion of the
person’s name on the certified report was in error.



(Ord. 2008-31, § 13, 10-27-2008; Ord. 2011-15, § 2, 9-12-2011; Ord.
2012-09, § 1, 3-12-2012)



Sec. 6-118.  Penalty:



   (a)   Any person violating section 6-109 of this article shall be
fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense.



   (b)   In lieu of a fine, or in addition to the fine, a person
violating section 6-109 of this article may be required to complete a traffic
education program. The fee for participating in a traffic education program
shall not exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00). A low income individual
required to complete a traffic education program who provides proof of
eligibility for the federal earned income tax credit under Section 32 of the
Internal Revenue Code or the Illinois earned income tax credit under Section
212 of the Illinois Income Tax Act shall not be required to pay any fee for
participating in a required traffic education program.



   (c)   If a person fails to request a hearing and does not otherwise
complete a traffic education program or pay the applicable fine indicated in
the violation notice by the date specified, or both, or fails to complete the
traffic education program or pay the original fine within twenty-five (25)
days after an administrative hearing, or both, an additional penalty of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) will be automatically assessed against the violator.



(Ord. 2008-31, § 15, 10-27-2008; Ord. 2011-15, § 2, 9-12-2011; Ord.
2012-09, § 1, 3-12-2012)



Sec. 6-119.  Reserved:



ARTICLE IX.  MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATIONS IN PRIVATE PARKING LOTS



Sec. 6-120.  Definitions:



   For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   Owners shall mean actual legal owner, the trust officer of a banking
institution having the right to manage and control such property, or a person
having the legal right, through lease or otherwise, to manage or control the
property.



   Parking Lot shall mean any area, or areas, of land near or contiguous
to a school, church, hospital building, shopping center, commercial or
industrial facility, apartment complex, condominium complex, but not the
public highways or alleys, and used by the public as the means of access to
and egress from such buildings and the stores and business establishments at
a shopping center, and for the parking of motor vehicles.



(Ord. 2015-01, § 1, 1- 26-2015)



Sec. 6-121.  Regulations:



   The following regulations may be enforced by the village upon the
election and agreement of the owner(s) of any school, church, hospital
building shopping center, commercial or industrial facility, apartment
complex, or condominium complex, which shall be recorded in the office of the
cook county recorder of deeds:



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor
vehicle in a parking lot in excess of a posted speed limit.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor
vehicle in a parking lot in violation of any posted traffic control sign,
signal or device. The standard applicable to obeying any such sign, signal or
device shall be the same as codified in the Illinois Vehicle Code for
highways.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any registered owner of a motor
vehicle to permit the stopping, standing or parking of his or her vehicle in
a parking lot except within designated parking spaces.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any registered owner of a motor
vehicle to permit the stopping, standing or parking of his or her vehicle in
a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities unless the vehicle is
properly displaying authorized disability license plates or decals and the
person operating the vehicle is the authorized holder of the disability
license plates or decals or transporting the authorized holder thereof.



      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any registered owner of a motor
vehicle to permit the stopping, standing or parking of his or her motor
vehicle within a parking lot during prohibited hours as posted in the parking
lot. Provided, however, any motor vehicle having affixed on the windshield a
decal or sticker constituting a parking permit issued by the owners shall not
be subject to this restriction.



      (6)   It shall be unlawful for any registered owner of a motor
vehicle to permit the stopping, standing or parking of his or her motor
vehicle within a parking lot for the purposes of congregating or meeting.



      (7)   It shall be unlawful for any registered owner of a motor
vehicle to permit the stopping, standing or parking of his or her motor
vehicle within a designated fire line or traffic lane or within twenty (20)
feet in any direction of fire hydrant, wall hydrant, water standpipe or a
fire exit door.



      (8)   It shall be unlawful for any registered owner of a motor
vehicle to permit the stopping, standing or parking of his or her vehicle
within an apartment or condominium parking lot unless the occupants thereof
are authorized guests of the complex and the motor vehicle is parked in a
designated "guest" parking spot.



      (9)   It shall be unlawful for any registered owner of a motor
vehicle to permit the stopping, standing or parking of his or her motor
vehicle within a parking lot of a shopping center if the occupants are not
present conducting business at an establishment to which the parking lot
serves.



      (10)   It shall be unlawful for any registered owner of a
motor vehicle to permit the overnight stopping, standing or parking of his or
her motor vehicle within a parking lot of a shopping center.



(Ord. 2015-01, § 1, 1-26-2015)



Sec. 6-122.  Penalty:



   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this article
shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Provided,
however, any person found to be in violation of section 6-121(4) shall be
fined in accordance with the schedule for the corresponding violation under
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3. Each day a violation occurs or is permitted to continue
constitutes a new and separate violation.



(Ord. 2015-01, § 1, 1-26- 2015)



Sec. 6-123.  Administration:



   The following provisions shall govern the administration of citations
written for a violations of this article:



      (1)   Citations issued for violating any stopping, standing or
parking regulation in a private parking lot shall be administered through
Chapter 6, Motor Vehicles and Traffic, Article V, Adjudication of Vehicular
Regulation Violations.



      (2)   Citations issued for violating any regulation governing
the movement of vehicles in a private parking lot shall be administered
through the courts.



(Ord. 2015- 01, § 1, 1-26-2015)



Sec. 6-124.  Enforcement:



   No regulation provided in this article shall be enforceable in a
private parking lot until the later of the following events:



      (1)   The installation of any signs, signals or devices as may
be applicable to the regulation(s) to be enforced in the private parking lot;
and



      (2)   Three (3) days after an agreement, executed by the owner
of the parking lot and village, has been recorded in the offices of the cook
county recorder of deeds.



(Ord. 2015-01, § 1, 1-26-2015)



 


Notes

1 
65 ILCS 5/11-40-3; 415 ILCS 105/7; 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.

2 
See also section 4-30.1 of this code.



CHAPTER 7
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS*



   Art. I.   In General, §§ 7.1-7-85



   Art. II.   Animals, §§ 7-86-7-170



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 7-86-7-115



      Div. 2.   Dogs Generally, §§ 7-116-7-170



   Art. III.   Removal Of Weeds And Debris, §§ 7-171-7.195



   Art. IV.   Public Safety, §§ 7-196-7-250



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 7-196-7-225



      Div. 2.   Ratproofing, §§ 7-226-7-250



   Art. V.   Use Of Public Ways And Property, §§ 7-251-7-280



   Art. VI.   Drugs, Poisons, Etc., §§ 7-281-7-305



   Art. VII.   Trees And Shrubbery, §§ 7.306-7-330



   Art. VIII.   Cemeteries, §§ 7-331-7-335



*  State law references—Municipal police ordinances, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch.
24, § 11-1-1; municipal public order regulations, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, §
11-5-1 et seq.; criminal law and procedure, III. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, § 1-1 et
seq.; property forfeiture, Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, 37-1 et seq.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 7-1.  Criminal code adopted.



   There is hereby adopted the Illinois statute entitled the Criminal Code
of 1961, as now or hereafter amended, which is incorporated in this section
as if set out at length herein. An officer issuing a citation or complaint
may issue it by using any of the sections of the Criminal Code of 1961. All
citations or complaints so issued shall be issued in the name of the village
and shall be referred to in the citation or complaint as an ordinance
violation. The penalties specified in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances
shall apply to such violations.



   State law reference-Criminal Code of 1961, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, §
1-1 et seq.



Sec. 7-2.  Definition.



   For the purposes of this article the term "firearm" means any weapon,
by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a projectile or
projectiles by the action of an explosive and a firearm muffler or firearm
silencer, or any other part or parts of such weapon.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-1)



   State law reference-"Firearm" defined, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, §
83-1.1.



Sec. 7-3.  Unlawful possession of firearm.



   (a)   Any person under eighteen (18) years of age, any narcotic
addict, any person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this
state or any other jurisdiction within five (5) years from release from the
penitentiary or within five (5) years of conviction if a penitentiary
sentence has not been imposed, and any person who has been released from a
mental institution or from the custody of the juvenile division of the state
department of corrections within the last five (5) years, or is mentally
retarded, and any person who possesses any firearm, the possession of which
is prohibited by any state or federal law relating to weapons or firearms,
shall be ineligible to register pursuant to this article. Any purported
registration by any of the above described persons shall be null and void.



   (b)   A person may not possess or harbor any firearm, whether
concealed or not concealed, if such person is ineligible to register himself
with the licensing authority pursuant to the provisions of this article.



   (c)   Any person who violates subsection (a) or (b) shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first
offense and not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense and shall be punished as a
misdemeanor for each subsequent offense by incarceration in the county jail
for a term not to exceed six (6) months under procedures set forth.



   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry in any vehicle or
about his person, except when on his land or in his own abode or fixed place
of business, any rifle, shotgun, or other firearm; provided that this
subsection shall not apply to:



      (1)    Peace officers or any person summoned by any such
officers to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while he is
actually engaged in assisting such officer.



      (2)    Wardens, superintendents, and keepers of prisons,
penitentiaries, jails, and other institutions for the detention of persons
accused or convicted of an offense, while in the performance of their
official duty, or while commuting between their homes and places of
employment.



      (3)    Members of the armed services or reserve forces of the
United States or the Illinois national guard or the reserve officers training
corps, while in the performance of their official duty.



      (4)    Special agents employed by a railroad to perform police
functions, or employees of a detective agency, watchman, guard or patrolman
agency, licensed by the state, while actually engaged in the performance of
the duties of their employment, or while commuting between their homes and
places of employment.



      (5)    Agents and investigators of the Illinois Crime
Investigating Commission authorized by the commission to carry weapons, while
on duty in the course of any investigation for the commission.



      (6)    The manufacture, transportation, or sale of weapons to
persons authorized under law to possess them.



      (7)    Members of any club or organization organized for the
purpose of practicing shooting at targets upon established target ranges,
whether public or private, while such members are using their firearms on
such target ranges.



      (8)    Duly authorized military or civil organizations while
parading, with the special permission of the governor.



      (9)    Licensed hunters or fishermen while engaged in hunting
or fishing.



      (10)    Transportation of weapons broken down in a
nonfunctional state or not immediately accessible.



   (e)   Any person violating the provisions of subsection (d) shall be
fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).



(Code 1972, §§ 6-4-2--6-4-6)



   State law references-Unlawful use of weapons, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38,
§ 24-1; unlawful use of weapons by felons, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, §
24-1.1; exemptions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, § 24-2; "mental retardation"
defined, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 91 1/2, § 1-116.



Sec. 7-4.  Discharge of firearms.



   (a)   No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol, or other
firearms within the village, except upon the premises duly used for a
licensed shooting gallery or gun club, or in accordance with the provisions
of this Code.



   (b)   No cannon or piece of artillery shall be discharged or fired
in any public way or other public place within the village, except upon the
express permission of the board of trustees.



   (c)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to sheriffs,
coroners, constables, members of the police force, or other peace officers
engaged in the discharge of their official duties, or to any person summoned
by any such officers to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace
while such person so summoned is engaged in assisting such officer.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-39)



Sec. 7-5.  Certain weapons prohibited; sale of knives to minors.



   (a)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, keep, possess, loan, or
give to any person any knife, the blade of which is released by a spring
mechanism, including knives known as "switch-blades," any blackjacks,
slingshots, sand clubs, sandbags, mental knuckles, or bludgeon. No person
shall sell, offer for sale, loan or give to any person under eighteen (18)
years of age or under any type or kind of knife, any blade of which is four
(4) inches in length or longer.



   (b)   No person shall carry or possess any knife, the blade of which
is released by a spring mechanism, including knives known as "switch-blades,"
any blackjack, slingshot, sand club, sandbags, metal knuckles, or bludgeon.



      (1)    No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall carry
or possess any knife, the blade of which is four (4) inches in length or
longer.



      (2)    No person shall carry or possess with intent to use
same unlawfully against another a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife,
razor, stiletto, or other dangerous or deadly weapon.



      (3)    No person shall carry concealed on or about his person
any of the items named above in this subsection. This provision shall not
apply, however, to the following officers while engaged in the discharge of
their official duties: Sheriffs, coroners, constables, policemen, or other
duly constituted police officers, and wardens, superintendents, and keepers
of prison penitentiaries, jails, and other institutes of detention for
persons accused or convicted of crime, nor to the following employees or
agents while engaged in the discharge of the duties of their employment:
Conductors, baggagemen, messengers, drivers, watchmen, special agents, and
police engaged by railroads or express companies; nor to persons lawfully
summoned by an officer to assist in making arrests, or preserving the peace,
while so engaged in assisting such officers.



      (4)    Any persons violating the provisions of this subsection
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) for each offense or shall be punished by imprisonment for a
period of six (6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment.



      (5)    In addition to all other penalties, weapons used in
violation of this subsection shall be forfeited to and confiscated by the
village.



(Code 1972, §§ 6-4-40, 6-4-41)



   State law references-Unlawful use of weapons, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38,
§ 24-1; confiscation and disposition of weapons, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, §
24-6.



Sec. 7-6.  House or vehicle used in prostitution.



   (a)   Every house of ill-fame or house of assignation where men and
women resort for the purpose of fornication, prostitution, or lewdness is
hereby declared to be a nuisance.



      (1)    No person shall keep or maintain a house of ill-fame or
assignation or a place for the practice of fornication, prostitution, or
lewdness. Each twenty-four (24) hours that such house or place shall be kept
or maintained for such purpose shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.



      (2)    No person shall patronize, frequent, be found in or be
an inmate of any such house or place used for any of the purposes set forth
in this section.



      (3)    No person shall lease to another any house, room, or
other premises, in whole or in part, for any of the uses or purposes set
forth in this section or knowingly permit the same to be used or occupied for
such purposes.



      (4)    No person knowingly shall direct, take, transport, or
offer to direct, take, or transport any person for immoral purposes of any
other person, or assist any person by any means to seek or to find any
prostitute or other person engaged in immoral practices, or any brothel,
bawdy house, or any place of ill-fame.



      (5)    Any person that shall violate the provisions of this
subsection shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense.



   (b)   No person shall knowingly receive any person for purposes of
lewdness, assignation, or prostitution into or upon any vehicle or other
conveyance or permit any person to remain for any of such purposes in or upon
any such vehicle or other conveyance. Any person that shall violate the
provisions of this subsection shall be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, §§ 6-4-10, 6-4-11)



Sec. 7-7.  Licenses; revocation.



   The business license or liquor license of any person or employees
thereof directly involved in the violation of section 7-6 of this article, or
sections 11-14-11-19.1 of the Criminal Code of 1961, may be revoked, and also
the village license of the vehicle or conveyance used may be revoked in the
discretion of the mayor. No license revoked under this section shall be
reinstated until the lapse of a period of one (1) year after such revocation.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-12)



   State law reference-Prostitution and related offenses, Ill. Rev. Stat.
Ch. 38, § 11-14 et seq.



Sec. 7-8.  Prostitution; nuisance declared.



   Any prostitute, solicitor to prostitution, or any other person of evil
fame or repute, plying his vocation upon the public ways or other public
places in the village, is hereby declared to be a common nuisance and shall
be fined not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-13)



   State law reference-House of prostitution as public nuisance, Ill. Rev.
Stat. Ch. 100 1/2, § 1 et seq.



Sec. 7-9.  Inhabiting a house of prostitution; solicitation.



   Any person who is an inmate of a house of ill fame or assignation, or
place for the practice of fornication or prostitution or lewdness, or who
shall solicit to prostitution in any street, alley, park or other place in
the village, shall be fined not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00).



(Code 1972, § 6-4-14)



Sec. 7-10.  Obscene articles.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit,
sell, print, offer to sell, give away, circulate, publish, distribute, or
attempt to distribute any obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, photograph,
motion picture film, play, image, instrument, statue, drawing, or other
article which is obscene.



   (b)   "Obscene" for the purpose of this section is defined as
follows: Whether to the average person, applying contemporary community
standards, the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to
prurient interest.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-18)



   State law reference-Obscenity, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, § 11-20.



Sec. 7-11.  Obscene literature-Generally.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or to offer to exhibit for
sale, in sealed form, or in any form which indicates that the sale thereof is
surreptitious or contrary to law, any book, pamphlet, or literature of any
kind bearing the title of a book which the sale is prohibited, or bearing the
title of a book of which the contents are actually lewd, lascivious, obscene,
immoral or indecent. It shall likewise be unlawful to sell, or to offer or
exhibit for sale, any book, pamphlet, or literature of any kind having
anything about it which indicates that its contents are of obscene, immoral,
lewd, lascivious, or indecent character, or to sell, or to offer or exhibit
for sale, any book, pamphlet, or literature of any kind under the guise or
pretense that the same is obscene, immoral, lewd, lascivious, or indecent, or
in a manner that indicates concealment of anything as contrary to law or
immoral contained therein or to use any pretense, trick, fraud, artifice, or
device to convey the impression that such book, pamphlet or literature is
lewd, lascivious, indecent, obscene, or immoral, whether such pretense,
trick, fraud, artifice, or device is a misrepresentation in regard to the
contents of the same or not.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-19)



Sec. 7-12.  Same-Distributing to minors.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit,
sell, offer to sell, give away, circulate, or distribute or attempt to
distribute to any person under the age of seventeen (17) years any obscene
book, magazine, pamphlet, paper, writing, cards, advertisement, circulars,
print, picture, photograph, picture, film, play, image, instrument, statue,
drawing or other material.



   (b)   "Obscene" for the purpose of this section is defined as
follows: Whether the average person under seventeen (17) years of age or the
person to whom the material is exhibited, sold, offered for sale, given away,
circulated, or distributed, applying contemporary community standards, the
dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to prurient interests.



   (c)   In determining whether the publication or other material is
obscene and whether the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole
appeals to prurient interests, consideration shall be given to whatever
artistic, literature, historical, or educational value the publication or
other material may have for persons under the age of seventeen (17) years in
the community and whether the probability of the appeal to prurient interests
is so great as to outweigh whatever artistic, literary, historical,
educational or other merits the publication or other material may possess.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-20)



   State law reference-Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, §
11-21.



Sec. 7-13.  Same-Penalty.



   Any person violating any provision of section 7-11 or 7-12, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00). Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder. If more than one (1) publication prohibited hereunder shall be
sold, offered for sale, exhibited, given away or in any way furnished or
attempted to be furnished to any such person in violation of action above,
the sale, offering, exhibiting, giving away or in any way furnishing or
attempting to furnish to any such person of each separate publication
prohibited hereunder shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable accordingly.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-21)



Sec. 7-14.  Obscene Conduct:



   Any person who shall commit any indecent, lewd, or filthy act in any
public place in the village; who shall utter any lewd or filthy words, sing
any songs, the words of which are suggestive of indecency or immorality, or
use any threatening or abusive language in the hearing of other persons; who
shall make any obscene gesture in the presence of other persons; or who shall
make any overture of lewdness, tending to pervert the morals of any person,
upon or in the public ways or other public places or in any public conveyance
in the village, is hereby declared to be a common nuisance and shall be fined
not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-16)



Sec. 7-15.  Museum Of Anatomy; Lewd Exhibitions Unlawful:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate any
exhibition commonly known as a museum of anatomy, or other exhibition, show,
or place of amusement which is open to the general public, whether or not
admission thereof is restricted by sex and age, or whether or not a fee for
admission thereto is charged, wherein the principal part of the exhibition is
illustrative of the human anatomy, or wherein are exhibited any books,
pamphlets, circulars, pictures, charts, diagrams, models, casts, or other
articles, paintings, drawings, or designs of any kind, illustrating or
describing the genital organs or containing any obscene, lewd, indecent or
immoral exhibitions of any kind, when such museum or other exhibition is
conducted for gain or profit, either directly or indirectly, or for the
purpose of advertising or in connection with a place where medical treatment
is offered or medicine is sold, or for any immoral purposes.



   (b)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense, and each day's continuance of any
violation of the same shall be deemed a separate offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-22)



Sec. 7-16.  Certain Sirens Prohibited During War:



   For the duration of any war in which the United States is engaged, no
person upon an authorized emergency vehicle shall sound a siren for any
purpose. For the purposes of this section the term "siren" shall not include
a foghorn when used for the protection of navigation in and about the
metropolitan ship canal and Des Plaines River. This section shall not apply
to any person officially designated by the mayor to sound a siren as an air
raid alarm. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-34)



Sec. 7-17.  Defacing Public Property:



   (a)   No person shall cut, injure, mark, or deface any public
building, sewer, pipe, hydrant, or other village property or any tree, grass,
shrub, or walk in any public way or public park.



   (b)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-31; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998)



Sec. 7-18.  Loitering:



   (a)   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings set forth below, unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning. Where applicable, words used in the present
tense include the future tense of the word and words in the singular include
the plural form of the word.



   Loitering: Remaining idle or lingering aimlessly in essentially one
location. Loitering including lingering, loafing, wandering, standing around,
and being dilatory. Persons waiting in line to purchase goods, services, or
admission tickets shall not be deemed to be loitering.



   Public Place: An indoor or outdoor area, whether publicly or privately
owned, which the general public has access to and a right to resort for
business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. Public places include,
without limitation, streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, and parking lots.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, either alone or
in consort with others, in a public place with the intent or effect to:



      (1)   Warrant a reasonable person to believe that the purpose
or effect of that behavior is to enable a person or persons to establish
control over identifiable areas, to intimidate others from entering those
areas, to conceal illegal activities, or for an independent illegal purpose;



      (2)   Commit in or upon any public street, highway, alley,
parkway, parking lot, park or any other public place or any building any act
or thing that is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted
use or enjoyment of property or with any business lawfully conducted by any
person in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, highway,
sidewalk, alley, parkway, parking lot, park or any other public place or any
building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress,
to and from such premises; or



      (3)   Engage in activities, make loud noises, consume
alcoholic beverages or create circumstances that afford probable cause for
alarm or concern for the safety and well being of persons or for the security
of public or private property in the surrounding area or jeopardize the
health, safety, and welfare of citizens. Among the circumstances which may be
considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the
person takes flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify
himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or
any object; or



      (4)   To remain in or about any public place after such public
facilities are closed to the public or to loiter where a “no loitering”
sign or signs have been posted.



   (c)   This section does not prohibit picketing or orderly
demonstration by labor unions or members of the public.



   (d)   When any person causes or commits any of the acts enumerated
in subsection (b) above, a police officer or any other law enforcement
officer shall: (i) inform such persons that they are engaged in loitering,
which is prohibited; (ii) order that person or persons to stop causing or
committing such acts and to move on or disperse; (iii) inform those persons
that they will be subject to arrest if they fail to obey the order promptly
or engage in further loitering within the sight or hearing of the place at
which the order was issued during the next six (6) hours. Any person who
fails or refuses to obey such orders is guilty of a violation of this section.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-56; Ord. 79-10, 6-7-1979; Ord. 2009-22, § 1, 10-26-2009)



Sec. 7-19.  Communication Offenses; Alarms1:



   (a)   No person, unless duly authorized, shall open any signal box,
except to give an alarm of fire or to communicate with the police on
necessary business, nor break, cut, injure, deface, damage, derange, or in
any manner meddle or interfere with any signal box or the fire alarm or
police telegraph wires, or with any village electric wires, poles, conduits,
or apparatus. Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection
shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.



   (b)   (1)    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any call
to "911" or to permit any call to "911" when, at the time the call or
transmission is made, there is no reasonable ground for making the call or
transmission and the call or transmission results in the emergency response
of any public safety agency.



      (2)    The fine for each act of making a false "911" call
shall be a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).



      (3)    The person who is found guilty of making a false "911"
call shall also be responsible for the costs incurred by the village police,
fire, or public works department in responding to that false "911" call. The
costs shall be calculated on the actual cost, including overtime, of the
salaries of the police, fire and/or public works department employees, any
outside automatic aid from other municipalities and the cost of the vehicles
responding at a rate of sixty five dollars ($65.00) per hour for automobiles
and one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) per hour for each vehicle whose
weight is greater than four thousand (4,000) pounds.



(Code 1972, §§ 6-4-32, 6-4-35; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2,
3-23-1998; Ord. 99-26, §§ 1-3, 8-9-1999)



1  720 ILCS 5/26-1(a)(2).



Sec. 7-20.  Defacing Alarm Poles:



   Any person who shall scratch, stencil, or post placards or bills on any
of the poles used for wires of the police and fire alarms' telegraph, or in
any other manner shall deface or injure the same, shall be fined not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-33; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998)



Sec. 7-21.  Passing Police And Fire Lines:



   No person shall pass police and fire lines for the purpose of gathering
and editing spot news or photographing news events, unless such person is a
legal holder of a press card.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-36)



Sec. 7-22.  Glass Or Broken Items On Athletic Areas1:



   (a)   No person shall throw, drop, or place upon any baseball park,
athletic field, or other place where games are played any bottle or other
glass receptacle or any broken bottle or other broken instrument or thing.



   (b)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-38; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998)



1  415 ILCS 105/1.



Sec. 7-23.  Parades; Open Air Meetings2:



   (a)   No parade shall be allowed on any public way or sidewalk, nor
shall any open air public meeting be held in or upon any public way or upon
any ground abutting upon any public way, including sidewalks, until a permit
in writing therefor shall first be obtained from the president. Application
to conduct such parade or procession or open air meeting shall be made in
writing to the board of trustees at least thirty (30) days prior to the event
by the person in charge or control thereof, or responsible therefor. Such
application shall set forth the desired route along which such parade or
procession is to proceed, the desired time of starting, the duration, the
names of the persons or society in control thereof or responsible therefor,
and the purpose of such parade or procession. In case of an open air meeting,
such application shall specify the place at which it is desired to hold such
meeting, the purpose thereof, the name of the person or society in control
thereof or responsible therefor, the time at which such meeting is to be held
and the probable duration thereof. Upon such application being made, the
board of trustees shall investigate or cause to be investigated the person or
society making such application and the truth of the statements made in such
application regarding the purpose or object of such parade, procession or
open air meeting.



   (b)   The board of trustees shall consider all applications for
permits for parades or processions to be held on any public way, including
sidewalks, and applications for permits for open air public meetings to be
held in or upon any public way or upon any grounds abutting upon any public
way, including sidewalks, and shall approve, disapprove or amend such
applications. The findings of the board shall be forwarded to the president
for final action. If he shall be informed by the board that such parade,
procession or open air meeting is not to be held for any unlawful purpose and
will not in any manner tend to be a breach of the peace, and will not
unnecessarily interfere with the public use of the public ways, including
sidewalks, of the village or the peace and quiet of the inhabitants thereof,
he shall issue such permit to the person or society making application
therefor.



   (c)   Any person who participates in a parade, procession or open
air meeting for which the required permit has not been obtained shall be in
violation of this section.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-50)



2  625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(3).



Sec. 7-24.  Liquor Regulations:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink “alcoholic
liquor”, as defined in section 3-81 of this code, on any public way in the
village.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry,
possess, or have any alcoholic liquor in, upon or about any motor vehicle
upon any public way in the village, except in the original package and with
the seal unbroken.



   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty
one (21) years to have any alcoholic liquor in his or her possession on any
street or highway or in any public place or in any place open to the public.
However, the possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person under
twenty one (21) years of age of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a
religious service or ceremony, is not prohibited by this section.



   (d)   The corporate authorities hereby designate the Lipinski Center
as a building where alcoholic liquor may be sold or delivered, at times to be
specified in applicable rental agreements, in accordance with all other
applicable legal requirements.



   (e)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned for a
period of six (6) months, or both.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-51; Ord. 75-14, 9-4-1975; Ord. 2009-01B, § 2, 2-9-2009;
Ord. 2010-03, § 2, 2-18-2010)



Sec. 7-25.  Racetrack Messenger And Contract Wagering Services1:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to offer services to make bets for
a second person at racetracks or to engage in the activity known as racetrack
messenger service or runner; or to enter into a contract or agreement with
another whereby the parties agree that for a specified fee, an amount of
money furnished by one party will be transferred or transported by the second
party to a designated racetrack where pari-mutual wagering is permitted by
law, and that the second party will place wagers for the first party in
conformance with the contract or agreement, and that any winning wagers will
be collected and returned to the first party at a designated place.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-52; Ord. 77-8, 1-20-1977)



1  720 ILCS 5/28-7, 5/37-1 et seq.



Sec. 7-26.  Real Estate Sale; Misrepresenting Zone:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or otherwise publicize
for the sale of real estate, stating that the property involved can be
converted to a two-flat, three-flat, four-flat, or other multiple unit of
living quarters where such property is not located in an area wherein it is
properly provided by the zoning code for the existence of such units, without
stating further that a zoning variation must first be obtained; or to further
state that such property has been approved for such accommodations where a
variation in the zoning has not actually been obtained.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-56; Ord. 79-27, 10-4-1979)



Sec. 7-27.  Sale Of Spray Paint To Minors2:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or deliver spray paint in
an aerosol can to a person less than eighteen (18) years of age within the
village.



(Ord. 86-18, § 1, 5-27-1986)



2  65 ILCS 5/11-1-8.



Sec. 7-28.  Skateboards And Bicycles In Parks:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use a skateboard or bicycle in
any park area, including, but not limited to, tennis courts.



(Ord. 88-18, § 1, 7-25-1988)



Sec. 7-29.  Private Alarm Systems And Outside Alarms1,2:



   (a)   Definitions:



      Burglar Alarm Or Private Alarm System: One which is connected
directly to an alarm panel located with the Police Department communications
center, or one which is activated at an outside location and communicated to
the Police Department facility via telephone lines or other electronic
methods.



      Outside Alarm: A warning device mounted on the outside of a
building which sounds continually when set off or activated.



   (b)   Connection Permit: The Village Police Department is hereby
authorized to permit the connection of private alarm systems, both commercial
and residential, both to a receiving panel or to the telephone located in the
Police Department.



   (c)   Connection Fees: A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be
charged for the initial connection. A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
shall be charged for each subsequent year that the private alarm system
remains connected. The permittee shall pay all costs and expenses in
connection with such installation and shall sign a contract agreeing to the
terms of this Section. Further, the Village reserves the right to select,
inspect and approve all installations and to require reimbursement for actual
costs incurred. The Village Electrical Inspector shall conduct such
inspections.



   (d)   Transmission Of False Alarm: It shall be a violation of this
Section for any person, party, corporation or owner or agent thereof to cause
the transmission of a false alarm. A permittee shall be deemed to be
responsible for all false alarms received through his individual connection.



   (e)   False Alarm Defined: A "false alarm" is defined as one caused
by mechanical problems, human error or omission. An outside alarm set off by
mechanical problems, human error or omission shall be considered a false
alarm.



   (f)   Allowable False Alarms: Each person or establishment shall be
allowed a total of three (3) false alarms within a one year period. This
period shall be concurrent with the fiscal year of the Village (May 1 through
April 30).



   (g)   Excess False Alarms: Whenever it appears that a false alarm
has been received over and above the number specified in subsection (f) of
this Section, the Chief of Police or his authorized representative shall
immediately issue a minor ordinance violation notice (P Ticket). The
provisions of Section 6-5 of this Code shall apply to the issuance of such
citation.



   (h)   False Alarm Fee: The fee for such false alarm violations shall
be forty dollars ($40.00) for each occasion.



   (i)   Connection Fee Waived: All alarms connected to the police
facility as of the effective date of this Section shall not be charged an
initial connection fee.



   (j)   Liability: Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to reduce
the permittee's liability to prosecution and damages, criminal or civil, for
the wilful transmission of a false alarm.



   (k)   Inspection Fees: Inspection fees will be as set forth in
Section 13-1 of this Code.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-55; Ord. 83-19, 7-21-1983; Ord. 89-1, § 1, 6-12-1989;
Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998)



1  See § 2-285 of this Code, § 7-19(b) of this Article and Ch. 9 of this
Code.



2 225 ILCS 445/1 et seq.



Sec. 7-30.  Loitering Prohibited To Certain Individuals:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any habitual drunkard, any person
known to be a narcotic addict, any person known to be a prostitute, or any
person who aids or abets prostitution, or for any person previously convicted
of a felony, or prostitution, or of aiding and abetting prostitution, to
assemble or congregate with other persons of any of the foregoing classes in
or upon the public ways or other public places in the village, or to loaf or
to loiter in or about or frequent the premises of any place where
intoxicating liquors are sold.



   (b)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
fined not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00).



(Code 1972, § 6-4-15)



Sec. 7-31.  Public indecency.



   Any person who shall appear in a public place in a state of nudity or
in a dress not belonging to his sex, with intent to conceal his sex, or in an
indecent or lewd dress, or who shall make any indecent exposure of his
person, shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-17)



   State law reference-Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, § 11-9.



Sec. 7-32.  Pay telephones; unlawful use.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or attempt to
insert, into the coin box or money receptacle of any telephone, any slug,
button, or other substance, or to manipulate or operate or to attempt to
manipulate or operate, in any manner whatever, any telephone instrument or
any mechanism or device connected or commonly used therewith, with the intent
to obtain telephone service without paying therefor.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or attempt to
insert into the coin box or money receptacle of any telephone, any slug,
button, wire, hook, or other implements or substances with the intent to
extract from such coin box or money receptacle a legal tender or coin of the
United States.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-23)



Sec. 7-33.  Discriminatory action.



   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to create a clear and present
danger of a riot or assault, battery, or other unlawful trespass against any
person or group of persons because of his or their race, religion, color,
national origin, or ancestry, or to create a clear and present danger of
arson, vandalism, defacement, or other unlawful trespass against property
because of the race, religion, color, national origin, or ancestry of the
owner, possessor, or authorized user or users of such property, or, in case
of a cemetery, of the decedent buried therein.



   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), or shall be imprisoned
for not less than ten (10) days nor more than six (6) months, or both, for
each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-26)



Sec. 7-34.  Criminal damage to property.



   Any person who wilfully defaces, mars, injures, destroys, or removes
any vault, tomb, monument, gravestone, memorial of the dead, church,
synagogue, or any other structure constituting a place of worship of any
religion, sect, or group, or any part of any contents thereof, or any fence,
tree, shrub, or plant appurtenant thereto, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for a period of six (6) months.
Each separate violation shall constitute a separate offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-27)



Sec. 7-35.  Criminal trespass to property.



   (a)   No person shall commit criminal trespass to property.



   (b)   A person commits criminal trespass to property when he
knowingly:



      (1)    Enters the property, or any part thereof, of another
when, immediately prior to such entry, he receives notice, either oral or
written, from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden;



      (2)    Remains upon the property, or any part thereof, of
another after receiving notice, either written or oral, from the owner or
occupant to depart;



      (3)    Enters upon property open to the public, or any part
thereof, and remains thereon, with a malicious and mischievous intent after
receiving notice, either written or oral, from the owner or occupant to
depart; or



      (4)    Wilfully defaces, mars, injures, or destroys any
building or part of any building or any property of another with paint, tar,
acid, grease, oil, or any other substance which would detrimentally alter the
outer face or substance of such building or any property of another, or any
fence, tree, shrub, or plant appurtenant thereto.



   (c)   Any person convicted of committing criminal trespass to
property shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00).



(Code 1972, § 6-4-28)



Sec. 7-36.  Possession of burglary tools.



   A person commits the crime of possessing burglary tools when he
possesses any tools, key instruments, device, or any explosive suitable for
use in breaking into any building, housetrailer, watercraft, aircraft,
vehicle, railroad car, or any depository designed for the safekeeping of
property, or any part thereof, with intent to enter any such place and with
intent to commit therein a felony or theft.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-37)



Sec. 7-37.  Discharging toy firearms, etc.



   No person shall at any time discharge or set off anywhere in the
village, or have within his possession, any toy firearm, air rifle, toy
cannon, or any gun, device, or bow and arrow that discharges projectiles
either by air, spring, explosives, substance, or any other force. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than
two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, §§ 6-4-42, 6-4-43)



Sec. 7-38.  Assault.



   A person commits assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in
conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a
battery. A person convicted of assault shall be fined not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00).



(Code 1972, § 6-4-44)



   State law reference-Assault, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, § 12-1.



Sec. 7-39.  Battery.



   (a)   A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly
without legal justification and by any means:



      (1)    Causes bodily harm to an individual; or



      (2)    Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking
nature with an individual.



   (b)   A person convicted of battery shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be fined not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and shall not be imprisoned in the penitentiary
but may be imprisoned in a penal institution such as a jail not to exceed six
(6) months.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-45)



   State law reference-Battery, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, § 12-3.



Sec. 7-40.  Theft.



   A person commits theft when he knowingly:



      (1)    Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of
the owner;



      (2)    Obtains by deception control over property of the owner;



      (3)    Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or



      (4)    Obtains control over stolen property knowing the
property to have been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would
reasonably induce him to believe that the property was stolen; and



         a.    Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the
use or benefit of the property;



         b.    Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property
in such manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or



         c.    Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing
such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner
permanently of such use or benefit.



   A person convicted of theft of property not from a person and not
exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in value shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for not more than one (1) year, or both.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-46)



   State law reference-Theft, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, § 16-1.



Sec. 7-41.  Theft of lost or mislaid property.



   A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits
theft when he:



      (1)    Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or
is aware of, or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner;



      (2)    Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the
property to the owner; and



      (3)    Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or
benefit of the property.



   A person convicted of theft of lost or mislaid property shall be fined
not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), or double the value of the property, whichever is greater.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-47)



   State law reference-Theft of lost or mislaid property, Ill. Rev. Stat.
Ch. 38, § 16-2.



Sec. 7-42.  Impersonating police officer.



   (a)   No person shall falsely assume or pretend to be a policeman or
a member of the department of police or, without being a member of the
department of police, wear in public the uniform adopted as the police
uniform.



   (b)   No person shall counterfeit or imitate, or cause to be
counterfeited or imitated, any badge, sign, or device adopted by the
department of police, nor shall any person use or wear any badge, sign,
signal, or device adopted or used by the department or any of the same
similar in appearance thereto, without authority so to do from the board.



   (c)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-49)



   State law reference-Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, § 17-2.



Sec. 7-43.  Possession of cannabis.



   (a)   As used in this section, "cannabis" includes marihuana,
hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of
the plant Cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the
resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin,
including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives,
including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients,
whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by
means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical
synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber
produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any
other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, cake or the
sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to possess any
quantity of any substance containing cannabis, except that the effect of this
section shall be limited to persons knowingly possessing less than thirty
(30) grams of any substance containing cannabis.



   (c)   Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of
this section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-53; Ord. No. 78-2, 1-5-78)



   State law reference-Cannabis Control Act, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56 1/2,
§ 701 et seq.



Sec. 7-44.  Drug paraphernalia.



   (a)   It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to
exhibit, sell, display for sale, offer to sell, give away or have in his
possession, with the intent to give away, any paraphernalia, articles or
equipment, as further defined in subsection (b), commonly used in aiding the
consumption or ingestion of a controlled substance or cannabis as defined by
the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, as amended, except if such articles
or equipment are prescribed for strictly medical purposes and are used as
such.



   (b)   The terms "paraphernalia," "articles" and "equipment" commonly
used in aiding the consumption or ingestion of controlled substances shall
include, but are not limited to, the following articles:



      (1)    Cocaine spoons.



      (2)    Pot pipes.



      (3)    Water pipes.



      (4)    Hypodermic needles.



      (5)    Syringes.



      (6)    Miscellaneous items commonly known as head supplies.



      (7)    Miscellaneous literature describing the consumption or
ingestion of a controlled substance or cannabis which tends to promote the
use of a controlled substance or cannabis.



   (c)   Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of
this section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-54; Ord. No. 78-11, 3-16-78)



   State law references-Tobacco Accessories and Smoking Herbs Control Act,
Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 23, § 2358-1 et seq.; Illinois Controlled Substances
Act, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56 1/2, § 1100 et seq.; Drug Paraphernalia Control
Act, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56 1/2, § 2101 et seq.



Sec. 7-45.  Disorderly conduct.



   (a)   A person shall commit disorderly conduct when he knowingly:



      (1)    Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to provoke,
make or aid in making a breach of peace;



      (2)    Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act,
utterance, gesture or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear
and present danger of a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence;



      (3)    Refuses or fails to cease and desist any peaceful
conduct or activity likely to produce a breach of peace where there is an
imminent threat of violence, and where the police have made all reasonable
efforts to protect the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity, and have
requested that such conduct and activity be stopped and have explained the
request if there is time;



      (4)    Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person
known by him to be a peace officer under circumstances where three (3) or
more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate
vicinity, which acts are likely to cause substantial harm or serious
inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm;



      (5)    Assembles with three (3) or more persons for the
purpose of using force or violence to disturb the public peace;



      (6)    Goes about begging or soliciting funds on the public
ways, except as provided in Article V of Chapter 7 of this Code;



      (7)    Appears in any public place manifestly under the
influence of alcohol, narcotics, or other drugs, not therapeutically
administered, to the degree that he may endanger himself or other persons or
property or annoy persons in his vicinity;



      (8)    Carries in a threatening or menacing manner, without
authority of law, any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife,
stiletto, knuckles, slingshot, an object containing noxious or deleterious
liquid, gas or substance or other dangerous weapon, or conceals such weapon
on or about the person or vehicle;



      (9)    Pickets or demonstrates on a public way within one
thousand one hundred fifty (1,150) feet of any primary or secondary school
building while the school is in session and one-half hour before the school
is in session and one-half hour after the school is in session and has been
completed, provided that this paragraph does not prohibit the peaceful
picketing of any school involved in a labor dispute; or



      (10)    Pickets or demonstrates on a public way within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of any church, temple, synagogue, or other place of
worship while services are being conducted and one-half (1/2) hour before
services are to be conducted and one-half (1/2) hour after services have been
conducted, provided that this paragraph does not prohibit the peaceful
picketing of any church, temple, synagogue, or other place of worship
involved in a labor dispute.



   (b)   A person convicted of disorderly conduct shall be fined not
less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-25)



   State law references:65 ILCS 5/11-5-2, 11-5-3; 720 ILCS 5/26-1.



Sec. 7-46.  Disorderly House1:



   Every common, ill governed, or disorderly house, room or other premises
kept for the encouragement of idleness, illegal gambling, drinking,
fornication, or other such misbehavior is hereby declared to be a nuisance,
and all persons patronizing or frequenting the same shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).



(Code 1972, § 6-4-29; Ord. 2012-16, § 3, 6-11-2012)



1  65 ILCS 5/11-5-1; 740 ILCS.



Sec. 7-47.  Disturbing The Peace, Religious Assemblies:



   Any person who shall disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly
met for religious worship by making noise, or by rude and indecent behavior
or profane discourse within the place of worship, or so near to the same as
to disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting, shall be fined not
exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-30)



Sec. 7-48.  Curfew For Minors:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person less than seventeen (17)
years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place,
street or highway at the following times:



 




Starting On

 

Until



Monday evening at 11:00 P.M.
 
6:00 A.M. Tuesday


Tuesday evening at 11:00 P.M.
 
6:00 A.M. Wednesday


Wednesday evening at 11:00 P.M.
 
6:00 A.M. Thursday


Thursday evening at 11:00 P.M.
 
6:00 A.M. Friday


Friday evening at 12:01 A.M. Saturday
 
6:00 A.M. Saturday


Saturday evening at 12:01 A.M. Sunday
 
6:00 A.M. Sunday


Sunday evening at 11:00 P.M.
 
6:00 A.M. Monday




 



   (b)   A citation for violation of subsection (a) of this section
shall not be issued if the police officer determines upon questioning that
one of the following exceptions is applicable:



      (1)    The minor is accompanied and supervised by a parent,
legal guardian, or a responsible person at least twenty-one (21) years of
age; or



      (2)    The minor is accompanied by a sibling, stepbrother or
sister, or a responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of age
approved by the parent or legal guardian; or



      (3)    The minor is engaged in a business or occupation which
the laws of this state authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of
age to perform; or



      (4)    The minor is participating in, going to, or returning
from:



         a.    A school activity;



         b.    A religious or political event;



         c.    An emergency involving the protection of a person
or property from imminent threat of harm or damage;



         d.   An activity conducted by a nonprofit or
governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training, or other
care under the supervision of one (1) or more adults;



         e.   An activity involving the exercise of the child’s
rights to freedom of speech, or the right to assemble and petition, or other
right protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution
or Article 1, Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Constitution of the State of
Illinois or both.



   (c)   It shall be the duty of all police officers upon discovering
any child in violation of this section to inquire of such child as to his or
her name, age and place of residence or guardian, and to see that such child
is promptly returned to the parent, custodian or legal guardian.



   (d)   Upon a police officer’s reasonable belief that a minor is in
violation of this section and if the police officer is unable to promptly
return a minor to the parent, custodian or legal guardian of the minor, said
minor may be detained until the parent or guardian of the minor shall take
such minor into custody. A police officer shall, upon taking custody of a
minor under this section, make reasonable attempts to contact the parent or
guardian of the minor in custody.



   (e)   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a minor in his or her custody or control to violate this
section.



   (f)   Any person violating this section shall be fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, seventy-five dollars ($75.00)
for the second offense and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
any subsequent offense.



(Code 1969, Ch. 19, Art. 2; Code 1972, §§ 6-8-1-6-8-3; Ord. 91-37, § 1,
11-11-1991; Ord. 2004-11, § 1, 4-26-2004)



Sec. 7-49.  Penalty:



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, where no
other penalty is provided, shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-4-24; Ord. 2004-11, § 2, 4-26-2004)



Sec. 7-50.  Graffiti:



   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to inscribe, draw, or otherwise
place upon the surface of any structure or wall that is privately or publicly
owned, any word, phrase, diagram, symbol, sketch or letters where the
contents thereof are visible to any member of the general public.



   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). If gang related symbols are used, the fine imposed shall
be double the amount. In addition, a mandatory requirement shall be imposed
by any court finding a person guilty of violating the provisions of this
section as a condition to any probation or supervision that full and complete
restitution be made to the owner of the property for expenses incurred in the
removal of the material and repair of the structure or wall.



(Ord. 92-10, § 1, 3-9-1992)



Sec. 7-51.  Owner's Responsibility:



   (a)   Graffiti must be removed from commercial or multi-family
property within three (3) days of discovery and written notice from the
police department to the owner of the premises.



   (b)   Graffiti must be removed from residential (R-1) property
within fourteen (14) days of discovery and written notice from the police
department to the owner of the premises.



(Ord. 92-10, § 2, 3-9-1992)



Sec. 7-52.  Reserved:



Sec. 7-53.  Gang Recruitment:



   No person shall force, threaten to use force, intimidate or coerce
another, by any means, to join any group, club or organization.



   (This section shall not apply to persons engaged in lawful concerted
activities governed and protected by the federal statute commonly known as
the "national labor relations act.")



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.



(Ord. 92-11, § 1, 3-9-1992)



Sec. 7-54.  Outdoor Water Use Restrictions:




   (a)   No person shall, during the period of May 15 through September
15, permit or sprinkle any lawn, garden or landscape area during the hours of
10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Lawn sprinkling shall not occur on consecutive days
and is only allowed on an odd/even basis – sprinkling is permitted on odd
calendar days if the last digit of the street address is an odd number or on
even calendar days if the last digit of the street address is an even number.
New lawns less than three (3) months old are exempt from the foregoing
restrictions.





   (b)   After a temporary emergency water shortage is declared by the
mayor, no person shall use water for any outside purpose, including but not
limited to, watering of lawns; watering of gardens; watering of landscaping;
washing of cars; washing of outside areas such as windows, buildings,
sidewalks or driveways; or filling of swimming pools during prohibited hours.





   (c)   For the purposes of this section, the word “sprinkle”
means the use of any device for distributing water over an area not under the
active control and in the possession of a person such as by a mechanical or
automatic sprinkler or sprinkler system.





   (d)   For the purposes of this section, the word “watering”
means the distribution of water over an area under the active control and in
the possession of a person such as by hose or sprinkling can.




   (e)   All new and replacement sprinkler systems shall be equipped
with a WaterSense labeled irrigation controller and shall otherwise be in
compliance with Section 2.5(g) of the Illinois Plumbing License Law.



(Ord. 2015-16, § 1, 9-28-2015)



Sec. 7-55–7-85.  Reserved:



ARTICLE II.  ANIMALS1,2



1 See also § 3-521 et seq., veterinary hospitals; § 5-137, animals in
bakeries, of this code.



2 65 ILCS 5/11-20-9, 11-40-1; 520 ILCS; 225 ILCS 115/1 et seq.; 410 ILCS 40/1
et seq.



DIVISION I.  GENERALLY



Sec. 7-86.  Animal Warden–Generally:



   There is hereby created the office of animal warden. The animal warden
shall be appointed by the president with the advice and concurrence of the
board. The president and the board may designate such person as they deem
appropriate, whether residing within or outside the village, to act as animal
warden. His term shall commence on May 1 and shall expire on April 30 of each
year.



(Code 1972, §§ 6-5-21, 6-5-1924)



Sec. 7-87.  Animal Warden-Duties:



   (a)   The animal warden shall be an auxiliary police officer for the
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article and shall perform his
duties under the supervision of the chief of police. He is hereby authorized
to make all necessary arrests in carrying out the provisions of this article.
The duties of the animal warden shall be in addition to the enforcement by
the police department.



   (b)   The animal warden shall submit monthly reports to the chief of
police setting forth the number of animals impounded indicating the breed,
sex and color, and the number of animals disposed of or redeemed, the number
of arrests made and/or warning tickets issued and the names and addresses of
any owner or keeper of animals involved.



   (c)   For purposes of carrying out the provisions of this Code and
making inspections hereunder, the animal warden or his authorized
representative, or any officer of the law, may enter upon private premises to
apprehend a straying dog or other animal, a dangerous or vicious dog or other
animal, or a dog or other animal thought to be infected with rabies.  If,
after request therefore the owner of such dog or animal shall refuse to
deliver the dog or other animal to the warden or officer, the owner shall be
in violation of this Code. 



(Code 1972, § 6-5-25; Ord. 2007-09, § 2, 7-23-2007)



Sec. 7-88.  Animal Warden-Compensation:



   The animal warden shall receive such compensation as shall be
determined in accordance with section 2-34 of this code.



(Ord. 70-6, 4-6-1970; Code 1972, § 6-5-26)



Sec. 7-89.  Raising Of Animals:



   (a)   No person shall keep or maintain any animals for breeding
purposes within the corporate limits of the village, except in conformity
with the provisions of this code.



   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).



(Code 1972, § 6-5-1)



Sec. 7-90.  Raising Or Slaughtering Poultry, Animals:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or raise any cattle, hogs,
sheep or poultry, or any similar animal which can be used for food purposes,
within three hundred feet (300') of any residence or school.  It shall be
unlawful to slaughter or kill any poultry or fowl, or use any house, place or
building in which the business of slaughtering such poultry or fowl may be
carried on in the village, unless such house, place or building is not less
than three hundred feet (300') from any residence of school.



(Code 1969, Ch. 5; Code 1972, § 7-2-28)



Sec. 7-91.  Housing Of Animals 1 :



   (a)   Any person keeping, breeding or raising animals within the
corporate limits of the village where such is permitted by ordinance shall
provide animals with adequate space and housing. Housing shall not be of
unsightly nature and shall conform to provisions of this code and the laws of
the state with regard to health and sanitation regulations. Same shall be
kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and such enclosures,
barns or kennels shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable hours by
the board of health, the animal warden, or the police department of the
village.



   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00).



(Code 1972, § 6-5-2)



1  510 ILCS 70/1 et seq.



Sec. 7-92.  Animal Refuse:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal to
deposit any dung or offal on any property other than that of the owners.



   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00).



(Code 1972, § 6-5-3)



Sec. 7-93.  Diseased Animals2:



   (a)   No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious
disease shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any public
place whereby the health of a person or animal may be affected; nor shall any
diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof,
except under supervision of the health officer and the animal warden.



   (b)   It is hereby made the duty of the health officer and the
animal warden to secure such disposition of any diseased animals and such
treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread of
the contagion or infection, except in cases where the state department of
agriculture is empowered to act.



   (c)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).



(Code 1972, § 6-5-6)



2  510 ILCS 50/1 et seq.; 720 ILCS 575/258.



Sec. 7-94.  Noise 1 :



   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep any animal which
disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night.



(Code 1972, § 6-5-7)



1   65 ILCS 5/11-5-2.



Sec. 7-95.  Stray Animals:



   (a)   It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal to keep same
confined within a pen or kept on a leash. No animal shall be allowed to roam
at large in the village. It shall be unlawful to picket or tie any animal on
public property or private property other than that of the owner for the
purpose of grazing, feeding or exercising.



   (b)   Any animal found at large or unlawfully picketed shall be
taken up and impounded in the manner provided in this article.



(Code 1972, § 6-5-8)



Sec. 7-96.  Impounding And Disposal:



   There shall be provided and maintained at some suitable place an animal
control center for the impounding of all animals found running at large in
violation of this article.  A community police officer, animal warden or
police officer may impound in the animal control center unlicensed dogs four
(4) months of age and over; any dog found running at large; any abandoned
animal; any dangerous animal that has acted in a threatening or terrorizing
manner or who has bitten or attempted to bite a person or animal; vicious
dogs; or any animal maintained in violation of this Code. 



(Code 1972, § 6-5-21; Ord. 2007-09, § 3, 7-23-2007)



Sec. 7-97.  Impounding Fees; Redemption:



   (a)   If an animal is impounded, the animal warden shall be entitled
to the following fees:



      (1)   If any animal is redeemed by the owner, the redemption
fee shall be as set forth in section 13-1 of this code per day for each day
subsequent to the day of impounding.



      (2)   If any animal is not redeemed by the owner, the village
shall pay the animal warden such fees as shall be determined by resolution of
the board.



   (b)   All impounded animals, except for vicious dogs, shall be held
for a period of three (3) days and may be redeemed by the owner as long as
the animal has a current license tag and all fees are paid.



   (c)   A vicious animal as defined in this code that has been
impounded under provisions of this section may not be redeemed and shall be
humanely euthanized pursuant to the Illinois Humane Care for Animals Act upon
such determination, provided that in all cases where the animal has bitten
any person or caused an abrasion of the skin of such person, no injured shall
be done to the head of the animal, and it shall be the duty of the person
euthanizing the animal to immediately deliver the carcass to a licensed
veterinarian to prepare the head and brain for delivery to the Cook County
rabies control department. 



(Code 1972, § 6-5-22; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2,
3-23-1998; Ord. 2007-09, § 4, 7-23-2007)



Sec. 7-98.  Cruelty To Animals 2 :



   No person shall cruelly treat any animal in any way. Any person who
inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this section.



(Code 1972, § 6-5-9)



2   510 ILCS 70/3.01; 65 ILCS 5/11-5-6.



Sec. 7-99.  Destroying Of Animals:



   When it is deemed necessary in the interest of public safety or in the
interest of humane treatment, the animal warden or the police department may
destroy animals.



(Code 1972, § 6-5-10)



Sec. 7-100.  Animal Bites 1 :



   Whenever any animal bites any person, the owner of the animal or any
person having knowledge of the bite shall immediately notify the chief of
police. The chief of police shall cause the animal to be confined under the
supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a period of at least ten (10)
days. If at the end of the ten (10) day period, the veterinarian determines
that the animal has symptoms of rabies, it shall be destroyed and the head
sent to the state department of health for examination for rabies. Any
expense incurred in the handling of any animal under this section shall be
borne by the owner or keeper.



(Code 1972, § 6-5-18)



1 510 ILCS 5/13.



Sec. 7-101.  Symptoms Of Rabies 2 :



   The owner of any animal which exhibits symptoms of rabies and any
animal in direct contact with such animal, whether or not such animals have
been vaccinated, shall immediately notify the chief of police and shall
promptly confine such animals, or have them confined, under suitable
observation, for a period of at least ten (10) days, unless officially
authorized by the chief of police in writing to release them sooner.



(Code 1972, § 6-5-19)



2   510 ILCS 5/12.



Sec. 7-102.  Leghold Traps3:



   (a)   No person shall use or permit the use of any leghold animal
trap or similar device with spring activated jaws of the type used for the
trapping of furbearing animals which is capable of inflicting cruelty upon
animals or which constitutes a hazard to small children.



   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).



(Code 1972, § 6-5-27; Ord. 83-17, 7-21-1983)



3  520 ILCS 5/2.33a.



Sec. 7-103.  Vicious And Wild Animals; Dogfighting; Number Of Certain
Animals Kept:



   (a)   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used
in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:



      Attack: Any aggressive, menacing or vicious physical contact
between any dog and any person or other animal including but not limited to
contact of the mouth or teeth of the dog with the victim of the attack and
any striking or scratching of the victim of the attack by the paws of any
dog, regardless of whether or not such actions result in injuries of any kind
sustained by a victim.



      Bite: Seizing with the teeth or jaws so that the person or other
animal seized has been nipped, gripped, cut, wounded or pierced, and further
includes the contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.



      Confinement Structure: A securely locked pen, kennel or other
structure at least six feet (6') in height, forming or causing an enclosure
suitable to prevent the entry of young children and suitable to confine a
vicious or dangerous dog. Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed and
locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom, shall be designed to
prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure, shall comply with all
building and zoning regulations of the village, shall be adequately lighted
and ventilated, and shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



      Dog, Dangerous:  Any dog which, unmuzzled, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person or other animal in an apparent
attitude of attack upon any street, sidewalk or any public grounds or place,
or any premises other than those of its owner, and which does not cause
serious physical injury, provided that such approach is unprovoked.



      Dog, Vicious:



         (1)   Any dog with a known tendency, propensity or
disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to, or otherwise threaten
the safety of human beings or domestic animals;



         (2)   Any dog which has caused serious physical injury
as defined in this section.



         (3)   Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or
bites, or has attacked or bitten, a human being or domestic animal on public
or private property;



         (4)   Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for
the purpose of dogfighting, or any dog trained for dogfighting;



         (5)   Any dog which has been found to be a dangerous dog
on three (3) separate occasions in the village; or



         (6)   Any dog which has been declared a vicious dog as
defined in the Illinois Animal Control Act by a court of competent
jurisdiction, from which an order was entered based on that finding.



      Guide Dog:  A dog trained and used to aid the blind or hearing
impaired, provided that the owner of any such dog complies with the
provisions contained in 510 ILCS 5/8.



      Injury, Serious Physical:  Any physical injury that creates a
substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious disfigurement,
protracted impairment of health, impairment of the function of any bodily
organ, or elastic surgery.



      K-9 Dog:  A dog trained and used in the performance of official
police duties authorized by the chief of police, provided that any such dog
shall be currently inoculated against rabies as provided for in 510 ILCS 5/8.



      Leash: A strap or chain, manufactured for use as a leash and
securely fastened to the collar or harness of a dog, that shall in no case be
longer than eight feet (8') and shall be of sufficient strength to keep the
dog under control.



      Muzzle: A device constructed of strong, soft material or metal
which will prevent a dog from biting any person or animal, provided that such
muzzle is constructed in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration.



      Neutered Animal: A male or female animal treated by a licensed
veterinarian to render it incapable of reproduction.



      Owner:  Any person, firm, corporation, organization or
department (1) having a right of property in an animal, (2) keeping an
animal, (3) caring for or having custody of an animal; or (4) knowingly
permitting an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by said
person, firm, corporation, organization or department.



      Run at Large: To be free of restraint off the premises of the
owner.



      Veterinary Hospital: Any place used for the treatment of animals
operated by a veterinarian and licensed by the state of Illinois.



   (b)   Vicious Dogs–Requirements and Prohibitions:



      (1)   It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, maintain, own or
in any way possess within the corporate limits of the village any vicious dog.



      (2)   Notwithstanding any provisions contained in this title
to the contrary, K-9 and guide dogs shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section.



   (c)   Dangerous Dogs–Requirements and Prohibitions:



      (1)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall not suffer or permit
the dog to be beyond the premises of the owner unless the dog is securely
muzzled and restrained by a chain or leash no longer than six (6) feet in
length, and under the direct control, supervision, and physical restraint of
the owner, provided that, in no event, shall such dog be under the direct
control or supervision of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting
any human or animal.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any dangerous dog to annoy,
endanger or approach, in an apparent attitude of attack, or cause injury to,
any person or animal.



   (d)   Nuisance Declared:  Each vicious or dangerous dog is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. Vicious dogs shall be prohibited from the
village and dangerous dogs shall only be kept, harbored, maintained, owned or
possessed within the corporate limits of the village in strict conformance
with the provisions of this section.



      (1)   Report of Incident; Investigation:  Any person or
persons who witness an incident involving a bite, attack, attempt to attack,
or menacing behavior by any dog occurring in the village shall file a sworn
affidavit of complaint with the police department setting out the nature and
date of the incident, a description of the dog, and if known, the owner of
the dog and the address of the owner.



      (2)   The police department, upon receipt of an affidavit of
complaint, shall investigate the complaint to determine whether the dog is
dangerous or vicious.  If the police department finds that the dog is
dangerous or vicious, the owner shall be notified by certified mail of such
finding.  No dog shall be found dangerous or vicious if the attack or
menacing behavior was directed at a person who was, at the time in question,
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises of the owner;
or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog; or who has in the
past teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog; or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime.



      (3)   The owner of a dog found to be dangerous or vicious may,
within seven (7) days of the mailing of notice by the police department, make
a written request to the police department for a review of such finding. 
Such review shall be made by the chief of police within seven (7) days of
such request and shall be based upon the sworn affidavit of complaint and any
statements or evidence presented by the owner, witnesses to the incident,
police department personnel or any other person possessing information
relevant to such finding. The chief of police shall issue the written
findings within five (5) days after the review, or within twelve (12) days of
receipt of the written request for review, sustaining or overruling the
finding made by the police department. Pursuant to state law, the owner of a
dog found to be dangerous may file a complaint in the circuit court within
thirty-five (35) days of receipt of notice of the determination.



      (4)   If a dog is found to be vicious or upon three (3)
findings that a dog is dangerous, said dog will be deemed to be a vicious
dog, subject to all provisions of the village code.



   (e)   Dogfighting.  No person shall possess, harbor or maintain the
care or custody of any dog for the purpose of dogfighting, or train, torment,
badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of causing or encouraging the dog
to attack human beings or domestic animals.



   (f)   Permitted number of animals. It shall be unlawful for any
person to house, keep, maintain or own on any premises or property within the
Village more than three (3) dogs, more than three (3) cats, or more than
three (3) dogs and cats combined. This subsection shall not apply to any duly
licensed pet shop, animal hospital or kennel. The limitation in this
subsection shall not apply to dogs or cats which are less than one (1) month
in age if they were born of dogs or cats legally on the premises. In order to
be legally on the premises, a dog or cat must be licensed by the Village and
must be within the limitation of this subsection.



      (1)   No person shall keep or permit more than one (1)
dangerous dog to be or remain in or about any single-family residence except
as those circumstances enumerated in the village code.



      (2)   Where a household contains one (1) dangerous dog, the
maximum number of animals allowed (not counting fish) in that residence is
three (3), whereby the other four (4) animals must be non-dangerous.



   (g)   Animals, keeping prohibited.  It shall be unlawful to keep,
harbor, own or in any way possess within the corporate limits of the Village:



      (1)   Any warm-blooded, carnivorous or omnivorous, wild or
exotic animal (including but not limited to nonhuman primates, raccoons,
skunks, foxes and wild and exotic cats; but excluding fowl, ferrets and small
rodents of varieties used for laboratory purposes).



      (2)   Any animal having poisonous bites.



      (3)   Any vicious dog.



   (h)   Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
section may be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense.



(Ord. No. 89-5, § 3, 2-27-89; Ord. 2007-09, § 5, 7-23-2007)



   State law reference–Authority for above section, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch.
24, § 11-1-1; cruelty to animals, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-5-6; animals
running at large, dog tax, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-20-9.



Sec. 7-104.  Penalties.



   Any person violating any provision of the following sections shall be
fined not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00): 7-94, 7-95, 7-98, 7-100,
7-101, 7-117, 7-119, 7-120, and 7-123-7-125.



Sec. 7-105.  Construction of carrier pigeon lofts.



   (a)   All lofts for carrier pigeons and other birds shall be a
maximum of six (6) feet wide and six (6) feet deep. The enclosure shall be
constructed on stilts or supports approved by the building commissioner. The
bottom shall be three (3) feet above ground level, and it shall be
constructed of screening or other porous material that shall allow waste to
fall upon the ground. The maximum height of the structure shall be eight (8)
feet above ground level. Three (3) sides shall be enclosed, and one side
open. The structure must comply with all setback requirements of the Village
Code.



   (b)   All plans and specifications for the construction of the
structure shall be submitted to and approved by the building commissioner.



   (c)   Pursuant to state law (Chapter 8, Paragraph 903, Illinois
Revised Statutes), the loft shall be maintained in a clean, orderly
condition, kept in good repair and inspected annually.



   (d)   The maximum number of pigeons that may be kept at one location
shall be twenty-five (25).



(Ord. No. 92-26, § 1, 6-22-92)



Sec. 7-106–7-115.  Reserved.



DIVISION  2. DOGS GENERALLY* 2



* State law reference–Animal Control Act, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 8, § 351 et
seq.



Sec. 7-116.  Definition:



   For the purpose of this division, the word "dog" shall be construed to
include any animal of the canine species.



(Code 1972, § 6-5-11)



   State law reference–"Dog" defined, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 8, § 352.11.



Sec. 7-117.  Display Of License Tags:



   Every dog shall be provided by the owner or keeper with a leather or
chain collar, to which a license tag will be securely fastened. No dog shall
be permitted to remain within the limits of the Village unless the owner or
keeper thereof shall have caused such dog to be registered and provided with
such collar and tag. Any owner or keeper of a dog failing to provide such
collar and tag shall be subject to fine as provided in section 7-103 for
every day such dog goes unlicensed.



(Code 1972, § 6-5-4)



Sec. 7-118.  Female Dogs At Large:



   It shall be unlawful for any bitch or female dog to run at large in the
village while in heat, and any such bitch or female dog may be impounded by
any police officer of the village. Any person who shall knowingly suffer or
permit any bitch or female dog owned or possessed by him to run at large
while in heat shall be fined as in this code provided.



(Code 1972, § 6-5-5)



Sec. 7-119.  Ownership; How Shown:



   Any person who shall harbor any dog or suffer or permit any dog to be
and remain at or about his stable, store or other premises in the village
shall be held to be the owner of the same and subject to the same and subject
to the penalties contained in this code.



(Code 1972, § 6-5-12)



Sec. 7-120.  Dog License Required:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a dog within the
corporate limits of the village unless he shall procure a license as provided
in this division.



(Code 1972, § 6-5-13)



Sec. 7-121.  License Regulations:



   (a)   Application for license under this division shall be made to
the village. The applicant’s name and address and the name, breed, color
and sex of each dog owned or kept by the applicant, except vicious dogs,
shall be supplied to the village. The applicant shall also deliver to the
village, at the time of the application, a certificate of a duly registered
veterinarian that such dog has been inoculated for rabies, in compliance with
section 7-124. Upon the foregoing information and certificate being supplied,
and the payment of the required fee, the village shall issue the license.



   (b)   The village shall issue to the applicant a license certificate
and metallic tag for each dog for which the fee has been paid. The shape of
such metallic tag shall be changed each year, and it shall have stamped
thereon the year for which the fee is paid. Such tags shall bear
identification numbers and the letters “D.T.”



   (c)   No license shall be issued to vicious dogs pursuant to the
provisions of this code, which prohibits such animals in the village. 



(Code 1972, § 6-5-14; Ord. 2007-09, § 6, 7-23-2007; Ord. 2009-15, § 32,
6-22-2009)



Sec. 7-122.  License Fees; Expiration:



   The license fees to be paid to the village under this division shall be
the sum of five dollars ($5.00) for each dog annually. All licenses shall
expire on December 31 of each year. 



(Code 1972, § 6-5-15; Ord. No. 88-5, § 1, 3-28-88)



Sec. 7-123.  Removal Of Tag; Release of Dog:



   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner
or keeper, to remove the collar and/or license tag from any dog for which the
Justice dog license has been paid or to untie, take or release any such dog
out of the enclosure or off the premises of its owner or keeper. 



(Code 1972, § 6-5-16)



Sec. 7-124.  Inoculation For Rabies1:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a dog within the
corporate limits of the village unless the dog has been inoculated for
rabies. In order to comply with this section, dogs shall be inoculated every
twelve (12) months.



(Code 1972, § 6-5-17)



1  510 ILCS 5/8.1 et seq.



Sec. 7-125.  Running At Large Generally:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog owned by him or
in his possession to travel or run at large upon the streets, alleys, other
public places or upon private property of another in the corporate limits of
the village, unless such dog is restrained by a leash no more than six feet
(6') in length. In no circumstances shall any dog be walked or aired upon
private property of another unless and until permission is granted by the
owner of such property.  It shall be considered a separate offense for an
owner to knowingly allow a dangerous dog to run at large, whereby said action
results in injury to a person or animal.  Dangerous dogs found running at
large in violation of this section will be subject to a fine greater than
that of non-dangerous dogs found in violation, with fines set forth in the
annual fee ordinance. 



(Code 1972, § 6-5-20; Ord. 2007-09, § 7, 7-23-2007)



Sec. 7-126.  Enforcement:



   It shall be the duty of the police department or some person designated
by the board to enforce the provisions of this division and to take up and
impound any dog found running at large or not wearing a collar and license
tag within the corporate limits of the village as required by this division. 



(Code 1972, § 6-5-23)



Secs. 7-127–7-170.  Reserved:



ARTICLE III.  REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND DEBRIS 1



1  65 ILCS 5/11-20-6, 5/11-20-7, 5/11-20-13; see also chapter 5 of this code.



Sec. 7-171.  Definition:



   As used in this article, the word "weed" shall mean jimson, burdock,
ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other plants of a like kind.



(Code 1972, § 6-6-1)



Sec. 7-172.  Weeds, Debris Declared Nuisance:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any weeds, plants or
grass, other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, to grow
to a height exceeding eight inches (8"), or to permit any debris to
accumulate anywhere in the village. Such plants and weeds exceeding such
height, and such debris, are hereby declared to be a nuisance.



(Code 1972, §§ 6-6-1, 6-6-2)



Sec. 7-173.  Barberry Bushes:



   It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to plant or permit
the growth of the bush of the species of tall, common or European barberry,
further known as Berberis vulgaris, or its horticultural varieties within the
village.



(Code 1972, § 6-6-3)



Sec. 7-174.  Notice To Abate Weeds, Debris; Removal By Village Upon Failure
Of Owner:



   (a)   It shall be the duty of the building commissioner to serve or
cause to be served a notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on
which weeds or plants are permitted to grow, or on which there is an
accumulation of debris, in violation of the provisions of this article, and
to demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10) days.



   (b)   If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within ten
(10) days after such notice, the building commissioner may proceed to abate
such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such
expense shall be charged to and paid by such owner or occupant.



(Ord. 69-15, 7-2-1969; Code 1972, §§ 6-6-4, 6-6-5)



Sec. 7-175.  Lien-For Recovery Of Village Expenses; Notice To Property Owner:



   (a)   Charges for weed cutting and debris removal shall be a lien
upon the real estate affected, when notice of lien is filed as provided by
statute 2. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 1) a
description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, 2) the
amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service, and 3) the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by
the village.



   (b)   Notice of the bill for weed cutting or debris removal shall be
mailed to the owner of the premises whenever such bill remains unpaid for a
period of sixty (60) days after it has been rendered.



   (c)   The failure of the village to mail such notice, or the failure
of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the right to foreclose
the lien for unpaid bills for weed cutting or debris removal as provided for
in section 7-176 of this article.



(Code 1972, § 6-6-6; Ord. 2009-15, § 33, 6-22-2009)



2.  65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.



Sec. 7-176.  Lien-Foreclosure 1:



   (a)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid debris removal or weed
cutting charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of
such sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is
the case in foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill
in equity in the name of the village.



   (b)   The village attorney is hereby authorized and directed to
institute such proceedings, in the name of the village, in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which a bill for weed
cutting or debris removal has remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has
been rendered.



(Code 1972, § 6-6-7)



1.  65 ILCS 5/11-20-13; 770 ILCS 60/9 et seq.; 735 ILCS 5/15-1101 et seq.



Sec. 7-177.  Fee Charged By Village:



   The fee for weed or debris removal, if village equipment and personnel
are used, will be set, from time to time, by the president and board of
trustees. If equipment must be rented, or outside help employed or hired, the
fee shall be the amount of the bill which the village receives for such
services or equipment.



(Code 1972, § 6-6-8; Ord. 85-10, 6-24-1985; Ord. 93-29, § 1, 9-13-1993)



Sec. 7-178.  Alternative Remedies:



   In addition to the other remedies specified in this article, the
building commissioner or police department may also issue an appropriate
citation to either the owner or the occupant of the property where the plants
or weeds exceeding eight inches (8") in height are permitted to grow or where
other violations of this article exist. Such citation shall require the owner
or occupant to appear in court for allowing the nuisance to exist.



(Ord. 86-32, 10-13-1986)



Secs. 7-179–7-195.  Reserved:



ARTICLE IV.  PUBLIC SAFETY1 3



1  See also chapter 6 of this code.



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 7-196.  Penalty:



   Any person or corporation convicted of violating any of the sections in
this article where a specific penalty is not provided shall be fined not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00).



(Code 1972, §§ 6-11-11, 6-11-14-6-11-16, 6-11-27; Ord. 75-14, 9-4-1975;
Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998)



Sec. 7-197.  School Vehicle-Definition1:



   For the purposes of this article, the term "school vehicle" means a
vehicle which, for direct or indirect compensation, transports children to or
from any school, day nursery, daycare center, day camp, play group or any
regularly conducted public or private educational, religious, recreational or
care program. This definition shall include motor vehicles of any body style
so used, whether operated by the school or other institution, association or
enterprise as defined herein or by an independent operator, and shall include
such vehicles whether the fee or cost for such transportation is paid to the
owner of the vehicle directly by such children or their parents or guardians,
or paid by the sponsoring school, association or enterprise, whether on a per
trip or other basis. All public carriers certified by the state commerce
commission and all vehicles belonging to a public utility or municipal
corporation are not included in this definition.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-1)



1  625 ILCS 5/1-182.



Sec. 7-198.  School Vehicle-Passenger Capacity, Seating:



   No school vehicle shall be operated while containing a number of
passengers in excess of that indicated on the certificate of registration2,
nor shall any school vehicle be operated unless all passengers are seated in
the space provided for them.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-2)



2  625 ILCS 5/3-100 et seq., 5/11-1424, 5/12-707.



Sec. 7-199.  School Vehicle-Seat And Aisle Specifications:



   All seats of every school vehicle shall be firmly anchored to the floor
of the vehicle. All seats shall be equipped with backs3. There shall be a
clear aisle leading from all seats to regular exit doors.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-3)



3  625 ILCS 5/12-807.1.



Sec. 7-200.  School Vehicle-Fire Extinguishers Required4:



   Every school vehicle shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher in good
operating condition, approved by the fire chief or his duly appointed
deputies, and readily accessible at all times when such vehicle is in
operation.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-4)



4  See also chapter 4 of this code; 625 ILCS 5/12-808.



Sec. 7-201.  School Vehicle-Penalty For Violating Provisions:



   Any person convicted of violating any provision of sections 7-197
through 7-200 of this division, shall be fined not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).



(Code 1972, § 6-11-4; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998)



Sec. 7-202.  Nuisances Connected With Businesses5:



   No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatever which is dangerous
or detrimental to health shall be allowed to exist in connection with any
business, or to be used therein, or be used in any work or labor performed in
the village. No nuisance shall be permitted to exist in connection with any
business or in connection with any such work or labor.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-6)



5  See chapter 3 of this code.



Sec. 7-203.  Dead Or Live Animals, Other Substances Creating Nuisance:



   No person shall bring into the village or keep therein for sale or
otherwise, either for food or for any purpose, any dead or live animal, nor
any matter, substance or thing, which shall be a nuisance or which shall
occasion a nuisance in the village, or which may or shall be dangerous or
detrimental to health.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-7)



Sec. 7-204.  Spreading Poison:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to spread, or to cause or permit
any agent or employee to spread, any poison for the purpose of killing rats,
mice, insects or other vermin in any public way or public place in the
village; and it shall be unlawful for any person to spread, or to cause or
permit any agent or employee to spread, any poison for such purpose in any
yard, court, passageway or other open place or private premises, or on the
outside of any building or structure, or in any place within a building which
is open to the general public, or where pet dogs, cats or other domestic
animals or fowl have access, without placing the same in a receptacle of such
kind or character that it can be reached only by the kind of vermin which the
poison is intended to kill, or without placing a wire or other guard about
same in such way that no child or domestic animal, domestic fowl or other
harmless creature can reach the same.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-8)



Sec. 7-205.  Throwing Missiles In Public Places Of Amusement1:



   No person shall cast, drop or throw any object, missile or any other
substance or article in, from or into any public place of amusement.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-11)



1  See § 3-121 et seq., of this code.



Sec. 7-206.  Bridges; Certain Actions Prohibited; Penalty:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)    Loiter on any public bridge, viaduct or overpass in
such manner or for such purpose as might jeopardize the safety or well being
of any person upon or near the roadway below;



      (2)    Stop any vehicle on any public bridge, viaduct or
overpass, except for necessary emergency purposes or upon the order of a
police officer or other person authorized to direct such action;



      (3)    Throw or drop or cause to be thrown or dropped from any
public bridge, viaduct or overpass any article or thing which might
jeopardize the safety or well being of any person upon or near the roadway
below.



   (b)   Any violation of any of the provisions of this section shall
constitute a nuisance and the offender shall be subject to a fine not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), or imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or both.
Every violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-12; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2,
3-23-1998)



Sec. 7-207.  Sharp Objects On Public Ways; Duty To Remove2:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump or deposit upon any
public way any glass article, broken glass, nails, tacks, sharp metal objects
or other articles or material that may cause damage to rubber tires or motor
vehicles. It shall be the duty of every owner or person in possession or
control of any motor vehicle, the glass or metal parts from which are broken
and dropped upon any public way, to promptly remove such broken glass and
metal parts and restore the public way to a condition safe for automotive
traffic.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-13)



2  See chapter 10 of this code.



Sec. 7-208.  Corrosive, Caustic Substances-Possession, Sale:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession
or for any person to carry about any corrosive or caustic acid or phosphorus,
or any solution or mixture thereof, or any hydrogen sulphide, valerianic
acid, ammonium valerianate, valerianate of zinc, or any other nauseous,
offensive or filthy substance of like or similar nature; provided, that this
provision shall not apply to manufacturing and wholesale druggists, retail
druggists, physicians, chemists or regularly established laboratories, or to
persons who have procured any of such substances for medicinal purposes upon
a prescription of a physician regularly licensed under the laws of the State.



   (b)   No person shall give, sell, offer to sell or give away or have
in his possession any stink ball or any bomb, ball tube, vial or bottle made
of thin glass or other easily breakable material containing any of the above
mentioned substances.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-14)



Sec. 7-209.  Corrosive, Caustic Substances-Dispensing By Physician:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give away any corrosive
or caustic acid, or any phosphorus or solution thereof, or any hydrogen
sulphide, valerianic acid, ammonium valerianate, valerianate of zinc or any
solution or mixture of such substances, or any other nauseous, offensive or
filthy substances of like or similar nature, except upon the written
prescription of a physician licensed under the laws of the State. Such
prescription shall be filled only once and shall have written upon it the
name and address of the patient. This Section shall not apply to sales at
wholesale by manufacturing or wholesale druggists to retail druggists,
physicians or chemists.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-15)



Sec. 7-210.  Corrosive, Caustic Substances-Casting, Throwing, Depositing In
Public Places:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw, deposit or place
any stink ball, fire ball, or bomb, described in Section 7-208 of this
Division or to cast, deposit or place any substance described in Section
7-209 of this Division, from, upon or to any public place in the Village, or
at, upon or within any public conveyance, or upon the floor or within any
restaurant, theater, hall, assembly, room or public building, or at, upon or
within any automobile or other vehicle within the Village.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-16)



Sec. 7-211.  Shooting Galleries, Rifle Ranges, Etc.-License Required:



   No person shall conduct or operate any shooting gallery, rifle range,
gun club or other place where firearms are discharged in the Village without
first being licensed to do so.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-25)



Sec. 7-212.  Shooting Galleries, Rifle Ranges, Etc.-Restriction On Location;
Safety Precautions:



   (a)   No shooting gallery shall be located upon any street in any
block in which two-thirds (2/3) of the buildings on both sides of the street
between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets of such block are used
exclusively for residence purposes, without the written consent of a majority
of the owners of the property according to frontage on both sides of the
street between such intersecting streets.



   (b)   Each rifle range, gun club or other place upon or in which
firearms may be discharged shall be sufficiently ample to permit the
discharge thereon or therein of firearms without endangering the safety of
the public or persons living adjacent to such premises, and the targets or
butts shall be so placed, kept and maintained as to permit the use of such
premises and the discharge thereon or therein of firearms with the maximum of
safety to the public, to persons living adjacent to such premises, and to
persons using such premises upon which such rifle range or gun club is being
conducted or operated.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-26)



Sec. 7-213.  Abandoned Refrigerators1:



   Any person who abandons or discards, in any place accessible to
children, any refrigerator, icebox or ice chest of a capacity of one and
one-half (1 1/2) cubic feet or more which has an attached lid or door which
may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch, or who, being
the owner, lessee, or manager of any such place, knowingly permits such
abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox, or ice chest to remain there in
such condition, shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or
imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both, for each offense.
Every day that such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-5)



1  720 ILCS 505/1.



Sec. 7-214.  Expectorating In Public Places:



   No person shall spit upon any public sidewalk, or upon the floor of any
public conveyance, hall, assembly room or public building, under a penalty of
not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five dollars ($5.00) for each
offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-9)



Sec. 7-215.  Disposing Of Facial Tissue In Public Places:



   No person shall drop, throw, or place any used facial tissue or paper
handkerchief upon any public way or other public place or upon the floor of
any public conveyance or upon the floor of any theater, hall, assembly room
or public building or upon the surface of any lot or parcel of ground or on
the roof of any building or in any light or air shaft, court or areaway.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-10)



Sec. 7-216.  Junk Accumulation1:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate, or permit the
accumulation, on any open lot or other premises of any lumber, boxes,
barrels, bricks, stones, scrap metal, motor vehicle bodies, or parts or
similar objects, rubbish, or any articles of junk, which provide rat
harborage, unless the same shall be placed on open racks that are elevated
not less than eighteen inches (18") above the ground, evenly piled or stacked.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-23)



1  See also § 3-271 et seq., § 5-2 and § 6-41 et seq., of this Code.



Sec. 7-217.  Laser Pointers:



   (a)   Possession By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person under the age of eighteen (18) to possess a laser pointer except in
the residence of that person.



   (b)   Sale To Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
to sell a laser pointer to any person under the age of eighteen (18).



   (c)   Use Outside Of Buildings Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any person to use a laser pointer in such manner that the laser beam
illuminates on any person, animal, object or place located outside of the
building where the person using the laser pointer is located.



   (d)   Illumination Of Persons Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam
illuminates on any person.



   (e)   Illumination Of Vehicle Operators Prohibited: It shall be
unlawful for any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the
laser beam illuminates the operator of a motor vehicle.



   (f)   Illumination Of Law Enforcement Personnel Prohibited: It shall
be unlawful for any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the
laser beam illuminates a uniformed law enforcement officer.



   (g)   Use In Public Places Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person located on the public right-of-way, street, alley, public park, or
private parking lot accessible to the public to use a laser pointer.



   For purposes of this Section, a "laser pointer" is any device which
contains a small diode laser that emits an intense beam of light, including,
but not limited to, Class 2 lasers, Class 3a lasers, Class 3b lasers, and
Class 4 lasers.



   The penalty clause adopted for the enforcement of this Section is
Section 7-196 of this Division.



(Ord. 1999-5, § 1, 2-22-1999)



Sec. 7-218  Rain Barrels:



   (a)   Policy and Purpose. The village has entered into an
intergovernmental agreement with the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District
of Greater Chicago (“MWRDGC”) whereby the latter has agreed to supply at
no cost to the village for its residents rain barrels that are intended to
“catch” rainwater. The rain barrel program is designed to: (i) alleviate
storm water capacity issues by deferring run-off to non-event times; and (ii)
allow for use of rainwater, as an alternative to the potable water supply, to
engage in common domestic tasks.



   (b)   Supply And Registration. Rain barrels supplied to the village
by the MWRDGC will be made available for use by registered residents. Rain
barrels will be supplied to residents on a first-come first-serve basis.
Residents requesting a rain barrel will be required to register with the
Building Department. Use of rain barrels, or other devices of similar purpose
and design, that are not supplied by, and registered with, the village are
prohibited.



   (c)   Location. No more than one (1) rain barrel shall be placed on
each registered residential lot. No rain barrels shall be placed in the front
or side yard of a residential lot. Rain barrels shall be placed under a
downspout, in a location that will not obstruct ingress and egress to the
residence, and in such a manner that will prevent overflow to adjoining
property or in the direction of a resident’s foundation. All rain barrels
shall be placed on or above a pervious surface to prevent the accumulation of
standing water during an overflow. Use or relocation of a rain barrel at or
to locations other than a registered residence is prohibited.



   (d)   Appurtenances. Rain barrels shall be installed with supplied
appurtenances such as the rain barrel lid, rain barrel water intake screen,
and rain barrel mosquito screen. Residents may attach a hose to the overflow
fitting to direct an overflow of water away from the residence on to a
pervious surface. Should the rain barrel be placed on a platform, the
platform shall not exceed one and one-half (1.5) feet in height and be
constructed of such materials that will support weight between five hundred
(500) and six hundred (600) pounds.



   (e)   Alterations. Alterations to rain barrels and supplied
appurtenances are prohibited. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence,
residents may make cosmetic alterations to personalize rain barrels such as
painting the exterior. Use of rain barrels for any purpose other than as
intended by this section shall be prohibited.



   (f)   Maintenance. All rain barrels and supplied appurtenances shall
be installed and maintained in a safe and good working order. Rain barrels
shall be emptied within seven (7) days of the last rain event or prior to any
likely overflow, in the absence of an attached overflow hose, from a
subsequent rain event, whichever is earlier. Any accumulated water on top of
rain barrel lid shall be removed every three to four (3-4) days. Emptying of
rain barrels directly into the storm water system is prohibited. Rain barrels
and appurtenances, including platforms, shall be inspected by users prior to
installation, every thirty (30) days thereafter, and prior to being placed in
service after winterization, to ensure the same exists in safe working order.
All rain barrels shall be placed in a winterized state from December 1 of a
calendar year through April 1 of the following calendar year, which at a
minimum shall require the rain barrel spigot to remain opened on a continuous
basis.



   (g)   Disposal. Residents no longer desiring to participate in the
rain barrel program, or in need of a replacement rain barrel or other
appurtenance, shall contact the village to make arrangements to have the same
retrieved and/or replaced, as the case may be. Disposal of rain barrels or
supplied appurtenances by a resident shall be prohibited unless through the
village.



   (h)   Volunteer Program. The rain barrel program is a volunteer
program and participation in the same is neither required nor encouraged by
the village. Every resident participating in the rain barrel program shall be
required to sign a document releasing the village and MWRDGC to and from any
and all liability that may arise due to a resident’s participation in the
same.



   (i)   Penalty. Owners/occupiers violating the terms and provisions
of this section shall be fined no more less than one hundred ($100.00)
dollars nor more than seven hundred fifty ($750.00) for each violation. Each
violation or day a violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense. The village reserves the right to disqualify and prevent
owners/occupiers from participation in the rain barrel program upon a finding
of liability for two (2) or more violations of this section within a calendar
year, or in the event a resident’s participation constitutes an immediate
hazard to the health and safety persons or property. In such instances,
supplied rain barrels and appurtenances shall be recalled by, and returned
to, the village.



(Ord. 2016-17, § 1, 5-9-2016)



Secs. 7-219-7-225.  Reserved:



DIVISION 2. RATPROOFING1 4



1  See also Chs. 5 and 8 of this Code.



Sec. 7-226.  Definitions:



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Division,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Hardware Cloth: Wire screen of such thickness and spacing as to afford
reasonable protection against the entrance of rats.



   Rat Harborage: Any condition which provides shelter or protection of
rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or
outside a structure of any kind.



   Rat-Stoppage: Applies to a form of ratproofing to prevent the ingress
of rats into or under buildings or other structures from the exteriors or
from one building to another. It consists essentially of the closing of all
openings in the exteriors, walls, ground and first floors, basements and
foundations that may be reached by rats from the ground by climbing or by
burrowing, with concrete, sheet iron, hardware cloth or other types of
ratproofing material impervious to rat gnawing, approved by the Building
Commissioner.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-17)



Sec. 7-227.  Required:



   Every building or structure within the Village shall be rat-stopped,
freed of rats and maintained in a rat-stopped and rat-free condition.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-17)



Sec. 7-228.  Building Commissioner To Inspect For Rats:



   It shall be the duty of the building commissioner to cause inspections
of the interior and exterior of buildings or other structures to determine
evidence of rat infection and the existence of new breaks or leaks in the rat
stoppage, and when any evidence is found indicating the presence of rats or
openings through which rats may enter such buildings or structures, to report
such evidence to the building commissioner, who shall serve the owner, agent
or occupant of such building or structure with written notice to abate the
condition found.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-18)



Sec. 7-229.  Maintenance Of Rat Stoppage:



   The owner, agent or occupant in charge of all rat stopped buildings or
structures shall maintain them in a rat stopped condition and repair all
breaks or leaks that may occur in the rat stoppage.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-19)



Sec. 7-230.  Removal Of Rat Stoppage:



   It shall be unlawful for an owner, occupant, contractor, public utility
company, plumber or any other person to remove the rat stoppage from any
building or structure for any purpose and fail to restore the same in
satisfactory condition, or to make any new openings that are not closed or
sealed against the entrance of rats.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-20)



Sec. 7-231.  Installation Of Cement Flooring To Prevent Rat Infestation:



   Whenever conditions inside or under any building or structure provide
such extensive harborage for rats that the building commissioner deems it
necessary to eliminate such harborage, he may require the owner or occupant
in charge of any such building or structure to install suitable cement floors
in basements or to correct such rat harborage as may be necessary in order to
facilitate the eradication of rats.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-21)



Sec. 7-232.  Waste Accumulations:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, leave, dump or permit to
accumulate any garbage or trash in any building, structure or premises so
that the same shall offer food or harborage for rats, or to dump or place on
any premises, land or waterway any dead animals or waste vegetables or animal
matter of any kind.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-22)



Sec. 7-233.  Junk Accumulations1:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit the
accumulation on any open lot or other premises any lumber, boxes, barrels,
bricks, stones, scrap metal, motor vehicle bodies, or parts or similar
objects, rubbish or any articles of junk which provide rat harborage, unless
the same shall be placed on open racks that are elevated not less than
eighteen inches (18") above the ground, evenly piled or stacked.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-23)



1  See § 3-271 et seq., of this code.



Sec. 7-234.  Notice To Eradicate Rats; Work Done By Village Upon Failure Of
Owner Or Occupant; Recovery Of Costs:



   (a)   Upon receipt of notice in writing from the building
commissioner, the owner, the agent or occupant in charge of any building,
structure or premises specified in such notice shall take immediate measures
for the rat stoppage of such building or structure and for freeing the
premises of all rats. Unless such work is completed in the time specified in
the notice, in no event to be less than fifteen (15) days, or any written
extension thereof that may be granted by the building commissioner, then the
owner, agent or occupant in charge of the building, structure or premises
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article.



   (b)   Whenever the owner, agent or occupant in charge of any
building, structure or premises, after being served with notice as provided
in this section has failed within the time fixed in the notice to perform all
work necessary to prevent the ingress of rats to the building or structure or
to exterminate rats from the premises described in the notice, the building
commissioner or person duly authorized by him may go on the premises and do
such work as is necessary to free the premises from rats and to maintain the
premises in a rat stopped condition. The cost and expense incurred for all
work and materials shall be charged to and collected from the owners and
persons interested in the premises and the village or persons performing such
work or furnishing such materials therefor shall have a lien on the premises
and may enforce the same as provided by statute.



   (c)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, except where
otherwise specifically provided. A separate and distinct offense shall be
held to have been committed each day any person continues to violate any of
the provisions hereof.



(Code 1972, § 6-11-24; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2,
3-23-1998)



Secs. 7-235-7-250.  Reserved:



ARTICLE V.  USE OF PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY1



1  See chapter 10 of this code.



Sec. 7-251.  Zone Of Quiet-Established:



   There is hereby created and established a zone of quiet in all
territory embraced within the block upon which abuts the premises of any
hospital owned by the federal, state, county or city governments or any
licensed hospital, convalescent home, nursing home or home for the aged.



(Code 1972, § 6-12-1)



Sec. 7-252.  Zone Of Quiet-Unnecessary Noise Within:



   The making, causing or permitting of any unnecessary noise of any kind
whatsoever, or the playing of itinerant musicians, or the making of noises
for the purpose of advertising any goods, wares or merchandise, or of
attracting the attention or inviting the patronage of any person to any
business, or the playing of itinerant musicians upon the public ways within
any zone of quiet established in accordance with this article, is hereby
declared a nuisance and is hereby prohibited.



(Code 1972, § 6-12-2)



Sec. 7-253.  Transporting Loose Materials2,3:



   Any person who shall transport upon any public way crushed stone, sand,
gravel, sawdust, ashes, cinders, lime, tanbarks, shavings, wastepaper, ice,
mortar, earth, rubbish, manure or other loose material likely to sift, fall
or be blown upon any public way shall convey the same in tight wagon boxes.
In case such materials fall or become scattered upon any public way, such
person shall cause such fallen substance to be forthwith removed.



(Code 1972, § 6-12-3)



2  See chapter 6 of this code.



3  625 ILCS 5/15-109.1.



Sec. 7-254.  Overloaded Vehicles:



   No person shall overload or cause to be overloaded any cart, truck,
wagon or other vehicle in such a manner that the contents or any part thereof
shall be scattered in any public way or other public places in the village.
It shall be the duty of every person in charge, possession or control of any
cart, truck, wagon or other vehicle, the contents of which, or any part
thereof, may become scattered in any public way or public place, to replace
at once on such conveyance any part of the contents thereof which shall or
may have fallen, dropped or spilled from such conveyance.



(Code 1972, § 6-12-4)



Sec. 7-255.  Throwing, Depositing Sharp Objects:



   No person shall throw, drop, place or deposit, or cause to be thrown,
dropped, placed or deposited in or upon any public way, public bathing beach
or public playground, any glass bottles, nails, glass, tacks, wires,
crockery, cans or other sharp or cutting substances injurious or dangerous to
the feet of persons or animals or to the tires or wheels of any kinds of
vehicles, including motor vehicles. Any person who shall violate the
provisions of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), however,
where any person has accidentally or by reason of an accident dropped from
his hand or vehicle any of the foregoing substances upon any public way,
public bathing beach or public playground, such penalty shall not be enforced
if such person shall immediately make all reasonable efforts to clear such
place of the same.



(Code 1972, § 6-12-5; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998)



Sec. 7-256.  Throwing Missiles:



   No person shall throw or cast any stone or other missile in, from or to
any public way or public place in the village.



(Code 1972, § 6-12-6)



Sec. 7-257.  Damaging Fences, Signs, Awnings In Public Places:



   No person shall wantonly mar, injure, deface or destroy any fence,
guidepost, signboard or awning in any public place in the village.



(Code 1972, § 6-12-7)



Sec. 7-258.  Spilling Certain Fluids On Pavement:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to spill any turpentine, kerosene,
gasoline, benzine, naphtha, coal, oil or any product thereof, or any oil used
for lubricating, illuminating or fuel purposes, or allow any such fluids to
escape to or upon asphalt pavement of the village or to operate or to permit
to be operated any tank, wagon or other vehicle from which any of such fluids
are permitted to so escape.



(Code 1972, § 6-12-8)



Sec. 7-259.  Loitering, Speculating In Tickets1:



   No person shall obstruct or encumber any street corner or public place
in front of any theater, baseball park or other place of amusement in the
village by lounging in or about the same after being requested to move on by
a police officer, nor shall any person be permitted to remain at any such
place having in his possession any tickets for any theater, baseball park or
other place of amusement, for the purpose of selling same, or offering the
same for sale, in front of, or near, any theater, baseball park or other
place of amusement in an attempt at speculating in such tickets.



(Code 1972, § 6-12-9; Ord. 75-14, 9-4-1975)



1  720 ILCS 375/1 et seq.



Sec. 7-260.  Closing Time For Parks:



   All village parks shall close at sunset, except by special permit
issued by the village board of trustees.



(Code 1972, § 6-12-10)



Sec. 7-261.  Alcoholic Beverages In Parks2:



   No beverages containing alcohol shall be served or sold in any village
park except by special permit issued by the village board of trustees.



(Code 1972, § 6-12-11)



2  See § 3-81 et seq., of this code.



Sec. 7-262.  Penalty:



   Any person or corporation convicted of violating any of the sections in
this article, where a specific penalty is not provided, shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-12-12; Ord. 82-6, 7-15-1982; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord.
98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998)



Secs. 7-263-7-280.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VI.  DRUGS, POISONS, ETC.



Sec. 7-281.  Penalty:



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article for which no
other penalty is provided shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00)
nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-13-10; Ord. 75-14, 9-4-1975)



Sec. 7-282.  Sale And Delivery Of Medicines, Poisons:



   No poisonous medicine, decoction or substance shall be held or kept for
sale or sold, except for lawful purposes and with proper motives, and by
persons competent to give the proper directions and precautions as to the use
of the same; nor shall any bottle, box, parcel or receptacle therefor be
delivered to any person unless the same is plainly marked on the outside as
"poison", nor to any person of whom the party delivering the same has reason
to think that he intends it for any illegal or improper use or purpose. Any
person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-13-1)



Sec. 7-283.  Misrepresentation Of Drugs:



   No doctor, druggist or other person shall make, sell, put up, prepare
or administer any prescription, decoction or medicine under any deceptive or
fraudulent name, description or pretense. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-13-2)



Sec. 7-284.  Distribution Of Samples:



   No person shall be permitted to give away, deposit or otherwise
distribute any sample package, parcel, box or other quantity of any nostrum,
proprietary medicine or other material of an alleged medicinal character or
purporting to be a curative agency by means of depositing or leaving the same
in any hallway, private area or yard or on any doorstep or in any place in
any public way in the village.



(Code 1972, § 6-13-3)



Sec. 7-285.  Prescriptions required; specifications.



   (a)   No druggist or other person shall sell or give away any
morphine, cocaine, alpha or beta eucaine, chloral hydrate or any salt,
compound or derivative of any of the foregoing substances, or any substance,
preparation or compound containing any of the foregoing substances, or any of
their salts, compounds or derivatives, except upon the written prescription
of a duly registered physician. Such prescription shall contain the name and
address of the person for whom prescribed and the date the same shall have
been filled, and shall be permanently retained on file by the person where
the same shall have been filled. It shall be filled but once, and no copy of
it shall be taken by any person, and the original shall at all times be open
to inspection by the state department of registration and education, and of
all officers of the law.



   (b)   Such morphine, cocaine, alpha or beta eucaine, chloral hydrate
or any salt, compound or derivative of the foregoing substances or any
substance, preparation or compound containing any of the foregoing
substances, or any of their salts, compounds or derivatives, may lawfully be
sold at wholesale upon the written order of a licensed pharmacist, licensed
druggist, duly registered practicing physician, licensed veterinarian or
licensed dentist, provided that the wholesale dealer shall affix or cause to
be affixed to the bottle, box, vessel or package containing the article sold,
and upon the outside wrapper of the package as originally put up, a label
distinctly displaying the name and quantity of morphine, cocaine, alpha or
beta eucaines, chloral hydrate or any salt, compound or derivative of any of
the foregoing substances, or any substance, preparation or compound
containing any of the foregoing substances or any of their salts, compounds
or derivatives sold, and the word "poison," with the name and place of
business of the seller, all printed in red ink; provided, also, that the
wholesale dealer shall, before delivering any of the articles, make or cause
to be made, in a book kept for such purpose, an entry of the sale thereof,
stating the date of sale, the quantity, name and form in which sold, the name
and address of the purchaser, and the name of the person by whom the entry is
made. The book shall be always open for inspection by the proper authorities
of the law, and shall be preserved for at least five (5) years after the date
of the last entry made therein.



   (c)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-13-4)



   State law reference-Sale of drugs, medicines or poisons, labels, Ill.
Rev. Stat. Ch. 111, § 4031.



Sec. 7-286.  Dispensing to habitual users.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any duly registered physician or
other person to prescribe, sell, offer for sale, dispense or give away any
morphine, cocaine, alpha or beta eucaine, chloral hydrate or any salt,
compound or derivative of any of the foregoing substances, or any substance,
preparation or compound containing any of the foregoing substances or any of
their salts, compounds or derivatives, to any person addicted to the habitual
use of morphine, cocaine, alpha or beta eucaine, chloral hydrate or any salt,
compound or derivative of any of the foregoing substances, or any substance,
preparation or compound containing any of the foregoing substances or any of
their salts, compounds or derivatives in any form.



   (b)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-13-5)



Sec. 7-287.  Opium dens.



   No person, within the village, shall keep or maintain or become an
inmate of, or in any way contribute to the support of, any place, house or
room for opium smoking, or where persons assemble for the purpose of inhaling
opium, or inhaling the fumes thereof, under a penalty of not less than five
dollars ($5.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense,
together with the confiscation of all articles and paraphernalia used for the
purpose of smoking or inhaling opium, or the fumes thereof, which may be
found in any such place.



(Code 1972, § 6-13-6)



Sec. 7-288.  Dispensing bichloride of mercury.



   It shall be unlawful for any apothecary, druggist or pharmacist, or any
employee of the same, or any other person, to give away, sell or offer or
expose for sale at retail in the village any bichloride of mercury, otherwise
known as corrosive sublimate, in the dry form, except in colored tablets
enclosed in a sealed container and conspicuously labeled with the word
"poison" in red letters. Each tablet in such container shall also be
individually wrapped and the wrapper shall have conspicuously placed thereon
the word "poison" in plain letters.



(Code 1972, § 6-13-7)



Sec. 7-289.  Inducing intoxication by chemical means.



   (a)   No person shall inhale, breathe or drink any compound, liquid
or chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene,
ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl ketone, trichloroathane, isopropanol, methyl
isobutyl ketone, methyl cellulose acetate, cyclohexanone, or any other
substance for the purpose of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation,
dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior or in any manner change, distort,
or disturb the audio, visual or mental processes. For the purpose of this
section, any such condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated
condition; however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to:



      (1)    Any person who inhales, breathes, or drinks such
material or substance pursuant to the directions or prescription of any
doctor, physician, surgeon, dentist, or podiatrist authorized to so direct or
prescribe.



      (2)    Any person who inhales, breathes, drinks or otherwise
in any manner uses any narcotic, dangerous drug, or other material or
substance or combination thereof which is defined by, and the use of which is
prohibited or regulated by, any law of the state.



   (b)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-13-8)



   State law reference-Intoxicating compounds, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, §
81-1 et seq.



Sec. 7-290.  Dispensing certain drugs to minors.



   (a)   No person shall knowingly sell, offer for sale, deliver, or
give to any person under seventeen (17) years of age, unless upon the written
order of such person's parent or guardian, any substance containing any of
the following volatile solvents, where the seller, offerer or deliverer knows
or has reason to believe that the substance will be used for the purpose of
inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational
behavior, or in any manner change, distort or disturb the audio, visual, or
mental processes: Toluol, hexane, trichlorethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl
acetate, methyl ethyl ketone, trichlorethane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl
ketone, methyl cellulose acetate, cyclohexanone, or any other substance which
will induce symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis,
irrational behavior, or in any manner change, distort or disturb the audio,
visual, or mental processes.



   (b)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense.



(Code 1972, § 6-13-9)



   State law reference-Sale of intoxicating compounds, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch.
38, § 81-2.



Secs. 7-291-7-305.  Reserved.



ARTICLE VII. TREES AND SHRUBBERY* 5



*  State law reference—Trees and forestry in municipalities, Rev. Stat,
Ch. 24, Art. 11, Div. 72 et seq.



Sec. 7-306.  Poplar, cottonwood trees prohibited.



   (a)   No person shall plant or cause to be planted in the village
any poplar or cottonwood trees as defined in this section.



   (b)   A "poplar tree" is hereby defined as any of a genus of
slender, quick-growing, salicaceous trees, also known as populus; a
"cottonwood tree" is hereby defined as a tree of the poplar group with a
cottony comma investing the seeds, also known as Populus balsamifera.



   (c)   Any poplar or cottonwood tree must be removed from any vacant
property before a building permit will be issued for construction on that
property. If an existing structure or building is demolished on any property,
any poplar or cottonwood tree must also be removed. Building department
permits will not be issued for construction on a vacant lot or for demolition
unless poplar and cottonwood trees are removed.



(Code 1972, § 8-5-1; Ord. 98-27, § 1, 6-22-1998)



Sec. 7-307.  Trimming Over Sidewalks, Streets:



   All trees kept, maintained or cultivated in any of the streets or
public places of the village, the branches of which extend over the sidewalk
or street, shall be trimmed at least seven feet (7') above the ground so that
the branches thereof will not interfere with persons using the walks or
streets.



(Code 1972, § 8-5-2)



Sec. 7-308.  Injuring:



   It shall be unlawful to injure any trees or shrubs planted or growing
in any public place, except by permission of the public works director.



(Code 1972, § 8-5-3; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 7-309.  Attaching Advertisements, Notices To:



   It shall be unlawful to attach any signs, advertisements or notices to
any tree or shrub in any public place.



(Code 1972, § 8-5-4)



Sec. 7-310.  Dangerous Trees1:



   (a)   Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on
or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the
abutting premises or of the premises on which such tree grows or stands.



   (b)   The public works director may trim any such tree or shrub or
remove any such tree or branch thereof so that the obstruction or danger to
traffic or passage shall be done away with.



(Code 1972, § 8-5-5; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



1  505 ILCS 90/15.



Sec. 7-311.  Proximity To Wires, Poles:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or rope to any tree or
shrub in any public street, parkway or other public place without the
permission of the board.



   (b)   Any person or company which maintains poles and wires in the
streets, alleys or other public places shall, in the absence of the provision
in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from
and away from trees and shrubs in such places so far as may be possible, and
shall keep all such trees and shrubs near such wires and poles properly
trimmed, subject to the supervision of the public works director, so that no
injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or to the shrubs and trees
by their contact.



(Code 1972, § 8-5-6; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 7-312.  Injury From Gas Pipes:



   Any person or company maintaining any gas pipe in the village shall
keep such pipes free from leaks so that no injury shall be done to any trees
or shrubs.



(Code 1972, § 8-5-7)



Sec. 7-313.  Injury From Excavations:



   In making excavations in streets or other public places, proper care
shall be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any trees or shrubs, wherever
possible.



(Code 1969, Ch. 7, Art. 4; Code 1972, § 8-5-8)



Sec. 7-314.  Village Pick Up Of Branches:



   (a)   The village will provide wood-chipping services and the
collection of nominal quantities of tree trimmings to residents during
periods of the year when such services are necessary in the opinion of the
president and board of trustees. Such services shall be provided during such
times as crews are available, and for the fees specified herein. Tree
trimmings are branches no longer than ten feet (10') in length and less than
four inches (4") in diameter.



   (b)   No tree trunks or limbs which are four inches (4") or larger
will be picked up. If there are trunks or limbs over four inches (4") in
diameter or over the specifications in subsection (a) of this section, which
are requested to be picked up or chipped, there will be a charge for this
service in accordance with subsection (d) of this section.



   (c)   Only tree limbs, branches or debris that result from the
trimming of a tree on private property will be picked up. If any tree trunk,
limb, branch or debris resulting from the trimming or removal of a tree on
private property by a private commercial tree service, or over the
specifications listed in subsection (a) of this section, is requested to be
picked up or chipped, there will be a charge for this service in accordance
with subsection (d) of this section. For the purpose of this section, any
tree trunk, limb, branch or debris resulting from the cutting, trimming or
removal of a tree on a public easement or on a right of way is considered to
be on private property.



   (d)   The cost and charges for services enumerated in this section
shall be set from time to time by the president and board of trustees. The
fee for services by the village under subsections (b) and (c) of this
section, per service, shall be a minimum of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for
every fifteen (15) minute block of time, or portion thereof, service is being
provided or rendered. No fee shall  be charged if the total time of service
is fifteen (15) minutes or less.



(Code 1972, § 8-5-9; Ord. 77-55, 12-1-1977; Ord. 99-18, § 1, 6-28-1999;
Ord. 2000-24, § 1, 5-8-2000; Ord. 2000-30, § 1, 7-10-2000; Ord. 2015-04, §
1, 3-9-2015)



Sec. 7-315.  Diseased Trees1:



   (a)   Any tree which has become infected or is infected by a fungus
disease of elms caused by Graphium ulmi, commonly known as Dutch elm disease
or elm blight, and by other plant diseases, shall be cut down and removed by
the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands.



   (b)   Should the owner of the property on which the diseased tree
grows or stands refuse or neglect to remove any such tree, the village may
remove such tree and collect from the property owner the reasonable cost
thereof. The cost shall be a lien upon the property affected.



   (c)   Prior to removal of the tree by the village, a notice
consisting of a sworn statement shall be personally served or sent by
registered mail to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general
taxes for the last preceding year on the property. Such notice shall be
delivered or sent not less than thirty (30) days prior to the removal of the
tree located thereon. The notice shall contain the substance of the Illinois
statute and this section and identify the property, by common description,
and the tree affected.



(Code 1969, Ch. 14, Art. 1; Code 1972, §§ 8-6-1-8-6-3)



1  65 ILCS 5/11-20-11, 5/11-20-12.



Sec. 7-316.  Burning Of Leaves:



(Rep. by Ord. 94-25, § 1, 11-14-1994)



Sec. 7-317.  Illegal Dumping And Depositing:



   (a)   Any person, business, corporation, partnership, limited
liability corporation or other entity that dumps or deposits landscape waste
or any other unauthorized debris on: 1) public property, or 2) public
parkway, or 3) abandoned or vacant property, not owned by said person,
business, corporation, partnership, limited liability corporation or other
entity, or 4) any property not licensed as a dumpsite in the village of
Justice shall be fined seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) a day for each
day the waste or debris remains on the property and in addition shall be
fined the costs of removing and dumping the waste or debris at a licensed
dumpsite. If the person, business, corporation, partnership, limited
liability corporation or other entity has a business license or work permit
in the village of Justice, said license shall be automatically revoked upon a
determination of fines and liability.



   (b)   "Landscape Waste", means all accumulations of grass or
shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs and other material accumulated as the
result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees.



(Ord. 2001-28, § 1, 7-23-2001)



Secs. 7-318-7-330.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VIII.  CEMETERIES



Sec. 7-331.  License; Fee:



   No person shall establish, open or enlarge any cemetery within the
limits of the village unless the board of trustees of the village shall first
fix and determine the boundaries of such cemetery, and unless the annual
license is first had and obtained. The annual license fee for the operation
of a cemetery under twenty (20) acres, within the village, shall be one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00); and for a cemetery over twenty
(20) acres, within the village, the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).



(Code 1969, Ch. 17; Code 1972, § 8-7-1)



Sec. 7-332.  Present Boundaries:



   The boundaries of all cemeteries within the limits of the village are
hereby fixed and described as the boundaries of such cemeteries as are
already situated and located in the village on the date of the adoption and
approval of this code, and shall be as the same appear on record in the maps,
plats or deeds of such cemeteries at such time.



(Code 1972, § 8-7-2)



Sec. 7-333.  Burial Outside Cemetery:



   No corpse shall be interred in any place within the limits of the
village not actually used as a cemetery, or without securing the burial
permit required.



(Code 1972, § 8-7-3)



Sec. 7-334.  Interments Must Conform To Regulations:



   It shall be unlawful to inter dead bodies within the limits of any
cemetery except under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the
board of trustees. The burial of any corpse outside of such limits and within
the village shall be deemed a violation of section 7-333 of this article.



(Code 1972, § 8-7-4)



Sec. 7-335.  Violations; Remedial Action:



   If any person shall violate any of the provisions of this article, he
shall be fined as provided in section 1-7 of this code. It shall be lawful
for any court to order the offender to disinter any and all dead bodies that
he may have buried contrary to the provisions of this article, and to enforce
obedience to such order by fines or imprisonment, or both. It shall be
unlawful for any person, except under the direction of the board of trustees,
to disinter any corpse buried contrary to the provisions of this article and
to remove and reinter the same within the lawful bounds of any cemetery.



(Code 1969, Ch. 17; Code 1972, § 8-7-5)



 


Notes

1 
510 ILCS 70/1 et seq.

2 
State law reference–Animal Control Act, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 8, § 351 et
seq.

3 
See also chapter 6 of this code.

4 
See also Chs. 5 and 8 of this Code.

5 
State law reference—Trees and forestry in municipalities, Rev. Stat, Ch.
24, Art. 11, Div. 72 et seq.



CHAPTER 8
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 1,2



1  See chapter 2, "Administration"; chapter 3, "Business Regulations";
chapter 4, "Fire Prevention And Protection"; chapter 5, "Health And
Sanitation"; chapter 10, "Streets, Sidewalks, Driveways And Parking Lots";
chapter 11, "Utilities"; chapter 12, "Zoning"; chapter 13, "Rates And Fees";
§ 2-281 et seq., building department administrators; § 2-526 et seq.,
zoning and planning board; § 3-11, businesses constituting nuisances; §
3-241 et seq., childcare homes; § 3-406 et seq., building regulations in
manufactured home communities; § 7-226 et seq., ratproofing; § 10-7, "House
Numbering"; § 11-31 et seq., wastewater generally, of this code.



2 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq., 5/11-8-1 et seq., 5/11-11-1 et seq., 5/11-30-1 et
seq.; 740 ILCS 150/1.



   Art. I.   In General,  §§ 8-1-8-15



   Art. II.   Buildings, §§ 8-16-8-165



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 8-16-8-30



      Div. 2.   Building Code, §§ 8-31-8-65



      Div. 3.   Plumbing, §§ 8-66-8-100.3



      Div. 4.   Electricity, §§ 8-101-8-120



      Div. 5.   Moving Buildings, §§ 8-121-8-140



      Div. 6.   Dangerous Buildings, §§ 8-141-8-165



   Art. III.   Signs; Billboards; Awnings, §§ 8-166-8-210



   Art. IV.   Swimming Pools, §§ 8-211-8-245



   Art. V.   Fences, §§ 8-246-8-265



   Art. VI.   Dish Type Satellite Signal Receiving Antennas, §§
8-266-8-285



   Art. VII.   Occupation Of Streets, 8-286-8-305



   Art. VIII.   Subdivisions, §§ 8-306-8-340



   Art. IX.   Special Flood Hazard Areas, §§ 8-341-8-399



   Art. X.   Housing Discrimination, §§ 8-400-8-420



   Art. XI.   Below Grade/Confined Space Work Permits, §§ 8.421-8-500



   Art. XII.   Annual Inspection For Residential Apartment Units, §§
8-501-8-520



   Art. XIII.   Condominiums and Common Interest Community
Associations, §§ 8-521–8-859



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



Secs. 8-1-8-15.  Reserved:



ARTICLE II.  BUILDINGS



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Secs. 8-16-8-30.  Reserved:



DIVISION 2. BUILDING CODE



Sec. 8-31.  General Provisions:



   (a)   Title: This division shall be known and may be cited as the
BUILDING CODE OF THE VILLAGE.



   (b)   Building Officers: The title "building officers" when used in
this division shall mean the building commissioner, the chief of police, the
fire chief, the health officer and all inspectors and assistants, as provided
herein or by the board of trustees. All such inspectors and assistants are
under the jurisdiction of and subject to the control of the building
commissioner.



   (c)   Right To Enter Premises: Building officers and their duly
authorized inspectors are hereby empowered, during reasonable hours, to
lawfully enter upon any premises or into any building or structure or portion
thereof, whether completed or in the process of construction, alteration or
repair, when necessary to do so in performance of any duty imposed upon them
by the laws of the village or the provisions of the zoning chapter1, or any
order or resolution of the board of trustees. It is hereby made unlawful for
any person to hinder or prevent, or attempt to hinder or prevent, any such
building officers or their duly authorized inspectors from performing their
respective duties. Any person hindering or attempting to hinder, resisting or
attempting to resist, any building officer in the performance of duty, shall
be charged with resisting an officer. The person convicted of such offense
shall be subject to the general penalty provided for violations of this code.



   (d)   Definitions: Words and terms used in this division, not
otherwise defined, shall have the meanings defined in the zoning chapter.



   (e)   Adoption Of Building Codes: The following codes are hereby
adopted and incorporated into this division as though fully set forth herein,
and all such rules and regulations shall apply to all buildings, structures
and appurtenances in the village:



      (1)   The 2012 International Building Code, with the exception
of the International Fire Code provisions contained therein.



      (2)   The 2012 International Residential Building Code, with
the exception of the International Fire Code provisions contained therein.



      (3)   The 2013 Electrical Code of the City of Chicago.



      (4)   The 2014 Illinois Plumbing Code, with the exception of
local code for allowable materials.



      (5)   The 2012 National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
Fire Prevention and Life Safety Code.



      (6)   The 2012 International Property Maintenance Code.



      (7)   The rules, regulations and recommendations of the office
of the Illinois State Fire Marshal.



      (8)   The 2012 International Existing Building Code.



      (9)   The 2012 International Mechanical Code.



      (10)   The 2012 International Energy Code.



      (11)   The 2012 International Fuel Gas Code.



   (12)   The 2012 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.



   (f)   Conflicting Provisions: If there is any conflict in the codes
adopted in this section and other village ordinance provisions, the more
restrictive provision shall apply. (Code 1972, §§ 4-1-1, 4-1-5; Ord. 82-7,
8-19-1982; Ord. 95-9, § 1, 5-22-1995; Ord. 97-33, §§ 1, 2, 10-13-1997;
Ord. 98-17, §§ 1, 5, 4-27-1998; Ord. 2000-33, § 1, 7-24-2000; Ord.
2003-20, § 1, 5-27-2003; Ord. 2005-24, § 1, 11-14-2005; Ord. 2013-01, § 1,
2-11-2013; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



1  See chapter 12 of this code.



Sec. 8-32.  Permits; Fees; Traffic Control:



   (a)   When Permit Required: Before proceeding with the erection,
construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal or excavation of any
building or structure in the village, a permit for such erection,
construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal or excavation shall first
be obtained by the owner or his agent from the building commissioner as
provided herein. As evidence that such permit has been issued, the building
permit card must be posted on the street side of the building when excavation
is started, kept posted during the entire time of construction, and for ten
(10) days after completion of the building.



   (b)   Time Limit Of Permit: If, after such permit shall have been
granted, the operation covered by the permit shall not be begun within six
(6) months after the date thereof, or if such operations are not completed
within one year from such date, then such permit shall expire by the terms
thereof, and no operations thereunder shall be begun or completed until a
renewal of the permit shall be obtained, as provided in subsection (h) of
this section.



   (c)   Permit Waived For Ordinary Repair Work: A permit will not be
required for ordinary repair work incidental to the upkeep of a building or
structure, provided there is not contemplated, nor involved, any change in
the classification or use or any increase in the fire hazard thereof; nor the
removal or installing of any external wall; nor the removal of any supporting
wall, column, poles, truss, girder or beam; nor the installing, closing or
changing of any stairs, exits, scuttles, skylights or fire escapes; nor
changing the number, location or connections of the fixtures, traps, vents,
waste, soil or drainpipes of the plumbing system; nor changing the number,
location or connections of the electrical system; nor reshingling or
recovering of roofs or the renewing of the exterior woodwork of any frame
building, structure or portion thereof. Nothing in this subsection shall be
interpreted or construed to allow any work included in the permit exemptions
thereof to be done in any manner contrary to the requirements of the building
code and other laws of the village.



   (d)   Application For Permits; Plans:



      (1)   Application for building permits shall be made by the
owner or his agent to the building commissioner on forms prepared and kept on
file in the office of the building commissioner. Such application shall
describe the location of the proposed work by setting forth the correct legal
description of the land upon which the building, structure or part thereof is
to be erected, constructed, added, altered or repaired and the street name
and number assigned to the site; the purpose for which the building or
structure is designed to be used; the length, width and height thereof, the
number of rooms; the total cost of the work proposed to be done under the
permit sought; the name and address of the owner or his authorized agent or
architect; the names of the licensed general contractors and subcontractors
such as mason, carpenter, sewer builder, plumber, heating and air
conditioning contractor, fire sprinkler contractor, fire alarm contractor,
and electrician. The application for a building permit shall also be
accompanied by a plat of survey, showing the proposed location of the
building to be erected on the lot, piece or parcel of land. The application
shall also contain an agreement to be signed by the owner, his agent or
architect conditioned that he or his duly authorized agent or architect, if
granted the permit sought, will construct the work in accordance with the
description set forth in the application and accompanying plans and
specifications.



      (2)   Application for building permits shall be accompanied by
plans and specifications which shall be sufficiently complete that the
proposed structure could be constructed therefrom by a competent contractor,
builder or engineer, without further direction of any kind.



      (3)   All such plans and drawings shall be drawn to the scale
of not less than one quarter  of an inch to the foot (1/4":1') on paper, in
ink, or by some process that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and
dimensions shall be accurately figured, and drawings made explicit and
complete, showing the lot lines and the location of the exterior lines of the
building in relation thereto, and the entire ventilating, sewerage and
drainpipes and the location of all plumbing fixtures within such building.



      No person shall be granted or plans approved unless such plans
are made and signed by such persons, licensed or registered architects or
registered structural engineers, as are permitted under the statutes of the
state to make plans for buildings.



      True copies of so much of the plans as may be required, in the
opinion of the building commissioner, to illustrate the features of the
construction and equipment of the building referred to, shall be filed with
the building commissioner, and shall remain on file in his office for a
period of six (6) months after the occupation of such building, after which
such plans may be returned only to the person by whom they have been
deposited with him, upon demand. It shall not be obligatory upon the building
commissioner to retain such plans in his custody for more than six (6) months
after the occupation of the building to which they relate.



      Complete plans and specifications of buildings for public or
business use for which permits are granted shall remain on file permanently
in the building commissioner’s office.



      In all cases, the approved plan or plans, together with building
permits, must be kept on the premises while the work is in progress.



      (4)   The building commissioner shall not issue any permit
authorizing the erection, construction, alteration, addition or repair of any
building or structure unless the plans submitted for his approval clearly
show that such building or structure with all its appurtenances, foundations
and attachments can be erected entirely within the limits of the lot or tract
of land upon which it is proposed to erect such building or structure, except
as provided by the building code and chapter 12 of this code, and no permit
to construct or alter any building or structure shall authorize the use of
any part of any public highway or other public ground unless permits therefor
have been obtained from the village board pursuant to an ordinance
specifically authorizing the same, nor, in the case of subdivisions where no
alleys are provided to service the lot, shall a permit be issued unless the
building or structure is so constructed on the lot to provide room for a side
drive.



      (5)   A contour map of the proposed lot or lots based upon a
permanent bench mark which can be reproduced at any time during or
immediately following completion of construction shall be submitted with the
application for building permit. This contour map shall show the following:



         a.   Foundation elevations of any existing adjacent
buildings and dimensions to the buildings.



         b.   Street and ditch elevations existing prior to
construction.



         c.   If the proposed lot or lots are located in a flood
zone, an elevation certificate shall also be provided.



   (e)   Issuance Of Permits:



      (1)   Permits authorized to be issued and required to be
obtained under this division shall be promptly issued by the building
commissioner when the application, approval of plans, filing of frontage
consents (if any required) and giving of notices are all completed as in this
division. But this shall not be construed to deny to the building
commissioner ample time to investigate any matters.



      (2)   No permits herein provided to be issued for the
erection, construction, alteration, addition, repair or excavation for any
wall, structure, building or any portion thereof, for which a fee is
prescribed by this division shall be in force until the fees prescribed
therefor shall have been paid.



   (f)   Alterations In Plans: It shall be unlawful to alter or in any
way modify plans which have been approved by the building commissioner, as
hereinbefore provided. If, during the progress of such work, it is desired to
deviate, in any manner affecting the construction or other essentials of the
building, from terms of the application or drawing, notice of such intention
to alter or deviate shall be given to the building commissioner, and his
written assent shall first be obtained before the alteration or deviation may
be made. Alterations in buildings which do not involve any change in their
structural parts, or of their stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other
communications of ingress or egress, or in lighting or ventilation or in
plumbing or electric wiring, and that are not in violation of any of the
provisions of this division, or the provisions of chapter 12 of this code,
may be made without the permission of the building commissioner.



   (g)   Temporary Permit: Where in the judgment of the building
commissioner it is justified, the building commissioner may authorize
building operations to commence and proceed for such limited time, not
exceeding ten (10) days, and the building commissioner may deem and fix as
sufficient to allow the owner, his architect or authorized agent to complete
the filing of detailed plans and other data required for the issuance of the
final permit. The applicant for a temporary permit shall furnish the building
commissioner with sufficient plans and data to enable the building
commissioner to determine that the work to be commenced, and proposed
subsequently to be done, is of a lawful nature. Temporary permits shall be
revocable at the will of the building commissioner.



   (h)   Permit Fees: The fees to be charged for building permits for
erecting, altering, repairing or adding to buildings shall be paid to the
village before issuance of any permits provided herein and as follows:



      (1)   For buildings, structures and additions of property
located in zoning districts R-1 and R-2, shall be as set forth in section
13-1 of this code with a minimum fee as set forth in section 13-1 of this
code.



      (2)   For buildings, structures and additions of property
located in zoning districts R-3, B-1, C-1, I-1, I-1-R and I-2 in accordance
with the fees in section 13-1 of this code.



      (3)   For residential garages only, shall be as set forth in
section 13-1 of this code which shall include electrical work.



      (4)   For wrecking or removal of buildings, shall be as set
forth in section 13-1 of this code per square foot with a minimum fee as set
forth in section 13-1 of this code.



      (5)   For certificate of occupancy, shall be as set forth in
section 13-1 of this code for garages only. Occupancy bonds shall be
refundable upon appropriate completion of the project subject to final
inspection by the appropriate authority. The full amount of the cash bond or
equivalent shall be forfeited to the village at the rate of ten percent (10%)
of such deposit per day that this section has been violated.



      (6)   For miscellaneous building permits, including but not
limited to, foundation installment; shingle roof repair or replacement; flat
roof repair or replacement; siding; gutters; soffit and fascia; window and
door replacement; furnace installation; air conditioning installation;
fireplace installation; concrete flat work (patios, aprons, and stoops), and
placement of dumpsters; the permit and inspection fee shall be as set forth
in section 13-1 of this code.



      (7)   At the time a foundation permit is applied for, the
applicant shall post a cash bond as set forth in section 13-1 of this code.
At time of completion of the foundation, all work will cease, until a spot
survey has been submitted to the village engineer for approval and said
approval has been acknowledged by the building commissioner.



      Additionally, the building commissioner shall require a copy of
the approved spot survey and shall review and confirm the approval of the
village engineer before work may proceed and the portion of the bond
associated with the foundation is released.



      If the spot survey is found to be in error, all monies will be
forfeited to the village and either removal of the foundation or submittal of
a petition for variance of zoning may be required, at the option of the
village.



      (8)   In addition to the permit fees named in this section,
there shall be paid such charges for water, used in connection with building
operations, as are fixed by the schedule of water rates in force, or as the
same may be amended from time to time by the board of trustees.



      (9)   For renewal of a building or foundation permit issued as
herein provided and which has expired by the terms thereof as provided for in
subsection (b) of this section, payment of an additional fee of fifty percent
(50%) of the original fee shall be required.



      All fees shall be forfeited to the village upon expiration of the
permit and within six (6) months thereafter either: a) a failure to commence
operations, b) a failure to renew permit, or c) a failure to file a request
for permit fee refunds.



   (i)   Issuance Denied To Violators: No person applying for a
building permit under the provisions of this division shall be entitled to
the issuance of a building permit if such person shall be in violation of any
of the provisions of this code, including this division or any provisions of
the zoning chapter or shall be indebted unto the village in any amount.



   (j)   Surety Bond (License Or Permit Bond): (Repealed)



   (k)   Penalty: Any owner or agent who is required to obtain a permit
under subsection (a) of this section and begins any work prior to obtaining
said permit shall pay a penalty to the village in the amount of twice the
permit fee specified in subsection (h) of this section, unless the permit fee
is over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), then the penalty shall be limited
to fifty percent (50%) of the permit fee, exclusive of other costs or cash
donations. The permit shall not be issued until the original permit fee plus
the penalty is paid in full to the village.



   (l)   Building Development Fee: Each applicant for a building permit
of new construction, or for a tear down/rebuild, or for conversion of any
unit from multi-family to single-family, or vice versa, shall, prior to the
issuance of such building permit, pay in addition to the amounts specified
elsewhere in this article, the amount as set forth in section 13-1 of this
code.



(Ord., 8-5-1965; Ord. 70-10, 7-16-1970; Code 1972, § 4-1-2; Ord. 74-3,
2-7-1974; Ord. 74-14, 7-18-1974; Ord. 86-8, 3-10-1986; Ord. 86-35, 11-8-1986;
Ord. 86-45, 12-29-1986; Ord. 91-16, § 1, 6-24-1991; Ord. 91-29, § 1,
9-9-1991; Ord. 93-16, § 1, 7-12-1993; Ord. 93-30, §§ 2-4, 9-13-1993; Ord.
94-6, §§ 1, 2, 5-23-1994; Ord. 94-21, § 1, 10-24-1994; Ord. 95-3, § 1,
2-27-1995; Ord. 95-29, § 1, 11-13-1995; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord.
98-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 99-12, § 1, 4-12-1999; Ord. 2000-54, § 1,
10-9-2000; Ord. 2002-22, § 1, 6-24-2002; Ord. 2003-41, §§ 2, 3,
12-22-2003; Ord. 2004-27, § 2, 11-8-2004; Ord. 2006-02, § 1, 1-9-2006; Ord.
2010-01, § 2, 1-11-2010; Ord. 2014-20, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1,
5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-33.  Certificate Of Occupancy:



   (a)   Required: No building or structure shall be occupied or used,
in whole or in part, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued
by the building commissioner and posted on the premises stating the purpose
for which the building may be used in its several parts, the maximum
permissible live loads on the several floors, the number of occupants that
may be accommodated in the several stories, in case such number is limited by
a provision of law or by the permit and all special stipulations of the
permit, if any.



   (b)   Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy: Upon request of the holder
of a permit, or of the owner if the holder of the permit is legally dissolved
or in legal bankruptcy, the building commissioner may issue a temporary
certificate of occupancy for part of a building or structure; provided, that
such temporary occupancy or use would not jeopardize life or property and the
following terms and conditions for final grading have been met. The request
for a temporary occupancy permit must be turned in to the building department
no later than two (2) weeks prior to a contractor's closing on the property.
In no event shall a certificate of temporary occupancy remain valid for a
period beyond six (6) months from the date of issuance. Failure to complete
any of the terms and conditions for final grading within the six (6) month
period of the temporary occupancy forfeits the cash bond required under this
section to the village of Justice. A violation of the Village engineer's
recommendations and approved plans and specification as well as the lapse of
the temporary occupancy certificate shall be a violation of this section. The
building commissioner shall have the ability to determine if a violation of
this section exists at any given time. Once the cash bond has been forfeited
under this section, it shall be the village of Justice's responsibility to
finish completion of the landscaping and grading in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications.



In order to secure compliance with this section, there shall be deposited
with the building commissioner, at the time of filing of an application for a
temporary certificate of occupancy, a cash bond or equivalent in an amount of
the estimated cost of final grading and landscaping as determined by the
building commissioner's sole judgement, or in the amount of six thousand
dollars ($6,000.00) per unit. The full amount of the cash bond shall be
forfeited to the village for violation of this section as determined by the
reasonable judgment of the building commissioner. Such forfeiture shall not
impair the village's right to enforce any and all other remedies available to
it by reason of such violation of this section, including the right to
recover a fine or penalty or seek injunctive relief. Completion of final
grading shall consist of two inches (2") of black dirt graded per the
approved site plan, maintained four inches (4") below the top of the
foundation. All grading must be landscaped or sodded completely to the
satisfaction of the building commissioner. Any amounts of the deposit that
remain due and owing to depositor shall be returned to depositor upon
completion of the final grading and landscaping and the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.



   (c)   Altered Buildings Or Structures: No building or structure
enlarged or extended, or so altered, wholly or in part, as to change its
classification of occupancy, and no altered building or structure for which a
certificate of occupancy has not been heretofore issued, shall be occupied or
used, in whole or in part, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been
issued by the building commissioner; provided, that if the occupancy or use
of such building was not discontinued during the work or alteration, the
occupancy or use of the building or structure shall not continue for more
than thirty (30) days after completion of the alteration unless such
certificate shall have been issued.



   (d)   Certificate For Change Of Occupancy:



       (1)    No change of occupancy shall be made in a building or
structure that is not consistent with the last issued certificate of
occupancy for such building or structure, unless a new certificate of
occupancy is secured.



      (2)    The occupancy of a building or structure shall not be
deemed to have changed because of a temporary vacancy or change of ownership
or tenancy. The reestablishment in a building or structure, after a change of
occupancy has been made, of a prior use that is not permitted in a new
building or structure of the same type of construction is prohibited. The
change from a specifically prohibited use to another specifically prohibited
use shall not be made.



   (e)   Issuance: A certificate of occupancy shall be issued within
five (5) days after written application therefor, if the building or
structure at the time of such application shall be entitled thereto. Copies
of certificates of occupancy shall be furnished, on request, to persons
having a proprietary interest in the building or structure.



   (f)   Certificate Of Complete Installations: When a certificate is
specifically required by a provision of this code for an installation,
extension or alteration of equipment or appliances, it shall be unlawful to
use or permit the use of such equipment or appliances to which such provision
applies until the appropriate certificate has been issued.



   (g)   Deposit Of Bond: In order to secure compliance with this
section, there shall be deposited with the building commissioner, at the time
of filing of an application for building permit for construction or
improvements in excess of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), a
cash bond or equivalent in an amount equal to one percent (1%) of the
estimated cost of construction of the improvement up to and including fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and one-half of one percent (0.5%) over fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The full amount of the cash bond or equivalent
shall be forfeited to the village at the rate of ten percent (10%) of such
deposit per day for each day that this section has been violated in the
reasonable judgment of the building commissioner. Such forfeiture shall not
impair the village's right to enforce any and all other remedies available to
it by reason of such violation of this section, including the right to
recover a fine or penalty or seek injunctive relief. The deposit shall be
returned to depositor upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



(Ord. 69-17, 8-7-1969; Code 1972, § 4-1-3; Ord. 81-7, 2-5-1981; Ord.
2003-04, § 1, 2-24-2003; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-34.  Classification Of Buildings:



   (a)   Establishment Of Classification: For the purpose of this
division, buildings shall be classified as follows:



      Class A buildings used as single-family dwellings;



      Class B buildings used as apartment houses;



      Class C buildings used as private garages;



      Class D buildings used for commercial or industrial purposes;



      Class E buildings used for the purpose of class D buildings and
in which are located one or more apartments;



      Class F buildings used as public garages or automobile filling
stations.



   (b)   Other Classifications: Buildings not included within any of
the above classes shall be fireproof construction unless such requirement is
modified by resolution of the board of trustees on recommendations of the
building commissioner.



   (c)   Change Of Classification Of Buildings: If buildings erected
for or converted to the uses of any classification mentioned in this section
are to be applied to the uses of any other class for which a better system of
construction is required by this division, the construction and equipment of
such buildings shall be first made to conform to the requirements of this
division as specified for their intended use. It shall be unlawful to use any
such building for a new or different purpose from that to which its structure
and equipment adopt it under this division, unless the provisions of this
division and the provisions of the zoning chapter1 for such new or different
use shall first have been complied with.



(Code 1972, § 4-1-4; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



1  See chapter 12 of this code.



Sec. 8-35.  Construction; Repair; Compliance With Division:



   (a)   Every building or structure or part thereof, hereafter
constructed, erected, altered, enlarged, maintained or repaired within the
village shall be so constructed, erected, altered, enlarged, maintained or
repaired in accordance with the provisions of this division, the zoning
chapter1, and other provisions of the laws of the village.



   (b)   The following building materials and repairs are prohibited in
the village of Justice:



      (1)    No exposed smooth cinder or concrete block on any
building.



   (2)   No boarded up windows or doors unless ordered by the building
commissioner to prevent further damage to abandoned or disaster struck
buildings; all boarded up windows and doors must be replaced with materials
equivalent to that which existed prior to the need for repair.



   (3)   No opaque windows may replace nonopaque windows.



   (4)   No oriental strand board (OSB) shall be allowed to be used as
roofing material.



(Code 1972, § 4-1-6; Ord. 77-52, 9-29-1977; Ord. 2001-14, § 1, 4-23-2001;
Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



1  See chapter 12 of this code.



Sec. 8-36.  Height, Area And Foundation Grades Of Buildings:



   (a)   Height And Area: The height and area of every building or
structure or part thereof, hereafter constructed, erected, altered, enlarged,
maintained or repaired within the village shall conform with the requirements
of the zoning chapter in respect to height and area.



   (b)   Foundation Grades: The height of the top of the foundation
wall shall be set at a maximum of eighteen inches (18") over the crown of the
street at the front of the property. Where there are existing buildings in
the block, foundation grades shall be set to equalize the height of all
buildings in the block where practicable, unless the existing buildings in
the block are set too low in relation to the existing or proposed curb
elevations where it then becomes necessary to place a new building foundation
grade higher than the existing buildings in the block. Provision shall then
be made to protect the lower elevation buildings from the water runoff of the
new buildings. Parts of the foundation which are placed at a higher elevation
for architectural effect shall not extend for more than forty percent (40%)
of the perimeter of the building.



   (c)   Basements: All basements shall be constructed in compliance
with subsection 8-31(e) of this division and all building codes adopted
thereunder.



No basement shall have more than thirty percent (30%) of its area separated
by dividers or walls from the total area of the basement. The enclosed or
separated areas may include a utility room, laundry room, a mechanical room
for a heating and air conditioning unit, electrical service, and water
heater, a storage room divided by the number of rental units in a
multi-family residence, one bathroom and at least one staircase. An open
stairway will be allowed outside the enclosed area in the open seventy
percent (70%) of the basement.



(Code 1972, § 4-1-7; Ord. 79-26, 10-4-1979; Ord. 96-22, § 1, 8-12-1996;
Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-37.  Alterations Of Existing Buildings:



   (a)   In construing the several sections of this division, such
sections shall not be construed as requiring alterations in the construction
or equipment of buildings or structures in existence at the time of the
passage of this division, unless specific provision is made to the contrary,
or unless the provision is expressly made retroactive, or unless such
building shall not have sufficient or adequate means of egress or ingress.



   (b)   It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of a building
to keep it in safe and sanitary condition and to comply with the zoning
chapter.



(Code 1972, § 4-1-8; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-38.  Reserved:



Sec. 8-39.  Fire Limits:



   (a)   Districts Included: For the purpose of guarding against the
calamities of fire, commercial and manufacturing districts are hereby
declared to be within the fire limits, and the fire limits are hereby
established to include all of such area and, except as hereinafter provided,
no wooden buildings hereafter shall be erected, placed, added to or enlarged
within such fire limits; provided, that within areas where more than fifty
percent (50%) of the available lot area has been used for the erection of
wooden buildings, wooden buildings may be erected, placed, added to or
enlarged but only when and after permission so to do has been obtained from
the village board of trustees upon application made to it therefor and then
only upon such reasonable terms and conditions as the village board of
trustees may prescribe with due regard to the protection of life and property
from the calamities of fire.



   (b)   Ordinary Repairs Allowed: Nothing contained in this section
shall be construed to prevent the making of ordinary repairs for the purpose
of maintenance of any existing wooden building.



   (c)   Fire Resistance: The provisions of this section shall apply to
all multi-family structures containing three (3) or more living units and
structures containing any type of use such as business or industrial and also
one or more living units. The fire resistance rating of all structural
elements (including walls, floors, and roof) and tenant separation or party
walls shall be a minimum of two (2) hours and shall be constructed of
noncombustible materials. Exterior and load bearing wall construction shall
be of masonry. All floors shall be of precast concrete, poured concrete or
other type having a minimum of two (2) hour fire resistance rating1.



(Ord., 8-5-1965; Code 1972, § 4-1-10; Ord. 85-1, 2-7-1985; Ord. 2016-20, §
1, 5-23-2016)



1  See chapter 4 of this code.



Sec. 8-40.  Minimum Area Of Class A Buildings:



   Buildings of class A shall have the following minimum area: Residences
shall have at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space. These
areas are exclusive of all porches, bays, furnace rooms, laundry rooms and
attached garages.



(Ord., 8-5-1965; Code 1972, § 4-1-11; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-41.  Class C Private Garages:



   (a)   Compliance With Provisions: Every structure erected for or
converted to the purpose of class C shall comply with the following special
provisions, in addition to the general provisions of this division.



   (b)   Permits: No work shall begin until a building permit has been
issued for the garage, according to section 8-32 of this code. No permit
shall be issued for garage unless a scaled drawing, drawn in professional
manner is presented. Plans shall show size, roof pitch, window and door
openings and front and side elevations. A plat plan will also be required
showing locations of the garage in relation to residence.



   (c)   Construction:



      (1)   Generally: No structure erected for or converted to the
purpose of class C detached garage shall exceed nine feet (9') in total wall
height from the single plate on the floor to the double plate on the top, and
not exceed fourteen feet (14') in total height of structure. No overall
dimension shall measure over thirty six feet (36') in length. The maximum
area of such structure shall be eight hundred sixty four (864) square feet,
as measured along outside walls.



      No second story, loft, or living quarters is permitted to be
constructed on a class C (detached) garage.



      Patios under a common roof shall not exceed the length of the
common wall and ten feet (10') in width. The common wall shall also extend to
the ridge closing the garage from the patio. All garages shall have a glass
area of three percent (3%) of floor area.



      No garage shall be built closer than ten feet (10') to the rear
of the lot nor closer than five feet (5') to the side of the lot line. No
private garage shall be erected on the front of the lot, unless attached to
the dwelling. The setback from the back of home shall be a minimum of twelve
feet (12').



      Walls may be eight inches (8") thick and foundations shall be at
least eight inches (8") wide and two feet (2') below grade.



      Flooring shall be a minimum of four inches (4") of concrete with
wire mesh and gravel base.



      Gas ledges will be required on any attached garage. Such curbs
shall be on walls adjacent to a structure and shall be a minimum of three
inches (3") in height.



      No wood floors shall be allowed in any private garages.



      (2)   Materials: It shall not be permissible to build garages
on wooden posts or piers of any form of material. It shall not be permissible
to build garages out of skids, forms or any boxes. Wooden shingles shall not
be permitted for a roof covering material.



(Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-42.  Hotels And Motels:



   (a)   Compliance With Provisions: All hotel and motel buildings
shall comply with the following special provisions, in addition to the
general provisions of this code.



   (b)   Definitions: The following terms shall have the meaning
ascribed them herein unless the context clearly evinces a different meaning:



   Hotel.  Any building of forty five (45) or more units on not less than
three floors, designed for the temporary occupancy of individuals who are
lodged for compensation, with or without meals; providing a private bathroom
for each guest unit which includes a toilet, sink, and shower/tub; whereby
access to all guest units is through a fully heated and air conditioned
hallway accessible by elevators between floors; which may provide meeting
rooms, common dining facilities, including banquet rooms; and all other uses
customarily and historically associated thereto, for the comfort,
accommodation and entertainment of patrons, including the service of
alcoholic beverages.



   Motel.  Any building or series of buildings that is not a hotel in
which temporary lodging is open to the general public for compensation. For
the purpose of this code, a motel is not a boarding house or multi-family
dwelling. A motel shall be no more than thirty five (35') feet above grade;
which provides primary access to some or all guest units through an
independent exterior door. Other terms include tourist homes or courts,
lodging houses, rooming houses, bed and breakfast inns, and motor lodges.



   Adult Motel.  A motel or similar commercial establishment which: a)
offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration, provides
patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other electronic or photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, and has a sign visible from the
public right of way which advertises the availability of such transmissions,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions; and/or b) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than twelve (12) hours; and/or c) allows a tenant or occupant of
a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than
twelve (12) hours. Rent and sub-rent when used in reference to an adult
motel, shall mean the act of permitting a sleeping room to be occupied for
any form of consideration.



   Dwelling Or Guest Unit.  Any room or unit of a hotel or motel used or
intended to be used as a unit for living, sleeping, cooking and eating,
containing sanitary facilities.



   Extended Stay Hotel Facility.  Any hotel with rooms specifically
designed for extended stays over thirty (30) days, improved with sleeping and
bathroom areas, a dedicated kitchen area with cooking appliances,
refrigerator, and sink.



   Sight Triangle.  The area of the corner lot closest to the street or
driveway intersection which must be kept free of visual impairment to allow
full view of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The area shall be marked
by a point at which the two (2) curb lines intersect, measuring back 15 feet
on each street front, and drawing a line across the two (2) back points to
form a triangulated area. No signs may be permitted within a sight triangle
except for public safety-related signs.



   (c)   Building Design:



      (1)   Bulk And Mass: All building and parking areas shall be
designed with treatments to reduce the appearance of improvement's bulk and
mass. Buildings shall include vertical architectural treatment to reduce the
appearance of the building's scale into smaller components. Any facade with a
plain wall shall be screened through landscaping, berming, and/or fencing.
Architectural details shall continue on all facades. The following design
elements should be incorporated to interrupt the monotony of the horizontal
plane of a building or wall:



         a.   Change in color, texture, or materials;



         b.   Projections, recesses, and reveals, structural
bays, entrances;



         c.   Grouping of windows or doors; and/or



         d.   Awnings.



      (2)   Materials And Color:



         a.   Minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all facade
(excluding windows and doors), shall be covered with brick, stone, textured
masonry block, or some other masonry product of similar quality to add
texture, color and visual interest to the walls, roofs and facades.



         b.   Ribbed metal siding is prohibited as a primary
exterior surface material. It may be used as trim covering no more than
fifteen percent (15%) of the facades.



         c.   Smooth faced gray concrete block and tilt-up
concrete panels are prohibited on all facades.



         d.   Facade colors should be earth tone with low
reflectance. High intensity, metallic, mirrored, or fluorescent colors are
prohibited.



      (3)    Mechanical Equipment: Roof mounted heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning equipment (excluding roof vents), duct
work, air compressors, and other fixed operating machinery shall be fully
screened from public view with architectural treatments that complement the
overall design of the structure.



   (d)   Parking And Loading Areas:



      (1)   Parking garages for hotels, having multiple floors,
either enclosed or partially enclosed, shall be built according to the most
recent codes adopted by the village.



      (2)   Computation: When a determination of the number of
off-street parking spaces required by this section results in a requirement
of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be
disregarded while a fraction in excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as
one parking space.



      (3)   Size: Off-street parking space shall be at least ten
feet (10') in width and at least twenty feet (20') in length, exclusive of
access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or office or work areas. Each
required off-street parking space shall have a vertical clearance of at least
seven feet (7'). Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided in accordance
with the most current edition of the American with Disability Act (ADA).



      (4)   Number: The number of required parking spaces for a
hotel shall be equal to one space per guest room and one space per every two
(2) employees; plus any spaces required for restaurant, lounge, banquet
areas, and meeting rooms as required under section 12-88 of this code.
Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the most
current edition of the Americans with Disability Act (ADA).



      (5)   Access:



         a.   Each required off-street parking space shall open
directly to an aisle or driveway of at least the widths identified below,
based upon the angle of the parking stalls provided, and whether the aisle
serves one or two (2) rows of parking spaces:



 


Parking Angle

 

1 Row

 

2 Rows




Parallel

 

12 Feet

 

12 Feet




30 Degrees

 

12 Feet

 

12 Feet




45 Degrees

 

13 Feet

 

14 Feet




60 Degrees

 

18 Feet

 

19 Feet




90 Degrees

 

20 Feet

 

24 Feet




 



         b.   All off-street parking facilities shall be designed
with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street in a manner which will
least interfere with traffic movements. No driveway across public property or
curb cut shall exceed a width of thirty (30) feet.



         c.   An off-street loading space of at least ten (10)
feet by thirty (30) feet shall be provided for each building and shall be
adjacent to a receiving space within the building.



      (6)   Construction/Surfacing/Draina ge:



         a.   All surface off-street parking areas and driveways
shall be improved with a compacted stone base, not less than six inches (6")
thick, surfaced with asphalt, concrete, brick or some comparable all-weather
dustless material.



         b.   In the event permeable parking surfaces are used,
they shall be of a six inch (6") porous asphalt or concrete course with a six
inch (6") inch perforated PVC SDR-26 under drain; twenty-four inches (24")
graded CA-5 stone reservoir; with non-woven geotextile fabric layer over an
un-compacted sub-grade.



         c.   Driveway aprons accessing streets shall be six inch
(6") thick concrete, with welded wire fabric placed on six inch (6W) minimum
well compacted gravel base. All driveway aprons shall have curb and gutters
made of cement, upon each side of the driveway and parking areas excepting at
entrance or exit thereto. Curb and gutters shall be subject to IDOT Bureau of
Local Roads requirements.



         d.   All surface off-street parking areas shall have
storm water drainage either through an underground sewer system tied into the
existing storm water systems of the village, or a detention pond as denoted
in section 11-11 of this code, pursuant to any Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District of Greater Chicago (MWRD) permit requirements.



         e.   All off-street parking areas shall be shall be
striped.



      (7)   Location Of Accessory Off-Street Parking Facilities: All
required parking spaces shall be within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
principal use in business and industrial districts.



   (e)   Landscaping And Screening:



      (1)   Parking Lot Street Yards: Where parking lots providing
for five (5) or more parking spaces are in view of the public right of way,
there shall be installed within a ten foot (10') wide street yard between the
parking area and the street, a minimum of, three (3) one and three quarter
inch (1-3/4") caliper canopy trees and one (1) one and three quarter inch
(-3/4") caliper understory trees per one hundred fifty (150) linear feet of
frontage. The substitution of one (1) understory tree for each required shade
tree that would conflict with overhead utilities will be permitted within
street yards. In conjunction with the planting standards described above, the
following screening techniques are encouraged:



         a.   Masonry walls compatible with proposed building
design, and landscaped as a foundation wall;



         b.   Screen fencing of wrought iron or approved
material. Chain link fencing is prohibited;



         c.   An earthen berm between the right of way and the
building, not to exceed a slope of two to one (2:1) (vertical: horizontal).



      (2)   Landscape Parking Islands: To break up large expanses of
parking and provide a minimum five percent (5%) landscape area, landscape
islands shall be required such that no parking space may be located more than
ninety (90) linear feet away from a landscape island containing a canopy
tree. Landscape islands must be a minimum of four feet (4') wide from back of
curb to back of curb, and a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet in area.



      (3)   Landscaping Between Buildings: There shall be sufficient
quantities of canopy, understory and evergreen trees, shrubs and ground
covers to screen unattractive views of the side and rear of adjacent
buildings.



      (4)   Foundation Planting:



         a.   At a minimum, a four foot (4') wide landscape area
shall be provided adjacent to all building walls (excluding driveways,
entrance areas, covered walkways, service and delivery areas).



         b.   The landscape area shall be planted with a balance
of understory and evergreen trees, shrubs and ground covers.



         c.   The plantings shall deemphasize large expanses of
building wall length and height, accent building entrances and architectural
features, and screen mechanical equipment adjacent to buildings.



   (f)   Outdoor Lighting:



      (1)   All areas intended for pedestrian use shall be well
lighted by fixtures that focus on lighting walkways and sitting areas.



      (2)   Decorative lighting fixtures that supplement general
lighting are strongly encouraged in all developments.



      (3)   To minimize hazardous glare, all fixtures visible from
the public right of way (with the exception of general street lighting) with
output greater than fourteen thousand (14,000) initial lumens, shall be
designed without lenses or globes protruding below the shell of the fixture,
and shall generally be parallel with the ground.



   (g)   Signs:



      (1)   The colors and materials of signs shall be similar to
and compatible with the architectural style, colors and materials of the
related building. Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural
element of the building and site to which it relates.



      (2)   The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held
to the minimum needed to convey the sign's message and shall be composed in
proportion to the area of the sign face.



      (3)   Signs should be oriented to vehicular traffic as well as
pedestrians, and scaled appropriately.



      (4)   Sign height is limited to the height of the building or
45' whichever is less.



      (5)   Line Of Sight: The lowest point on any sign face of a
free-standing sign may not be less than forty eight inches (48") from ground
level to provide a clear line of sight for vehicles entering or exiting a
driveway. Ground signs require a minimum set back from the right-of-way
property line of not less than five feet (5'). Signs shall not be permitted
in parkways. No signs shall be permitted within a sight triangle except for
safety-related signs.



   (h)   Minimum Lot Size: No hotel shall be constructed on a lot less
than two (2) acres in size without a special use permit in accordance with
the terms and provisions of this title. Hotels may be constructed on lots
less than two (2) acres if they are part of a larger master planned project,
provided the sum of all contiguous lots within the master planned project is
greater than ten (10) acres.



   (i)   Density: Maximum density requirements for hotels are
calculated on a sliding floor area ratio (FAR) system which is dependent on
the size of the site. FARs for master planned projects are calculated based
on the sum of all contiguous lots within the project.



      The following FARs shall apply:



         0.25 for sites less than ten (10) acres;



         0.40 for sites between ten to (10-15) acres; and



         0.70 for sites greater than fifteen (15) acres.



   (j)   Height: No hotel shall be less than three (3) stories above
grade. No hotel hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed
federal aviation administration (FAA) regulations.



   (k)   Refuse, Rubbish And Garbage: All hotels and motels shall
provide a refuse room within the principal building or an enclosed refuse
stall outside the building. Exterior refuse stalls shall be constructed of
the same principal material as the building and shall be located in an area
approved by the building commissioner.



   (l)   Minimum Room Size: No guestroom, including the bathroom, shall
be less than three hundred (300) square feet of heated/air conditioned space.



   (m)   Amenities: All hotels shall be required to provide guests with
the following facilities/improvements:



      (1)   On site food service including either a restaurant,
café, and/or in house or contracted room service;



      (2)   Elevator service to all floors;



      (3)   Twenty four (24) hour on site private security; security
cameras with recording capabilities in all common areas and exterior of the
building.



      (4)   Handicapped accessible facilities as required per the
provisions of this code.



   (n)   Prohibited Acts And Conditions:



      (1)   No hotel or motel shall provide rates for any period
less than one full night's stay.



      (2)   Adult motels as defined in this code are prohibited.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful to permit any violation of any
ordinance or law on the premises or in any motel or hotel.



      (4)   Parking of vehicles, including but not limited to
trucks, buses, road equipment, or other vehicles in parking lots of hotels
and motels, where vehicle owners/operators are not patrons of the hotel or
motel, is prohibited.



(Ord. 2013-04, § 2, 3-25-2013; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-43.  Reserved:



Sec. 8-44.  Salary Of Building Commissioner:



   See chapter 2, section 2-34 of this code for provisions concerning the
salary of the building commissioner. 



(Code 1972, § 4-1-15; Ord. 79-33, 12-6-1979; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-45.  Work Permit:



   (a)   No person shall build any new building nor shall remodel any
old building without first securing a work permit as herein provided for; nor
shall any such person desirous of soliciting work for the pursuit of business
as a building tradesman or building contractor, where work is to be performed
outside of the home, within the corporate limits of the village do so without
securing such work permit.



   (b)   Application for a work permit shall be made with the building
commissioner who shall issue such work permit upon receipt of the appropriate
insurance documentation, proper licenses, and a payment as set forth in
section 13-1 of this code, which shall not be refundable.



   (c)   Any person securing such a work permit shall keep such permit
on his person or in their vehicle before any work is started.



   (d)   All work permits issued by the village shall expire one year
from date of issue.



(Ord. 71-23, 11-4-1971; Code 1972, § 4-1-16; Ord. 91-29, § 2, 9-9-1991;
Ord. 92-15, § 1, 3-23-1992; Ord. 92-48, § 1, 12-28-1992; Ord. 98-6, § 2,
2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2009-15, § 34, 6-22-2009; Ord.
2009-28, § 2, 11-23-2009; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2014)



Sec. 8-46.  Environmental Barriers Act-Adopted:



   In accordance with the procedures required by state law, the
Environmental Barriers Act1 is hereby adopted by reference as if set out at
length in this section.



(Code 1972, § 4-1-17; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



1  410 ILCS 25/1 et seq.



Sec. 8-47.  Environmental Barriers Act-Building Permit Applications:



   Any application for a building permit or other official authorization
for construction of a public facility, as defined in section 3 of the
Environmental Barriers Act, must meet the requirements of that Act.



(Code 1972, § 4-1-18; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-48.  Accessibility Standards Act:



   In accordance with the procedures required by state law, the
Accessibility Standards Act2 published by the Capital Development Board3 of
this state is hereby adopted into this code, copies of such act having been
on file with the village for more than fifteen (15) days prior to the passage
and approval of this section.



(Code 1972, § 4-1-19; Ord. 80-2, 1-3-1980; Ord. 2009-15, § 34, 6-22-2009;
Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



2  20 ILCS 3105/1 (art. I).



3  20 ILCS 3110/1.1 et seq.



Sec. 8-49.  Telecommunication And Fiber Optic Installations:



   (a)   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or erect
any portion of a telecommunication or fiber optic system prior to obtaining a
permit from the village. An application shall be filed with the office of the
building commissioner upon such forms as he shall deem necessary. The
application shall be accompanied by a complete set of plans showing the
location of all work to be performed, a copy of the contract reflecting the
total cost of the project and the linear feet covered; and the certification
of a licensed electrical contractor that the plans and specifications comply
with the applicable village electrical ordinances.



   (b)   Contractors: Any and all persons constructing or erecting a
telecommunication or fiber optic  system shall obtain a license as a general
contractor under section 8-45 of this code.



   (c)   Occupation Of Streets: No street shall be blocked or occupied
by any person constructing or erecting any portion of a telecommunication or
fiber optic system without obtaining a street occupation permit. For the
purposes of telecommunication or fiber optics, the locations to be blocked or
occupied shall be given to the building commissioner and the public works
director at least two (2) business days prior to their blockage or
occupation. Adequate warning devices, including barricades, shall be supplied
to direct traffic to other areas by the contractor.



   (d)   Permit Fee: The permit fee for the construction and erection
of a telecommunication or fiber optic system shall be one percent (1%) of the
total cost of the project attributable to the village of Justice.



   (e)   Restoration: All disturbed areas within the village due to a
telecommunications or fiber optic installation shall be restored back to its
original condition within ninety (90) days of the completion of the project.
Failure to restore any disturbed area shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any one offense. A separate
and distinct offense shall be held to have been committed each day any person
or entity continues to violate any of the provisions hereof. 



(Code 1972, § 4-1-20; Ord. 81-5, 2-5-1981; Ord. 81-9, 3-19-1981; Ord. 98-6,
§ 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001;
Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-50.  Inspection Fees:



   (a)   Scope: This section hereby establishes the fees for inspection
by all building department administrators, as described in chapter 2, article
XI of this code, and the health officer, as described in section 5-113 of
this code, and their duly authorized agents.



   (b)   Fee Schedule: The fees to be charged for inspections by each
building department administrator, fire inspector, and health officer or his
duly authorized agent for new construction, major renovation, and all other
inspections shall be set forth in section 13-1 of this code for each
inspection. For the purpose of this section, major renovation shall include
at least one of the following, but shall not be limited to, the following: 1)
addition of a footed foundation; 2) an increase of thirty three percent (33%)
in living space; 3) the removal or installation of an external wall; 4) the
removal of any supporting wall, column, poles, truss, girder or beam; and 5)
the installation, closing or changing of stairs or existing ingress/egress
exit(s).



   (c)   Reinspection: The fees to be charged for reinspections by each
building department administrator,  fire inspector, and health officer or
their duly authorized agent for new construction, major renovation, and all
other inspections shall be set forth in section 13-1 of this code for each
reinspection.



(Code 1972, § 4-1-21; Ord. 85-8, 6-24-1985; Ord. 91-29, § 3, 9-9-1991; Ord.
98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2000-28, 6-12-2000;
Ord. 2006-02, § 2, 1-9-2006; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-51.  Chimneys For Wood Burning Appliances, Fireplaces And Stoves:



   The provisions of this section shall apply to all single-family
structures. Chimneys for wood burning appliances in all residences shall be:
a) capable of withstanding two thousand one hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(2,100°F) for thirty (30) minutes without any structural failure or any
temperature rise above the maximum temperature rises for materials as per UL
103; or b) built of noncombustible masonry construction with a vitrified clay
flue liner.



(Code 1972, § 4-1-22; Ord. 83-29, 8-18-1983; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-52.  General Building Provisions:



   No permits shall be issued unless the following criteria are met to the
satisfaction of the building commissioner:



      (1)    Buildings shall have good scale and be in harmonious
conformance with permanent neighboring development.



      (2)    Materials shall have good architectural character and
shall be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings.



      (3)    Monotony of design in single or multiple building
projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form and siting shall be used
to provide visual interest.



(Code 1972, § 4-1-23; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-53.  Suitable Architectural Design:



   (a)   No permit shall be issued for any new building, or for any
addition to an existing building, if the architectural design of the new
building or addition is such that the same is obviously inferior or radically
different so as to impair the marketability or property values of existing
buildings in the same immediate vicinity.



   (b)   All new buildings shall be of an architectural design so as to
prevent the deterioration of values in residential neighborhoods.



(Code 1972, § 4-1-24; Ord. 84-10, 4-19-1984; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5- 23-2016)



Sec. 8-54.  Certificate Of Housing Inspection:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is the new lessee or
purchaser of a residential housing unit to occupy the same until a
certificate of housing inspection without any deficiencies has been issued
for the subject unit, within the prior three (3) months.



   (b)   The certificate of housing inspection shall be provided by the
owner of the housing unit. At the time of inspection, the owner must provide
the building commissioner a copy of all paid bills showing no arrearages,
including sewer, water and garbage bills. No certificate shall be issued
until all such bills have been paid.



   (c)   For the purpose of this section, the following words shall
have the meanings set forth below:



      Lease: The transfer of occupancy rights of real property for
consideration even if no written agreement is entered into.



      Owner: The titleholder of the real property, including, but not
limited to, the beneficiaries of a land trust, all partners in a partnership,
the officers of a corporation or any agent thereof, and the owner of shares
in a cooperative association.



      Sale: The transfer for consideration of the title to real estate
and includes the purchase of a condominium unit or the share in a cooperative
apartment association or a corporation.



   (d)   All applications for a certificate of housing inspection shall
be made on such forms as prescribed by the building commissioner. The
building commissioner shall issue a report within fourteen (14) days after
gaining access to the subject property, whether by consent or by warrant, and
after the payment of the following inspections fees:



      (1)    For a single-family dwelling as set forth in section
13-1 of this code.



      (2)    For cooperative apartment or condominium as set forth
in section 13-1 of this code per apartment unit.



      (3)    For buildings containing more than one dwelling unit as
set forth in section 13-1 of this code per apartment unit.



   (e)   The building commissioner may order additional inspections,
including, but not limited to, plumbing, electrical, health and fire
protection. Each such inspection will be made after payment of a fee as set
forth in section 13-1 of this code, for each inspection. All deficiencies
shall be noted on the report.



   (f)   All deficiencies shall be corrected prior to occupancy.



   (g)   Upon all inspections being passed, the building commissioner
shall issue a certificate of inspection.



   (h)   No evidence obtained in a consented inspection of real
property pursuant to this section shall be used in the prosecution of any
criminal or ordinance violation against the owner of the property when
inspection was made.



   (i)   Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect any
property, no entry or inspection shall be made without procurement of a
warrant from the circuit court of the county. The court may consider any of
the following factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in
its decision as to whether a warrant shall issue:



      (1)    Eyewitness account of violation;



      (2)    Citizen complaints;



      (3)    Tenant complaints;



      (4)    Plain view violations;



      (5)    Violations apparent from village records;



      (6)    Property deterioration;



      (7)    Age of property;



      (8)    Nature of alleged violation;



      (9)    Similar properties in the area;



      (10)    Documented violations of similar properties in the
area;



      (11)    Passage of time since last inspection;



      (12)    Previous violations on the property.



Cause for issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist in light of
reasonable legislative and administrative standards which show that there is
reason to believe that a condition of nonconformity exists with respect to a
particular property in violation of a village ordinance.



   (j)   If the lessee or purchaser occupies the property without the
certificate of inspection, the village does not guarantee the condition of
the subject property and is not responsible for any claims arising out of the
subject property or the condition thereof. The village does not warrant that
all deficiencies are listed in a certificate and does not warrant anything as
to the condition of the property or the habitability thereof.



(Ord. 86-27, § 1, 8-11-1986; Ord. 93-45, § 1, 12-13-1993; Ord. 98-6, § 2,
2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-55.  MSD Permit Review Fee:



   (a)   If an MSD sewer permit is required by the metropolitan
sanitary district according to the latest edition of the “Manual of
Procedures for the Administration of Sewer Ordinance”, the developer shall
submit such permit along with the plans and specifications for the proposed
sewer hookup, and all supporting documentation, to the village. A fee as set
forth in section 13-1 of this code shall accompany all such documents. The
fee is the minimum fee to be charged for review of such plans by the village
engineer.



   (b)   If the engineer’s fee for such review exceeds the fee as set
forth in section 13-1 of this code, the village shall bill the developer for
such charges.



   (c)   All fees must be paid prior to the issuance of an occupancy
permit.



(Ord. 88-3, § 1, 2-22-1988; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2,
3-23-1998; Ord. 2009-15, § 34, 6-22-2009; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-56.  Sprinkler Systems:



   There shall be a sprinkler system permit fee as provided in section
8-69 of this chapter.



(Ord. 90-13, § 1, 8-13-1990; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-57.  Plan Review, Inspection And Reinspection Fees For Elevators,
Escalators, And Other Lift Devices:



   (a)   All new installations of elevators, escalators, dumbwaiters,
dock lifts, freight lifts, wheelchair lifts and other similar elevation lift
escalation devices and their components shall pay a plan review fee and an
inspection fee as set forth in section 13-1 of this code.



   (b)   Each such installation shall be inspected semiannually by the
building commissioner or his authorized representative and semiannually pay a
reinspection fee as set forth in section 13-1 of this code.



(Ord. 90-13, § 1, 8-13-1990; Ord. 91-29, § 4, 9-9-1991; Ord. 98-6, § 2,
2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2002-07, § 1, 3-25-2002; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-58.  Definitions:



   Storage Shed: A permanent manmade structure having four (4) enclosing
walls and a roof and which is not a part of any building or structure and is
more than two feet (2') in height over existing grade. Portable pavilions or
other temporary structures shall not be used for storage of any kind in any
zoning district in the village, may not be bolted down in any manner, and may
only be maintained in the village on a temporary basis, not to exceed
fourteen (14) days in duration without special approval by the building
commissioner.



(Ord. 91-29, § 15, 9-9-1991; Ord. 2001-19, § 1, 5-14-2001; Ord. 2016-20, §
1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-59.  Permit; Inspection; Regulations:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any storage
shed within the village without a construction permit from the building
commissioner.



   (b)   The application for a storage shed construction permit shall
be accompanied by a plat of survey showing the proposed location of the
storage shed in relation to the lot lines, existing permanent improvements,
the type of construction, the material to be used and the proposed dimensions
of the storage shed. These must be approved by the building commissioner.



   (c)   There shall be a building permit charge as set forth in
section 13-1 of this code, for a storage shed construction permit.



   (d)   All such new installation shall also pay an inspection fee as
set forth in section 13-1 of this code.



   (e)   The space used for a storage shed cannot decrease the number
of required parking spaces in commercial or multi-family zoning districts.



   (f)   Shed must be anchored as recommended and approved by the
building commissioner.



(Ord. 91-29, § 15, 9-9-1991; Ord. 94-18, § 1, 10-10-1994; Ord. 98-6, § 2,
2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-60  Vision Clearance:



   On corner lots, no storage shed shall obstruct any motor vehicle
driver’s view of any intersecting street as such vehicle is approaching the
intersection, so as to prevent the driver’s ability to halt his vehicle
with safety.



(Ord. 91-29, § 15, 9-9-1991; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-61  Materials:



   Any new normal storage shed material may be used for a storage shed.
However, all material shall be first approved by the building commissioner
when the permit is applied for.



(Ord. 91-29, § 15, 9-9-1991; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-62  Storage Shed Size And Number Requirements:



   (a)   No storage shed shall exceed twelve feet (12') in width by
twelve feet (12') in depth; nor shall it exceed eight feet (8') in total wall
height from the floor to the top of the wall, and not exceed ten feet (10')
in total height of structure, at the discretion of the building commissioner.



   (b)   Only one storage shed per residential lot is permitted.



(Ord. 91-29, § 15, 9-9-1991; Ord. 92-24, § 1, 6-22-1992; Ord. 2001-19, §
2, 5-14-2001; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-63  Location:



   No storage shed shall be constructed in violation of building setback
requirements of this division.



(Ord. 91-29, § 15, 9-9-1991; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-64  Requirements For Roof Construction:



   (a)   Contractors: All roofing shall be performed by a certified
roofing contractor, with a valid state license, or the homeowner who performs
the work themselves. The roofing contractor shall apply at the village
building department for a work permit as per section 8-45 of this code.



   (b)   Construction: Roofing construction shall meet the standards
set forth in section 8-31(e) of this code. No more than two (2) layers of
roofing material are allowed. If more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
roof sheeting area must be replaced, five-eighths inch (5/8") plywood
sheeting must be installed on the entire roof area.



   (c)   Inspection: For any roofing construction project requiring
only reshingling (second layer), one inspection is required at completion of
the project. For any roofing construction project requiring the tear-off of
roofing material or the replacement of roof sheeting, two (2) inspections are
required, one after the tear-off of the old roofing material or installation
of the new sheeting and the ice and water shield is installed and one at
completion of the project.



(Ord. 92-25, § 1, 6-22-1992; Ord. 98-26, § 1, 6-22-1998; Ord. 2016-20, §
1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-65  Architect Required; Certain Additions:



   A licensed architect must be employed by any property owner adding more
than fifty percent (50%) of square footage to the original square footage of
any structure, or for any second story addition. A licensed engineer or
architect must certify that the load bearing capacity of the existing
foundation is sufficient to bear the load of the new second story addition.
All building permits for such addition(s) must be issued in the
contractor’s name, if a contractor is employed.



(Ord. 92-42, § 1, 11-23-1992; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



DIVISION 3. PLUMBING 1,2



1.   See Chapter 11 of this code.



2.   65 ILCS 6/11-20-5; 225 ILCS 320/36.



Sec. 8-66  Reserved:



Sec. 8-67  Permit; Required:



   No person shall install or alter any plumbing within the village unless
he is a licensed plumber and until a permit has been secured for such
installation or alteration from the plumbing inspector or his authorized
designee. The plumbing contractor shall apply to the village building
department for a work permit pursuant to section 8-45 of this code.
Homeowners are only allowed to install fixtures or trim not including moving
or replacement of pipes, or other work as indicated in the plumbing code.



(Code 1972, § 4-2-1; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-68  Permit; Application:



   Application for plumbing permits shall be made upon printed forms to be
furnished by the building commissioner. Each application shall set out the
name of the owner of the premises where the proposed work is to be done, the
location thereof, by street and number, and a detailed description of the
proposed plumbing installation or alteration sufficient to show that the
proposed work is in conformity with this code.



(Ord., 8-5-1965; Code 1972, § 4-2-2; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-69  Permit; Fees:



   The plumbing inspector or his authorized designee shall issue a
plumbing permit upon such application in all cases where the proposed
installation or alteration as described in such application is found in
conformity with this code. The minimum plumbing permit shall be as set forth
in section 13-1 of this code. The following plumbing permit fees shall be
paid to the village before any plumbing work is started:



   New work, shall be as set forth in section 13-1 of this code per
fixture.



   Remodeling or alteration, shall be as set forth in section 13-1 of this
code per fixture.



(Code 1972, § 4-2-3; Ord. 79-12, 7-19-1979; Ord. 91-29, § 5, 9-9-1991; Ord.
98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1,
5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-70  Inspections And Tests:



   (a)   All work done by licensed plumbers or homeowners within any
building or structure or part thereof shall be subject to inspection,
supervision and approval of the plumbing inspector or his authorized
designee, and all faulty and defective work which may at any time be
discovered shall be made satisfactory to the plumbing inspector or his
authorized designee and no further permit shall be issued to the party in
default until this section shall have been fully complied with.



   (b)   All work done by licensed plumbers or homeowners shall be
subject to such further inspections and tests as shall be required by the
rules and regulations of the plumbing inspector or his authorized designee.



(Code 1972, § 4-2-4; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-71  Street Openings:



   No person shall injure or disturb any street pavement, side or
crosswalk, or any part thereof without first having complied with the
applicable provisions of this code.



(Code 1972, § 4-2-5; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



   Cross reference–Streets, sidewalks, driveways and parking lots, Ch.
10.



Sec. 8-72  Reserved:



Sec. 8-73  Water Service Connections:



   All connections for water supply, between the water distribution system
of the village and the building, shall be made in accordance with the rules
and regulations of the building department of the village, or the rules and
regulations of the West Suburban Water Commission, whichever serves the
premises.



(Ord. of 8-5-65; Code 1972, § 4-2-8; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-74–8-75.  Reserved:



Sec. 8-76  Sanitary Sewer Cleanouts:



   On soil and waste pipes four (4) inches or more in diameter cleanouts
of approved type, not less than four (4) inches in diameter shall be used.



(Code 1972, § 4-2-11; Ord. No. 80-1, 1-3-80; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-77–8-81.  Reserved:



Sec. 8-82  Overhead Plumbing:



   All new construction with occupied areas below ground level shall have
overhead plumbing. Every building erected shall comply with this provision.



(Ord. 93-33, § 1, 9-27-1993; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-83–8-84.  Reserved:



Sec. 8-85  Salary Of Plumbing Inspector:



   The salary of the plumbing inspector shall be as set from time to time
by the president and the board of trustees, as stated in chapter 2, section
2-34 of this code.



(Code 1972, § 4-2-20; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-86  Reserved:



Sec. 8-87  Cross Connection Control–General Policy:



   (a)   Purpose: The purpose of these rules and regulations is:



      (1)   To protect the public water supply system from
contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer’s water system
contaminants or pollutants which could backflow through the service
connection into the public water supply system.



      (2)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross
connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer’s potable
water system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or
systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety.



      (3)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program
of cross connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution
of the public and consumer’s potable water system.



(Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-88–8-89.  Reserved:



Sec. 8-90  Cross Connection Prohibited:



   (a)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross connection
control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to ensure
proper operation on a continuing basis.



   (b)(1)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the
potable portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the agency.



   (2)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.



(Ord. 91-1, § 4, 1-14-1991; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-91–8-94.  Reserved:



Sec. 8-95     Inspection And Maintenance:



   (a)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which
backflow prevention devices required by the plumbing code are installed to
have an inspection, test, maintenance and repair once per year or as
specified in the manufacturer’s instructions.



   (b)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made
inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific
authorization by the plumbing inspector or his authorized designee.



(Ord. 91-1, § 9, 1-14-1991; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001; Ord. 2016-20, §
1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-96–8-97.  Reserved:



Sec. 8-98  Plumbing Installation; Requirements And Regulations:



   All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, Title 77 Illinois Administrative
Code, section 890, et seq. All new and replacement plumbing fixtures shall be
labeled as a WaterSense product, as specified by USEPA.



(Ord. 91-2, § 1, 1-14-1991; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001; Ord. 2015-16, §
2, 9-28-2015; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-99–8-100.  Reserved:



DIVISION 4. ELECTRICITY 1



1.   See § 2-556 et seq., of this code.



Secs. 8-101–8-102.  Reserved:



Sec. 8-103  Permits–Required:



   (a)   No electrical equipment shall be installed or altered without
a permit issued by the electrical inspector or his authorized designee
authorizing the installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment.



   (b)   Where an electrical installation has been started prior to the
issuance of a permit for such work, the permit fee for such work shall be
twice the amount of the normal permit fee prescribed in this division.



   (c)   Where a registered licensed electrical contractor is found
doing electrical work without a permit by request a hearing shall be held by
the building commissioner and three (3) members of the village board, at
which time the permit privileges of such electrical contractor may be
suspended for a period of time not to exceed one (1) year.



(Code 1972, § 4-3-3; Ord. 86-6, 3-10-1986; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-104  Permits–Application:



   (a)   No permit for the installation, alteration and use of
electrical equipment shall be issued except pursuant to an application
therefor made out on a printed form, to be furnished by the building
commissioner, and upon the payment of a fee to the village in advance, as
hereinafter provided.



   (b)   This application for each permit shall contain the name of the
owner, or user of electrical equipment to be installed, altered or used, and
the location of the premises where such installation or alteration is to be
made by street and number and a detailed description of the work to be done.



(Ord., 8-5-1965; Code 1972, § 4-3-4; Ord. 2009-15, § 35, 6-22-2009; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-105  Permits–Fee Schedule:



   (a)   The term “circuit” as used in this section shall mean any
set of branch lighting conductors which have been extended from a
distribution center, and which may be utilized for the transmission of
electrical energy.



   (b)   Except in single-family dwellings, see home building schedule.



   (c)   Inspections of temporary installations, underground or
overhead wires and apparatus, and all other inspections not specifically
provided for herein, shall be charged at the rate of the current inspection
fee, per inspector.



   (d)   Inspection fees for the reinspection of any existing,
previously approved electrical installation shall be the current inspection
fee, per inspector, and shall be



payable by the electrical contractor who subsequently obtains a permit to
make the required corrections to that electrical installation.



   (e)   Home building schedule:



      15- and 20-ampere branch circuits:



         0 to 50 circuits, each         $15.00



         51 or more circuits, each      6.00



      Branch circuits exceeding 20 amperes:



         All circuits, each         16.00



      Motor or device: Load in kw or hp shall be converted to the
appropriate size circuit for computing fees.



      The fee for a thirty (30) ampere lighting circuit shall be double
the amount of a fifteen (15) ampere circuit. The fee for a forty (40) ampere
fixed lighting circuit shall be double the amount of a twenty (20) ampere
circuit.



      The fee for a fifty (50) ampere fixed lighting circuit shall be
triple the amount of a fifteen (15) ampere circuit.



      For each 3-phase, 4-wire circuit of capacities of nominal fifteen
(15) ampere or twenty (20) ampere capacities, the fee shall be three (3)
times the number of circuits.



      For additional outlets on existing circuits and including the
fixtures, sockets or receptacles attached to such outlets, the fee shall be
three dollars ($3.00) for each outlet.



   (f)   The fees for new homes, the original installation in a
single-family residence, including all circuits, fixtures, receptacles
(except electric heat and services), shall be the same as motors and circuits
in section 8-158(e) of this code.



   (g)   The fees for each electric motor or current consuming device,
other than lighting fixtures, shall be the same as circuits and motors in
section 8-105(e) of this code.



   (h)   Inspection fees and reinspection of any electrical
installation shall be at the current inspection fee and shall be payable by
the contractor who subsequently obtains a permit for electrical installation.



   (i)   Where extra inspections are made because of inaccurate or
incorrect information, failure to make necessary repairs or faulty
construction, a charge of the current inspection fee per inspection shall be
made for each such inspection.



   (j)   No inspection shall be made for an amount less than as set
forth in section 13-1 of this code.



   (k)   The fee for the examination of plans shall be as set forth in
section 13-1 of this code per hour or fraction thereof per plan examiner,
minimum one (1) hour charge.



   (l)   The fees for electrical work in connection with displays,
exhibitions, carnivals and similar temporary installations shall be as set
forth in section 13-1 of this code per hour or fraction thereof.



   (m)   The fees for electrical interior communication systems,
burglar alarms, and fire alarms shall be as set forth in section 13-1 of this
code.



   (n)   Fees for services shall be as set forth in section 13-1 of
this code.



   (o)   Fees for the installation of street lighting equipment shall
be as set forth in section 13-1 of this code.



(Code 1972, § 4-3-5; Ord. 86-9, 3-10-1986; Ord. 91-29, § 6, 9-9-1991; Ord.
98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2006-02, § 3,
1-9-2006; Ord. 2012-25, § 2, 9-24-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-106  Reserved:



Sec. 8-107  Certificate Of Approval:



   (a)   The electrical inspector or his authorized designee shall
issue a certificate of approval after each inspection in which the wiring or
apparatus is found to be



in compliance with the terms of this division and with the electrical code
adopted. A copy of such certificate shall be sent to the building
commissioner.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful to use or turn on power into or induce
any electric current to flow through any wires or equipment hereafter
installed for which such certificate has not been issued.



(Code 1972, § 4-3-7; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-108  Reserved:



Sec. 8-109  Salary Of Electrical Inspector:



   The salary of the electrical inspector shall be as set from time to
time by the president and board of trustees, as stated in section 2-34 of
this code.



(Code 1972, § 4-3-9; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-110–8-120.  Reserved:



DIVISION 5. MOVING BUILDINGS 1



1.   See Chapter 6 of this code.



Sec. 8-121  Permit–Required:



   No building shall be moved on or across any public street, walk, alley
or other public place within the village by any person, except upon a permit
duly issued by the village.



(Code 1972, § 4-4-1; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-122  Permit–Application; Fee; Bond:



   (a)   Any person desiring to move any building within the village
shall first obtain a permit after application thereof, presented to the
building commissioner, upon a form to be used for such purpose.



   (b)   Before such permit shall be granted to any person, the
application therefor shall designate or describe the building proposed to be
moved, where located, the place to which it is proposed to be moved, the
route to be taken and the time probably required for such moving. In addition
to the signing of such application, the applicant shall furnish to the
building commissioner the written consent of the owners or their duly
authorized agent, of the majority of the frontage on both sides of the street
where it is proposed to locate such building, lying between the nearest
intersecting streets. If, upon consideration of such application and such
inspection as the building commissioner may deem necessary, it shall appear
to the building commissioner that the work proposed to be done is in
accordance with the provisions of this code, the building commissioner, upon
the payment to the village of the fees and bond hereinafter provided for, may
grant the permit sought for such purpose. Before the issuance of such permit,
such applicant shall pay to the village a sum of money in payment for the
occupancy of the street or streets through which the building is proposed to
be moved, such sum to be determined by estimating the number of days which
will be required to move the building, on the assumption that the building
will be moved five hundred feet (500') per day, at the rate set forth in
section 13-1 of this code per day. There shall also be furnished in addition
to the sum herein provided for, a bond in the sum set forth in section 13-1
of this code, with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the
president, conditioned, among other things, that the party will pay any and
all damage that may occur to any public street, alley or public place over
which the building may be moved, and to reimburse the village and any public
utility company for the cost of removing and replacing all overhead wires,
cables and appurtenances and for the making of the necessary repairs thereto.



   (c)   No permit to move any building within the village shall be
granted unless the construction and proposed use of such building on the
proposed new site shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and of
the zoning regulations of this code.



(Code 1972, § 4-4-2; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998;
Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-123  Occupation Of Streets:



   No building which shall be authorized to be moved in accordance with
the terms of the preceding sections of this division shall be permitted to
stand or remain in the intersection of any streets, or any street and public
alley or upon any railroad or railway crossing at any time during the course
of its moving.



(Code 1972, § 4-4-3; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-124  Lights:



   On each and every night while such building remains on the public
streets or alleys of the village, from dusk to sunrise, the person to whom
such permit shall be issued shall place and cause to be maintained at the
center and each end of such building amber lights which lights shall be
plainly visible during the period above mentioned.



(Code 1972, § 4-4-4; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-125  Care Of Pavement:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom permit shall be issued
under this division to drive stakes in any pavement, public alley or at any
railroad or railway crossing.



(Code 1972, § 4-4-5; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-126  Liability Insurance:



   Before any person to whom a permit may be issued under this division
shall enter upon the moving of any building so authorized to be moved by such
permit, the person shall obtain from some reliable insurance company,
policies of liability insurance in the amount of not less than a one
million/five million dollar ($1,000,000.00/$5,000,000.00)  umbrella
indemnifying the village for any damage or injury resulting to any of the
workmen or employees of such person engaged in the moving of such building,
and also indemnifying the village for any damages or injury suffered by any
other person resulting from the moving of such building.



(Ord., 8-5-1965; Code 1972, § 4-4-6; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-127-8-140.  Reserved:



DIVISION 6. DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 1, 2



1.   See Chapter 4 of this code.



2.   65 ILCS 5/11-31-1 et seq.



Sec. 8-141  Declared A Nuisance:



   Any building or part thereof, or any structure of like nature, in a
condition dangerous to the occupants or those passing, or to any adjacent
building, by reason of bad conditions of walls, overloaded floors, defective
heating apparatus, violations from machinery, defective flues, confined or
cramped stairways, insufficient exits, narrow or dark passageways, or which
is unsafe or dangerous for the purpose for which it is to be used or intended
to be used, or is in danger of being set on fire from any defect in its
construction or is especially dangerous in case of fire by reason of its
dilapidated condition or defective construction or from other causes, or
which may be prejudicial to the public health or the health of the
inhabitants of the neighborhood, shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance.



(Code 1972, § 4-5-1; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-142  Report:



   Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the building commissioner or
health officer that any building walls or structure within the village is in
such dangerous condition as described in the preceding section, the building
commissioner or health officer, as the case may be, shall forthwith report
the same to the board of trustees.



(Code 1972, § 4-5-2; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-143  Abatement:



   If it shall appear to the board of trustees, after due investigation of
such report, that such building, walls or structure is in such dangerous
condition as aforesaid, and the owner or his agent, or the lessee or occupant
thereof, if within his power or duty so to do, shall fail within a reasonable
time to be fixed by the board of trustees, and after notice thereof in
writing served on such owner or his agent, or upon such lessee or occupant,
by such office of the village as the board of trustees shall direct,
specifying wherein such building is unsafe, defective or unlawful, to make
the same safe in such way as the board of trustees may direct, such building,
wall or structure shall, upon the order of the board of trustees, be torn
down and removed by the building commissioner, or made safe as the board of
trustees may order.



(Code 1972, § 4-5-3; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-144  Notice To Be Posted:



   Every building which shall appear to the building commissioner or
health officer to be especially dangerous in case of fire by reason of bad
conditions of walls, overloaded floors, defective construction, decay or
other causes, shall be held to be an unsafe building and the building
commissioner or health officer as the case may be, in addition to proceedings
as provided in section 8-143 of this division, shall also affix a notice of
the dangerous character of the building in a conspicuous place on the
exterior wall thereof. Any person removing, defacing or disturbing such
notice so affixed shall be liable to the penalties as provided in section 1-7
of this code.



(Code 1972, § 4-5-4; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-145  Liability Of Owner:



   An itemized account of the expenses of tearing down and removing such
structure or of putting the same into safe condition shall be kept by the
building commissioner, and shall be presented to the owner or owners of the
structure, or their agents or to such lessee or occupant for payment, and in
case such owner or owners, lessee or occupant, as the case may be, shall fail
or refuse, upon demand, to pay the same, then the same may be recovered from
such owner or owners, lessee or occupant in an action of debt in the name of
the village.



(Code 1972, § 4-5-5; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-146  Measures To Prevent Accidents:



   In case the building commissioner or health officer finds any building
or part of a building in such condition as to endanger life or liable to
cause serious accident, and that such danger may be averted by the immediate
application of precautionary measures, such officers or either of them shall
have and exercise the power, without the preliminary direction of the board
of trustees, to take such precautionary measures as in his opinion may be
necessary to render any building or part thereof safe, provided the owner,
lessee, occupant or agent of the building refuses or neglects to take such
precautionary measures after being notified so to do by such officers or
either of them. The decision and order of the officers or either of them, as
the case may be, shall be absolute and final.



(Code 1972, § 4-5-6; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-147  Closing; Revocation Of Applicable Licenses:



   (a)   The building commissioner or health officer may order that no
person shall be permitted to enter, occupy or use a dangerous building or any
portion thereof until the same shall have been made safe and may post such
order in a conspicuous place on the exterior wall of such building. No person
shall enter, occupy or use (except for the purpose of repairing and making
safe) any building or portion thereof after the posting of such notice until
such building or portion thereof shall have been made safe.



   (b)   If the building or portion thereof found dangerous shall be
devoted to any purpose requiring a license, the president may suspend the
license pending the period of making repairs, and he may revoke the license
in case of failure on the part of the owner or party having an interest in
such unsafe building or portion thereof to make such without delay and at
their expense.



(Code 1972, § 4-5-7; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-148  Resumption Of Occupancy; Issuance Of Permits For Reconstruction,
Repair:



   (a)   It shall not be lawful to occupy for human habitation any
building which is declared by the health officer to be unfit for habitation
by reason of defective sanitary conditions, until such conditions have been
remedied and the premises approved by the health officer as fit for occupancy.



   (b)   If work has been done and expense incurred by the village in
connection with dangerous buildings a bill of cost shall be rendered by the
village to the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of the property. The village
may refuse to issue a permit for the reconstruction, alteration or repair of
any building or portion thereof on the property involved until the
expenditure incurred by the village on account of the work and material
supplied has been repaid.



(Code 1972, § 4-5-8; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-149–8-165.  Reserved:



ARTICLE III.  SIGNS



Sec. 8-166  Definitions:



   For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:



   (a)   Abandoned Sign means a sign which no longer correctly directs
or exhorts any person, advertises a bonafide business, lessor, owner, product
or activity conducted or product available on the premises where such sign is
displayed.



   (b)   A-Frame - Sandwich Board. Tent Sign means a portable sign,
with one (1) or more sign faces, that may be carried from place to place and
is not attached to the ground.



   (c)   Animated Sign means any sign which includes action or motion.



   (d)   Attention-Getting Device means a flag, propeller, spinner,
streamer, search light, inflatable device or balloon which expands when
filled with a gas or air, or similar device or ornamentation which is
designed or used for the purpose of promoting, advertising, or attracting
attention for commercial purposes.



   (e)   Banner Sign means a temporary sign composed of cloth or
flexible material either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame, secured
or mounted to an existing structure.



   (f)   Beacon means a stationary or revolving light which flashes or
projects illumination, single or multi-colored, in any manner which is
intended to attract or divert attention; except, however, this term is not
intended to include any kind of lighting device which is required or
necessary under the safety regulations described by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other similar agencies.



   (g)   Bench Sign means a sign placed on a bench in the public
right-of-way.



   (h)   Billboard means any sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service or activity not necessarily conducted, sold or
offered upon the premises where such sign is located.



   (i)   Bus Shelter Sign means a sign erected on or in a bus shelter
located in the public right-of way.



   (j)   Canopy Or Awning Sign means any sign which is affixed to,
painted on or suspended from a roof-like shelter, either permanent,
retractable, or removable, which is self-supporting and provides protection
from sun, rain, snow, and other elements.



   (k)   Copy. Changeable Or Message Board Sign means a sign on which
the copy changes automatically on a lamp bank or through mechanical means,
such as electrical or electronic time and temperature units, or is changed
manually in the field in or upon the surface area of the sign.



   (l)   Directional Sign means a sign which directs or guides persons
to an establishment or to facilities intended to serve the public, including
entrances, exits, restrooms, public telephones, walkways, parking areas,
full-service and self-service gasoline pumps, and similar facilities, but
which does not identify the establishment itself or other goods or services
available at the establishment and does not contain other advertising
messages.



   (m)   Directory Sign means a sign which serves as common or
collective classification for a group of persons or businesses operating on
the same zoned lot, including but not limited to, shopping centers and office
complexes. Such sign may name the persons or businesses included, but carry
no other advertising matter.



   (n)   Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend
or affix.



   (o)   Flashing Sign means any sign which contains an intermittent or
flashing light source, or which produces the illusion of intermittent or
flashing light.



   (p)   Freestanding Sign means a sign which is completely or
principally supported by one (1) or more posts or other support of which
seventy-five percent (75%) is visually or physically attached to the ground,
which is not attached to the principal building on the property, and is
anchored in or upon the ground. This shall include, but not be limited to,
signs attached to poles or supports for lights, canopies, and other items or
structures.



   (q)   Garage Sale Sign means a temporary sign which indicates the
location of a sale of personal items from a private residence.



   (r)   Ground Level means the natural grade at the base of the sign
support.



   (s)   Ground Sign means a sign which is supported by one or more
uprights, poles, braces, or structure upon the ground.



   (t)   Height means the vertical distance measured from the natural
grade at the base of the sign support to the highest point of the sign or
tower.



   (u)   Hologram Sign means a three-dimensional picture that is made
on a photographic film or plate without the use of a camera, that consists of
a pattern of interference produced by a split coherent beam of light and
which for viewing is illuminated with a coherent light from behind.



   (v)   Home Occupation Sign means a sign indicating the occupation or
profession performed at a residence by a member of that residence.



   (w)   Identification Sign means a sign which states the name of the
business or establishment, including either the national company or local
proprietor and/or the address of a building.



   (x)   Illuminated Sign means any sign which emanates light either by
means of exposed tubing or lamps on its surface or by means of illumination
transmitted through the sign faces.



   (y)   Indirectly Illuminated Sign means any sign which reflects
light from a source intentionally directed upon it, for example by means of a
flood light.



   (z)   Information Sign means a sign of an informational nature
bearing no advertising.



   (aa)   Mall means any concentration of retail stores and/or service
establishments which share customer parking areas and area located within an
enclosure having public walkways whereby a customer in one store or
establishment may walk to another store or establishment without leaving the
enclosure.



   (bb)   Mansard Roof means a double-sloped pitched roof rising
steeply from the eaves, and having a summit of flatter slope on both sides of
the ridge.



   (cc)   Marquee means a roof-like structure that projects over an
entrance to a building, but not supported by the ground.



   (dd)   Memorial Sign means a sign, tablet, or plaque memorializing a
person, event, structure, or site.



   (ee)   Monument Sign means a ground sign which has a base other than
a pole such that the width of the sign is typically the same from the ground
to the top of the sign.



   (ff)   Municipal Sign means a sign erected and maintained pursuant
to and in discharge of any municipal functions or required by law, ordinance,
or other governmental regulation.



   (gg)   Name Plate means a sign which displays only the name and/or
street address of the occupant.



   (hh)   Non-Conforming Sign means any sign which was lawfully erected
and maintained prior to the adoption and effective date of this article and
any amendments hereto, which fails to conform to all applicable regulations
and restrictions of this code, or a sign previously deemed to be
non-conforming for which a special permit has been issued.



   (ii)   Off Site Sign means any sign that identifies a business,
person, activity, goods, products, services or facilities that is not
conducted on the premises upon which such sign is maintained.



   (jj)   On-Site Sign means any sign that identifies a business,
person, activity, goods, products, services or facilities that is located on
the same premises as the sign itself.



   (kk)   Pole Sign means a free standing sign which is supported by a
pole or poles and designed so as to permit pedestrian or vehicular traffic
thereunder.



   (ll)   Political Sign means a temporary sign which announces
candidates seeking public political office, or referendum appearing on the
ballot at, any elections.



   (mm)   Portable Sign means any sign that is not permanently attached
to the ground, a structure, or a building and which is designed to be
transported to another location, whether or not there are wheels, skids, or
other means of conveyance attached thereto.



   (nn)   Public Right-of-Way means any dedicated street, alley,
parkway, sidewalk, or public property, including those belonging to the
village of Justice, County of Cook, and the State of Illinois.



   (oo)   Public Sign means a sign of a non-commercial nature and in
the public interest, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the
performance of a public duty, such as official signs and notices of any
public or governmental agency, or erected by or on the order of a court or
public officer, including official traffic signs authorized by the Illinois
Vehicle Code of the Illinois Compiled Statues.



   (pp)   Real Estate Sign means a temporary sign placed upon property
for the purpose of advertising to the public the sale or lease of said
property.



   (qq)   Roof Sign means any sign wholly erected, constructed, or
maintained on the roof structure or parapet of any building.



   (rr)   Sight Triangle  means the area of the corner lot closest to
the street or driveway intersection which must be kept free of visual
impairment to allow full view of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The
area shall be marked by a point at which the two (2) curb lines intersect,
measuring back 15 feet on each street/driveway front, and drawing a line
across the two (2) back points to form a triangulated area. No signs may be
permitted within a sight triangle except for public safety-related signs.



   (ss)   Sign means any object, device, display, structure, or part
thereof, which is used primarily to advertise, identify, display, or direct
or attract attention to an object, person, establishment, product, service,
event or location by any means including, without limitation, words, letters,
figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or
projected images, visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel on which
they are situated or visible from any public thoroughfare or right of way.
This includes, but is not limited to, wall signs, freestanding signs, ground
signs, window signs, awning or canopy signs, marquees, bench signs,
changeable copy signs, message boards, illuminated signs, moving signs,
temporary signs, portable signs, pennants, banners, streamers or any other
attention-getting device, flag, or other display, whether affixed to a
building or erected elsewhere on the premises. The term “sign” excludes
those features of a building which are an integral part of the building’s
design and structure.



   (tt)   Sign Area means the entire area of all sign faces,
cumulatively, including sign faces on which no copy is currently displayed.



   (uu)   Sign Face means that part of the sign which is or can be used
to identify, to advertise, to communicate information, or for visual
representation which attract the attention of the public for any purpose.
This shall include any background material, panel, trim, color, and direct or
self-illumination that differentiates the sign from the building, structure,
backdrop surface, or object upon or against which it is placed. This shall
not include any portion of the support structure for the sign, provided that
no message, symbol, or any part of the aforementioned sign face criteria is
placed on or designed as part of the support structure.



   (vv)   Shopping Center means any two (2) or more retail and/or
service establishments or one (1) retail and one (1) service establishment,
sharing customer parking areas, regardless of whether said stores and/or
establishments occupy separate structures or are under separate ownership.



   (ww)   Temporary Sign means a sign which contains information which
is not of a permanent character. Such signs include, but are not limited to
political signs, garage sale signs, portable signs, banner signs, and real
estate signs.



   (xx)   Tower means a stand alone structure that is relatively high
for its base length and width.



   (yy)   Unlawful Sign means a sign which violates this code; or which
the building commissioner may declare as unlawful if it becomes dangerous to
public safety by reason of dilapidation or abandonment; or a nonconforming
sign for which a permit required under a previous code was not obtained.



   (zz)   Wall Sign means any sign attached to or erected against a
wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign parallel to
the plane of the wall.



   (aaa)   Wind Sign means any sign composed of two (2) or more
banners, flags, or other objects, mounted serially and fastened in such a
manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind or breeze.



   (bbb)   Window Display means one (1) or more objects set inside a
building in a display case or on a window ledge which displays merchandise or
relates to services offered but which is not affixed to any window.



   (ccc)   Window Sign means a sign that is installed inside, painted
upon, or placed against a widow for purposes of viewing from the outside of
the premises, not including merchandise located in a window display.



(Code 1972, § 4-7-12; Ord. 91-29, § 9, 9-9-1991; Ord. 2008-23, § 2,
5-27-2008; Ord. 2013-04, § 3, 3-25-2013; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-167  Permit Requirements:



   (a)   Permission Of Owner: No person shall erect, construct or
maintain any sign upon any property, structure, or building without the prior
written consent of the owner or person entitled to possession of the
property, structure or building, or authorized representative. The written
consent must accompany the application for a sign permit.



   (b)   Permit Application: No person shall erect, maintain, or remove
any sign or rigid canopy over a street, alley, sidewalk or other public way,
or on any building, or on any property within the village without having
first obtained a permit from the electrical inspector or his authorized
designee. Permits for such signs shall be issued by the electrical inspector
or his authorized designee, upon approval, and payment of a fee provided in
this code. The installation of a freestanding sign shall also require a copy
of the plat of survey for the property where the sign shall be located.



   (c)   Permit Fees: Fees are calculated on the total square footage
of each sign face. The fee for the installation of any sign shall be as set
forth in section 13-1 of this code. In addition, electrical signs will comply
with the electrical code as adopted by the village and are subject to the
fees established for electrical connections as set forth in section 8-105 of
this code. The minimum fee for any sign shall be as set forth in section 13-1
of this code, plus inspection fees.



   (d)   Time Limit Of Permit: If, after such permit shall have been
granted, the operation covered by the permit shall not have begun within six
(6) months after the date thereof, or if such operations are not completed
within one (1) year from such date, then such permit shall expire by the
terms thereof, and no operations thereunder shall be begun or completed until
a renewal of the permit shall be obtained, as provided in subsection (e) of
this section.



   (e)   Renewal: Renewal of a sign permit issued as herein provided
and which has expired by the terms thereof as provided for in subsection (d)
of this section, payment of an additional fee of fifty percent (50%) of the
original fee shall be required.



   (f)   Forfeit Of Fees: All fees shall be forfeited to the village
upon expiration of the permit for either: (1) a failure to commence
operations, (2) a failure to renew permit, or (3) a failure to file a request
for permit fee refunds.



   (g)   Refund Of Permit Fees: A fee paid for a permit under section
8-167 of this code, may be refunded upon application for refund to the
building commissioner, only if within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the
original permit no work of any kind has commenced. Application for a refund
shall be submitted to the building commissioner on the forms prescribed by
the building commissioner, and shall contain the name, address, and telephone
number of the person who paid the original permit fee; the address of the
site for which the original permit was issued; the original permit number;
and the signature of the person making the refund request. An inspection
shall be made by the building commissioner to verify that work has not
commenced. Therefore, one (1) inspection fee shall not be refunded.



   (h)   Penalty: Any owner or agent who is required to obtain a permit
under section 8-167 of this code and begins any work prior to obtaining said
permit shall pay a penalty to the village in the amount of twice the permit
fee specified in subsection (c) of section 8-167, unless the permit fee is
over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),then the penalty shall be limited to
fifty percent (50%) of the permit fee, exclusive of other costs. The permit
shall not be issued until the original permit fee plus the penalty is paid in
full to the village.



(Code 1972, §§ 4-7-1, 4-7-5, 4-7-16; Ord. 82-8, 8-9-1982; Ord. 83-18,
7-21-1983; Ord. 91-13, § 1, 6-10-1991; Ord. 91-29, §§ 7, 10, 9-9-1991;
Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2008-23, § 2,
5-27-2008; Ord. 2012-24, § 27, 9-24-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-168  Inspections:



   Each and every sign that is permitted under this code shall be
inspected by the electrical inspector or his authorized designee. Initial
inspections shall be made at the time that the sign has been erected.
Inspection fees will be as set forth in section 13-1 of this code per
inspection. There will be a minimum of three (3) inspections for electrical
signs. All signs in excess of ten (10) feet in height will require a
structural inspection by the building inspector.



(Code 1972, § 4-7-7; Ord. 2008-23, § 2, 5-27-2008; Ord. 2009-28, § 3,
11-23-2009; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-169  Construction:



   (a)   Location: The location of a proposed sign shall be designated.
For freestanding signs, a copy of the plat of survey for the property shall
be provided showing where the sign is to be located. The lowest part of any
sign or non-rigid awning or support thereof which extends over any sidewalk,
shall be at least ten feet (10') above the level of the public way over which
it extends. No such sign shall be maintained over any public way used by
vehicles if any part of it, or if its support is less than fifteen feet (15')
above the level of such public way. All signs must be securely fastened and
constructed so that there will be no danger of the same being dislodged by
ordinary winds or falling from any other causes. No sign shall be located
within ten feet (10') below or ten feet (10') closer to any electrical
transmission lines and must conform to all O.S.H.A. and Com Ed standards. 
  Signs shall not be permitted in parkways. No signs may be permitted within
a sight triangle except for public safety-related signs.



   (b)   Setback: The minimum setback from the right-of-way property
line shall be five (5) feet.



   (c)   Height: The height of any sign, tower, or similar structure,
except those located on the property of a hotel, shall not exceed the maximum
building and structure height allowable in the zoning district as amended
from time to time, or the height of the main structure of the property,
whichever is less. The current maximum heights for the zoning district are as
follows:



 



R-l
 
Thirty Feet (30')


R-2
 
Thirty Feet (30')


R-3
 
Thirty Feet (30')


B-l
 
Thirty Five Feet (35')


C-l
 
Thirty Five Feet (35')


I-1
 
Thirty Five Feet (35')


I-l-R
 
Thirty Five Feet {35)


I-2
 
Forty Five Feet (45')


Public buildings in any zoning district
 
Forty Five (45) feet


Sign height for a hotel is limited to the height of the building or forty
five (45) feet, whichever is less.




 



   (d)   Line of Sight: The lowest point on any sign face of a
free-standing sign may not be less than forty eight inches (48") from ground
level to provide a clear line of sight for vehicles entering or exiting a
driveway. Ground signs require a minimum set back from the right-of-way
property line of not less than five feet (5'). Signs shall not be permitted
in parkways. No signs shall be permitted within a sight triangle except for
safety-related signs.



   (e)   Illinois Toll Highway Authority: Any signs, billboards, or
other advertising structures are allowed within three hundred feet (300') of
the Illinois Toll Highway in the following zoning districts: B-l, 1-1, I-1-R,
and I-2. Size, lighting, and spacing requirements are to be consistent with
the Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971, as amended.



   (f)   Benches And Bus Shelters In The Public Right of Way: No person
shall erect a bench or bus shelter or advertise upon any bench or bus shelter
within a public right of way unless:



   (1)   The location and construction is approved by the village board.



   (2)   The owner has paid an annual license fee, as set forth in §
13-1 of this code, for each bench or bus shelter installed.



   (3)   The owner has applied for and received the appropriate permits
as required by the State of Illinois or Cook County;



   (4)   The owner has applied for and received a sign permit with the
village for any advertising that is installed with such bench or bus shelter
as required in section 8-167(b) of this code;



   (5)   The bench or bus shelter is constructed and maintained in a
manner which is safe for use by the public either on a concrete foundation or
a bus shelter pad as approved by the permitting authority;



   (6)   The owner repairs or replaces the bench or bus shelter within
seven (7) days of notice from the building department that the bench or bus
shelter is in an unsafe condition. Failure to comply with this requirement
will result in the village removing the bench or bus shelter at the owner’s
expense, at a cost of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour for each piece
of equipment used which is necessary to remove the bench or bus shelter, plus
labor costs.



   (g)   Board Approval: Any freestanding sign located in a residential
zoning district, or any sign over one hundred (100) square feet in size shall
not be erected until the size and height are approved by the board of
trustees. There shall be no billboard signs along village streets unless
approved by the board of trustees. 



(Code 1972, §§ 4-7-4, 4-7-6, 4-7-8—4-7-11; Ord. , 7-5-1951; Ord. 79-14,
7-19-1979; Ord. 85-6, 6-10-1985; Ord. 96-25, § 1, 8-26-1996; Ord. 2000-11,
§ 1, 2-28-2000; Ord. 2001-09, § 1, 3-26-2001; Ord. 2004-25, § 1,
11-8-2004; Ord. 2008-23, § 2, 5- 17-2008; Ord. 2013-04, § 4, 3-25-2013;
Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-170  Unlawful Signs:



   Except as specifically provided otherwise in this article, the
following signs and displays shall be strictly prohibited throughout the
village:



   (a)   No person shall park any vehicle or trailer on a public
right-of-way, which has attached thereto or located thereon any sign or
advertising device for the basic purpose of providing advertisement of
products or directing people to a business or activity located on the same or
nearby property or any other premises. This section is not intended to
prohibit any form of vehicular signage such as sign attached to a bus or
lettered on a motor vehicle.



   (b)   Portable signs, except where allowed by permit for a maximum
of thirty (30) days.



   (c)   Signs in public rights-of-way which are not public signs or as
authorized within this code.



   (d)   Streamers, posters, ribbons, light strings, light bulbs, light
bands, spinners, attention-getting devices that move including inflatable
devices or balloons which expand when filled with a gas or air; blinking,
electronic or flashing signs (except time, temperature and date signs); signs
which exhibit changing natural or artificial light or color effects; signs
(other than neon signs) which contain bare, unshielded light or tubes which
are visible from a public street or private residence.



   (e)   Signs attached to trees, fences, public utility poles,
hydrants, standpipes, gutter drains or fire escapes, other than warning signs
issued by government officials or public utilities.



   (f)   Abandoned or defunct signs, including the posts or other
supports attached thereto. The property owner shall remove said sign within
sixty (60) days of notification by the building department.



   (g)   Signs that move, rotate, change position, have moving parts,
or create the illusion of movement, whether the movement is caused by the
wind or mechanically, except for the rotation of barber poles and permissible
changeable copy signs.



   (h)   Signs which prevent free ingress or access from any door,
window, fire escape, driveway or utility lines.



   (i)   Signs which contain advertising matter which is untruthful.



   (j)   Signs which emit an audible sound.



   (k)   Signs which by reason of their size, location, movement,
content, coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed
to be a traffic-control sign, signal or device, or the light of an emergency
or road equipment vehicle.



   (l)   Off-site sign that identifies a business, person, activity,
goods, products, services or facilities that is not conducted on the premises
upon which such sign is maintained.



   (m)   Signs which hide or interfere with traffic flow or any street
sign, signal, or device.



   (n)   Signs which do not meet the standards of, or which otherwise
violate, the Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971 (225 ILCS 440/1 et seq.).



   (o)   Signs which contain radio or microwave transmitters.



   (p)   Signs painted directly on any building surface.



   (q)   Temporary signs, except where allowed by permit.



(Code 1972, §§ 4-7-13, 4-7-15; Ord. 2004-25, § 2, 11-8-2004; Ord. 2008-23,
§ 2, 5-27-2008; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-171  Temporary Signs:



   Temporary signs include signs which contain information, which is not
of a permanent nature. Such signs include, but are not limited to, political
signs, garage sale signs, real estate signs, portable signs, and banner
signs. Temporary signs may not be posted at any time on the state or county
rights-of-way, including Archer Road, 79th Street, 87th Street, 88th Avenue,
and Roberts Road within the village of Justice. All signs posted without a
permit or before or after the prescribed times, will be removed without
notice by the village of Justice code enforcement department. In the event
that the village causes the removal of a sign, the village will hold the sign
for seven (7) days during which it may be recovered by the owner upon paying
the village for costs of removal and storage. If such signs are not claimed
and the removal and storage costs are not paid within the seven (7) days, the
village is hereby authorized to dispose of the signs. Payment of removal and
storage costs will remain the responsibility of the property owner. Removal
and storage costs are set forth in section 13-1 of this code.



   (a)   Political Signs: Signs for candidates seeking public political
office or for referendum appearing on the ballot at any election, shall be
permitted up to a total area of thirty-two (32) square feet for each zoning
lot and shall be located only on private property. Political signs of any
type are prohibited on public property, including, but not limited to, public
rights-of-way, parkways, village easements, and properties owned by the
village of Justice. Political campaign signs shall not be displayed on
non-residential private property more than sixty (60) days prior to nor seven
(7) days following the election for which intended. Political signs posted on
residential property may be displayed for an indefinite period of time.
Political signs may be posted without a permit. In no case shall political
signs be erected on other than private property.



   (b)   Garage Sale Signs may be placed on private property at any
time and may be placed in the village of Justice right-of-way only from
midnight Thursday to midnight Sunday.  Garage sale signs require a permit
from the clerk’s office of the village of Justice and are obtainable at a
rate prescribed in section 13-1 of this code.



   (c)   Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs may be placed on private
property at any time and do not require a permit. In no case shall real
estate signs be erected on other than the private property that the sign
pertains to.



   (d)   Banner signs are temporary signs composed of cloth or flexible
material, secured or mounted to an existing structure or post and do not
require a sign permit if located in a residential (R-l, R-2, or R-3) zoning
districts. Banner signs located in commercial or industrial zoning districts,
require a permit issued by the electrical inspector or his authorized
designee.



   (e)   Portable signs are temporary signs that are not permanently
attached to the ground, a structure, or a building and which are designed to
be transported to another location, whether or not there are wheels, skids,
or other means of conveyance attached thereto. Portable signs also include
A-frames, sandwich boards and tent signs. A permit is required for all
portable signs. Permit fees are set forth in section 13-1 of this code.



      (1)   A portable sign permit is valid for not more than thirty
(30) days.



      (2)   No permit shall be issued to a single business location
more than two (2) times in any twelve (12) month period. Two (2) or more
places of business within the same shopping center or mall shall not be
considered separate business locations.



      (3)   Where there is more than one (1) business activity
carried on upon the premises where a portable sign is located, such as a
shopping center or mall, no permittee shall utilize a portable sign to
advertise or direct attention to a business, commodity, service, or other
activity, to which the permittee is not related either as owner or principal.



      (4)   A portable sign shall not obstruct or encroach upon any
public street or right-of-way. All such signs shall be placed upon private
property only.



      (5)   The total length of cord between the source of power and
the sign unit shall be no more than six (6) feet in length.



      (6)   The source of power shall be a weather proof, grounded
receptacle.



      (7)   There shall be no other type of connector between the
sign and the power source.



      (8)   In no case shall the cord be in such a position that it
will be walked over by pedestrian traffic or be driven over by any form of
wheeled vehicles.



      (9)   All portable signs shall meet all village requirements
concerning traffic hazards and line of sight hazards. No portion of any type
of portable sign shall have any type of flashing lights.



      (10)   All portable signs shall have affixed to the sign an
Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc. approval.



      (11)   When a portable electric sign is to be displayed, a
licensed and registered electrical contractor shall install a rigid
connection and shall pay the regular electrical permit fees and inspection
fees as set forth in section 13-1 of this code.



      (12)   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
section, portable signs shall be subject to all of the provisions of this
article and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the village.



(Code 1972, §§ 4-7-3, 4-7-14; Ord. 91-29, § 8, 9-9-1991; Ord. 2008-23, §
2, 5-27-2008; Ord. 2010-30, § 2, 12-27-2010; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-16)



Sec. 8-172  Penalty:



   Any person violating any provision of this article shall receive one
written warning from the building department for a specific violation. Any
person that fails to immediately remove or remedy the situation shall receive
a written violation order wherein the license or permit for said sign shall
be revoked and upon receipt of a written violation, the person is subject to
appearing in housing court, where a penalty may be charged in the amount of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
($750.00) per day for each day the sign is in violation of this article. A
separate and distinct offense shall be held to have been committed each day
any person continues to violate any of the provisions hereof. No further sign
licenses or permits shall be issued for the violator of any sign provision
until all fines and renewal license or permit fees are paid to the village of
Justice. In the event the village is required to pursue enforcement actions
under this article, the violator shall be required to pay all reasonable
attorney fees and costs incurred by the village.



(Code 1972; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord.
2004-25, § 3, 11-8-2004; Ord. 2008-23, § 2, 5-27-2008; Ord. 2016-20, § 1,
5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-173–8-210.  Reserved:



ARTICLE IV.  SWIMMING POOLS



Sec. 8-211  Definition:



   The term “swimming pool” means an accessory structure which is a
receptacle for water or an artificial pool of water having a depth at any
point of more than twenty-four (24) inches, and with a capacity of more than
one thousand (1,000) gallons or with a water surface area exceeding two
hundred fifty (250) square feet; which is used or intended for the purpose of
immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings and including all
appurtenant equipment, constructed, installed and maintained in or above the
ground.



(Code 1972, § 4-8-2; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-212  Compliance With Article:



   Every private residential swimming pool constructed, installed,
altered, maintained, removed or demolished hereafter shall comply with all
applicable provisions of this article. Existing private swimming pools may be
continued without change, provided the requirements of sections 8-215, 8-221
and 8-226 of this article, inclusive, are observed.



(Code 1972, § 4-8-1; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-213  Building Permit Required:



   (a)   No person shall construct or alter a private residential
swimming pool without first having obtained a building permit therefor.



   (b)   Application for a permit shall be made on forms prescribed by
the building commissioner. The permit fee shall be as set forth in section
13-1 of this code.



(Code 1972, § 4-8-3; Ord. 91-29, § 11, 9-9-1991; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998;
Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-214  Reserved:



Sec. 8-215  Location:



   No portion of an outdoor private residential swimming pool, except the
walkway, or appurtenant equipment (pumps, filters, etc.), shall be located at
a distance less than five feet (5') from any side or rear property line or
building line except where such appurtenant equipment is installed in an
accessory or main building. No swimming pool appurtenant equipment shall be
permitted in the required side yard between dwellings or in utility easements.



(Code 1972, § 4-8-5; Ord. 93-18, § 1, 7-26-1993; Ord. 2016-20, § 1,
5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-216–8-220.  Reserved:



Sec. 8-221  Water Supply:



   (a)   There shall be no physical connection between the water supply
line from the waterworks distribution system or private well water supply
system and the swimming pool system.



   (b)   The fresh water supply point of discharge to the pool through
a pipe shall be firmly fixed at a point at least six inches (6") above the
overflow level of the pool.



(Code 1972, § 4-8-11; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-222–8-225.  Reserved:



Sec. 8-226  Authority To Inspect, Close:



   (a)   If there is reasonable cause to believe that a swimming pool
does not meet the sanitary and safety requirements of this article, the
health officer and/or building commissioner may inspect such swimming pool.



   (b)   If the inspecting officer or officers find, after inspection,
that sanitary and safety rules are not being met, he or they may direct that
the pool be closed until all the requirements of this article are complied
with.



(Code 1969, Ch. 23; Code 1972, § 4-8-16; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-227  Penalty:



   Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined a
minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) per day. A separate and distinct offense shall be
held to have been committed each day any person continues to violate any of
the provisions hereof.



(Code 1972; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-228–8-245.  Reserved:



ARTICLE V.  FENCES 1



1.  See also § 10-27 of this code.



Sec. 8-246  Definition:



   A “fence” is defined as a manmade structure, forming a barrier,
which is not a part of any building or structure and is more than two feet
(2') in height over existing grade.



(Code 1972, § 4-9-1; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-247  Permit Required:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any fence
within the village without a fence construction permit from the building
commissioner.



   (b)   The application for a fence construction permit shall be
accompanied by a plat of survey and a sketch showing the proposed location of
the fence in relation to the lot lines, existing permanent improvements, the
type of construction, the material to be used and the proposed height of the
fence.



   (c)   There shall be a charge for a fence construction permit and an
inspection fee as set forth in section 13-1 of this code.



(Code 1972, § 4-9-2; Ord. 91-29, § 12, 9-9-1991; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998;
Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-248  Construction:



   (a)   A gate or opening shall be provided in all fence enclosures.



   (b)   A fence shall be at least one inch (1") inside any lot line.



   (c)   No fence shall be constructed within fifteen feet (15') of any
fire hydrant.



   (d)   If there is no existing fence on the perimeter of property
which provides ingress and egress by means of a gate to the immediate area of
a pool, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.



   (e)   The construction of any fence using opaque material is
prohibited within the front yard setback of any lot and the height of any
fence within the front setback is limited to a maximum of four feet (4') in
height.



(Code 1972, § 4-9-3; Ord. 99-22, § 1, 7-12-1999; Ord. 99-25, § 1,
7-26-1999; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-249  Vision Clearance:



   On corner lots, no fence shall obstruct any motor vehicle driver’s
view of any vehicle on any intersecting street, as such vehicle is
approaching the intersection, so as to prevent the driver’s ability to halt
his vehicle with safety.



(Code 1972, § 4-9-4; Ord. 82-16, 12-16-1982; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-250  Materials:



   (a)   Any new normal fencing material may be used for a fence.
However, all material shall be first approved by the building commissioner
when the permit is applied for. No fence shall be topped with sharp edged
material, with the exception of the construction of picket fences. Sharp
edged material shall be allowed on the top of eight foot (8') fences required
in an I-1, I-1-R, and I-2 zoning districts. All material must be uniform in
size, type and quality.



   (b)   Concrete shall be used to set posts. All posts shall be a
minimum depth of forty-two inches (42').



(Code 1972, § 4-9-5; Ord. 83-20, 8-4-1983; Ord. 93-6, § 1, 2-8-1993; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-251  Height:



   (a)   Residential Requirements: The maximum fence height in a
residential zoning district shall not exceed six feet (6') between buildings
and in the rear yard behind any building and shall not exceed four feet (4')
in the front yard. All height dimensions shall be measured from the
established grade to the topmost section of the fence.



   (b)   Commercial Requirements: Off street parking area for five (5)
or more vehicles shall be effectively screened by a fence on the side or
sides which adjoin or face any R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning district, and:



      (1)   The height shall be six feet (6').



      (2)   The fence will be constructed so that vision and lights
are obscured.



      (3)   All fences constructed in accordance with this
subsection must conform to the requirements of section 8-249 of this article.



   (c)   I-1, Light Industrial, I-1-R, Restricted Industrial, and I-2,
Heavy Industrial, Requirements: The height of all fences in an I-1, I-1-R,
and I-2 zoning districts shall be eight feet (8'). All fences constructed in
accordance with this subsection must conform to the requirements of sections
8-248 through 8-250 of this article.



(Code 1972, § 4-9-6; Ord. 82-16, 12-16-1982; Ord. 87-20, § 1, 8-10-1987;
Ord. 91-29, § 13, 9-9-1991; Ord. 92-47, § 1, 12-28-1992; Ord. 2016-20, §
1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-252  Industrial Fences:



   All industrial properties that are adjacent to public property or
property not zoned I-1, I-1-R, or I-2, shall have an opaque fence that meets
the requirements of this code, except that the fence along the front yard
setback shall not be of opaque material. All existing industrial properties
that meet the requirements of this section shall have until either December
31, 2002, or prior to issuance of a business license after a transfer of
property ownership, whichever comes first, to comply with the provisions of
this act.



(Ord. 2002-31, § 1, 7-22-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-253–8-265.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VI.  DISH TYPE SATELLITE SIGNAL RECEIVING ANTENNAS



Sec. 8-266  Definitions:



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Dish: That part of a satellite signal receiving antenna
characteristically shaped like a saucer or dish.



   Dish Type Satellite Signal Receiving Antennas: Also referred to as
“earth stations” or “ground stations”, means one or a combination of
two (2) or more of the following:



      (1)   A signal receiving device (antenna, dish antenna or dish
type antenna), the purpose of which is to receive communication or other
signals from satellites in earth orbit and other extraterrestrial sources.



      (2)   A low noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the
focal point of the receiving component and the purpose of which is to
magnify, store, transfer and/or transmit electronic or light signals.



      (3)   A coaxial cable, the purpose of which is to carry or
transmit said signals to a receiver.



   Grounding Rod: A metal pole permanently positioned in the earth to
serve as an electrical conductor through which electrical current may safely
pass and dissipate.



   Receiver: A television set or radio receiver.



(Code 1972, § 4-10-1; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-267  Permit Required:



   No person shall construct an earth station without a permit, nor shall
construction commence before a permit is issued by the electrical inspector
or his authorized designee in accordance with this article.



(Code 1972, § 4-10-2; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-268  Permit–Application:



   (a)   The owner, or occupant with written permission from the owner
of any lot, premises or parcel of land within the village who desires to
construct an earth station on such lot, premises, or land parcel, must first
obtain a permit to do so from the electrical inspector or his designee.



   (b)   The electrical inspector or his authorized designee shall
issue such permit, provided the applicant submits a written application upon
forms provided by the building commissioner, along with a plot plan of the
lot, premises or land parcel attached showing the exact location and
dimensions of the proposed earth station; a description of the kind of earth
station proposed; the exact location and dimensions of all buildings or
structures; construction plans and specifications prepared by a professional
engineer, showing the elevations of the proposed earth station upon
completion; and a structural engineering analysis. Each application shall
specify among other things the name and address of the owner of the real
estate; the applicant; the professional engineer who prepared the
construction plans and specifications; and the person to be permitted to
construct the proposed earth station.



   (c)   The applicant shall present documentation of the possession of
any license or permit required by any federal, state or local agency
pertaining to the ownership, construction or operation of an earth station.



   (d)   The applicant shall submit with each application the sum as
set forth in section 13-1 of this code which represents the permit fee. The
permit fee shall cover the costs of reviewing the construction plans and
specifications, inspecting the final construction and processing of the
application.



   (e)   The electrical inspector or his authorized designee shall
notify by certified mail owners of real estate adjoining the property upon
which the proposed earth station is to be erected at least ten (10) days
before issuing a permit.



(Code 1972, § 4-10-3; Ord. 86-13, 4-14-1986; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord.
98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-269  Location Of Earth Station:



   (a)   Ground Mounted:



      (1)   No earth station shall be constructed in any front or
side yard, but shall be constructed to the rear of the residence or main
structure.



      (2)   No earth station, including its concrete base slab or
other substructure, shall be constructed less than eight feet (8') from any
property line or easement.



      (3)   No earth station shall be constructed without
appropriate landscaping to reasonably conceal the earth station from view,
and the planting shall be completed before final approval by the electrical
inspector.



      (4)   No earth station shall be linked, physically or
electronically, to a receiver which is not located on the same lot, premises
or parcel of land as is the earth station.



      (5)   An earth station shall not exceed a grade height of
twelve feet (12').



      (6)   All structural supports shall be of galvanized metal.



      (7)   Wiring between an earth station and a receiver shall be
placed at least four inches (4") beneath the surface of the ground within
rigid conduit.



      (8)   Such earth station shall be designed to withstand a wind
force of seventy five (75) miles per hour without the use of supporting guy
wires.



      (9)   Any driving motor shall be limited to one hundred ten
(110) volts maximum power design and be encased in protective guards.



      (10)   An earth station must be bonded to a grounding rod.



      (11)   No earth station shall be constructed upon the rooftop
of any garage, residential dwelling, church, school, apartment building,
hospital or any other commercial building or structure. (Option for roof
mounted)



   (b)   Roof Mounted:



      (1)   Earth stations shall be mounted directly upon the roof
of a primary or accessory structure, as defined in the building code, and
shall not be mounted upon appurtenances such as chimneys, towers, trees,
poles or spires.



      (2)   An earth station shall be designed to withstand a wind
force of eighty five (85) miles per hour without the use of supporting guy
wires.



      (3)   Any driving motor shall be limited to one hundred ten
(110) volts maximum power design and be encased in protective guards.



      (4)   An earth station must be bonded to a grounding rod.



(Code 1972, § 4-10-4; Ord. 86-25, § 1, 6-23-1986; Ord. 2016-20, § 1,
5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-270  Appeals:



   The denial of a permit under this article shall entitle the applicant
to appeal to the full village board. The board shall hold a hearing within
fifteen (15) days of receiving a notice of appeal. At the hearing the
applicant shall be entitled to be represented by legal counsel, and present
witnesses to support his application.



(Code 1972, § 4-10-5; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5- 23-2016)



Sec. 8-271  Penalty:



   Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined a
minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate and distinct offense shall be held to
have been committed each day any person continues to violate any of the
provisions hereof.



(Code 1972, § 4-10-6; Ord. 85-2, 2-7-1985; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord.
98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-272  Telecommunication Towers:



   (a)   Purpose: The term telecommunication facility refers to
cellular communication towers or “cell towers” and all ancillary
equipment for said towers. The village of Justice recognizes the value in
cellular communications and the public’s need for its safety, convenience
and productivity. The village desires to keep the erection of new cellular
towers to a minimum and maximize the existing cell tower usage. To that end,
the village encourages new antennas and communication devices to be located
on existing permitted structures.



   (b)   Location: Cell towers shall be a permitted use in any zoning
district and based on the criteria of this section and the criteria for the
zoning district for the tower’s requested location. Each cell tower
application shall be reviewed on a case by case basis by the zoning board of
appeals. There shall be no blanket prohibition against cell towers in any
zoning district. However, the village encourages new antennas to be located
on existing, permitted structures. When this is not possible, a lot located
outside a residential zoning district is the most desirable location. If a
residential district must be utilized, a lot not used for any residential
purpose on the comprehensive plan is the next most desirable location.



   (c)   Cell Tower Requirements:



      (1)   Cell towers shall be at least fifteen feet (15') from
front property lines and ten feet (10') from side and rear property lines in
accordance with the front side and rear yard setbacks, whichever is greater.



      (2)   In nonresidential zoning districts a tower may be
constructed up to two hundred feet (200') in height, so long as the tower at
its highest point is equal to or less than the horizontal separation distance
to the nearest principal residence off site.



      (3)   In residential zoning districts, the tower may be
constructed up to fifty feet (50') in height. Additionally, the distance from
the tower’s highest point to the nearest property line must be equal to or
greater than one-half (1/2) the height of the tower.



      (4)   The tower must have landscaping and green space
consistent with the village’s landscaping and green space requirements for
the zoning district in which the tower is located. If there is storage of
apparatus at the base of the cell tower, a fence shall be erected that meets
the criteria of the location of the zoning district the tower is located in.



   (d)   Criteria For Approval: In addition to the specific criteria
for the requested zoning district, the following criteria shall also be
considered in determining if a cell tower is needed within a zoning district
or at a certain location:



      (1)   The quality of the proposed service in the area.



      (2)   The height in relation to surrounding structures.



      (3)   The impact on property values.



One hundred percent (100%) coverage is not a goal or factor to be considered
in determining the quality of existing service to a service provider’s
area. It is recognized that small dead spots or areas within a provider’s
service area where the field strength is less than the minimum level for
reliable service is accepted quality of service. A significant gap where a
remote user is unable to connect with any national telephone network is
unacceptable quality of existing service. In the event a significant gap of
service is disclosed, the least intrusive manner of filling the gap shall be
instituted at a location that maximizes the ability of one cell tower to fill
the existing gap. The burden of proof shall be on the provider in determining
the least intrusive manner of filling the gap and in providing documentation
and proof that the gap is such that a remote user is unable to connect to any
other national telephone network.



   (e)   Jurisdictional Notifications: All applications for a cell
tower must include the notification of the appropriate fire protection
agency, roadway authority, county health department and the federal aviation
administration. Proof of the required notifications must be submitted with
the zoning application. Notification to the required agencies must include
the intent for erecting the cell tower and all dimensions and applicant
information.



   (f)   Building Permits: Submission of two (2) applications for
building permits is required before the application will be considered
complete. One application is for the tower/antennas and the other application
is for the equipment shelter/cabinets. The costs of construction should be
separated between the tower/antennas and the equipment shelter/cabinets.



   (g)   Contractor Registration: Trade contractors must be registered
with the building department prior to any work in the village of Justice.



   (h)   Public Hearing: In the event the zoning application requires a
public hearing of any type, the applicant is required to submit the
application and application fee. In addition the applicant is responsible for
all other hearing expenses pursuant to section 12-9 of this code.



   (i)   Applicants And Disclosure: All fee owners of the subject
property must be the applicants. If the property is subject to a contract to
purchase, the contract purchaser shall also join as an applicant. Likewise,
if the property is owned or purchased by a land trust, the trustee shall also
be an applicant. Counsel should also be identified on the application. If an
agent is used, a notarized letter giving the agent authorization with the
authority to act upon the application is required.



When the applicant is a land trust or trustee of a land trust, the
application shall identify each beneficiary of such land trust by name and
address and define each beneficiary’s interest therein (beneficiary
disclosure). When the applicant is a corporation or limited liability
corporation, the applicant shall include the correct names, addresses, and
percent interest of all limited liability members, stockholders or
shareholders owning any interest in excess of twenty percent (20%) of all
outstanding stock of such corporation. If the corporation has no
shareholders, a statement to that effect shall be submitted.



If the applicant is a business entity doing business under an assumed name,
whether registered with the secretary of state or not, the application shall
include the names and addresses of all true and actual owners of such
business or entity.



When the applicant is a partnership or a limited liability partnership, joint
venture, syndicate, or an unincorporated voluntary association, the
application shall include names and addresses of all partners, joint
ventures, syndicate members, or members of the unincorporated voluntary
association.



   (j)   Cell Tower Maintenance: The village is the only authority
having jurisdiction for permit issuance on towers located within the village
limits. Zoning permits or variances are not required on an antenna upgrade,
unless the tower’s height or equipment structures are increased in size.
Building permits are required for maintenance and antenna upgrades. The
following information shall be provided before any permits will be issued:



      (1)   Three (3) sets of design/architectural plans with all
work specifications.



      (2)   A structural evaluation by an Illinois licensed
structural engineer stating their opinion of the tower’s integrity as it
pertains to existing and proposed loads.



      (3)   A certificate of liability and workmen’s comp
insurance (with the village of Justice as certificate holder).



      (4)   Work permit applications and required documentation for
all contractors working on the project.



   (k)   Demolition: A demolition permit shall be required to remove
any cell tower in its entirety.



   (l)   Penalty: Any person violating the terms and conditions of this
section shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), with each and every day that the violation of this section
is allowed to remain in effect being deemed a complete and separate offense.
In addition, the appropriate authorities of the village may take such other
actions they deem proper to enforce the terms and conditions of this section,
including, without limitation, an action in equity to compel compliance with
its terms. Any person violating the terms of this section shall be subject,
in addition to the foregoing penalties, to the payment of court costs and
reasonable attorney fees of the village.



(Ord. 2005-10, §§ 2, 4, 5-9-2005; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-273–8-285.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VII.  OCCUPATION OF STREETS 1



1.   See Chapter 10 of this code.



Sec. 8-286  Permit–Required:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or store upon the
street, parkway, sidewalk or alley abutting upon or adjacent to the lot or
tract, upon which any building or structure is being erected, constructed,
altered or repaired, or upon any street, parkway, sidewalk or alley within
the village, any building materials, tools, apparatus or structures designed
or intended to be used in the erection, construction, alteration or repair of
buildings, unless a street occupation permit is first obtained from the
building commissioner. Unless such street occupation permit is obtained, all
such building materials, tools, apparatus or structures, when first
delivered, shall be placed entirely within the boundary lines of such lot or
tract, and shall so remain until the completion of such building or structure
or until finally removed from such lot or tract.



(Code 1972, § 8-4-1; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-287  Permit–Application:



   All applications for street occupation permits shall be made to the
building commissioner and shall describe the location of the street, parkway,
sidewalk or alley proposed to be occupied, the use to be made of same, and
the length of time of such intended occupation. Such permit shall be issued
subject to the provisions of this article as to bonds, fees and all other
requisites in connection with such permit.



(Code 1972, § 8-4-2; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-288  Time Limit:



   The permission to occupy streets, parkways, sidewalks or alleys for the
purpose of building is intended only for imperative use in connection with
the actual erection, repair, alteration or removal of buildings and shall
terminate with the completion of such operation and at as much earlier time
as shall be feasible, at which time the person to whom the occupation permit
has been issued shall remove all materials and equipment and shall place the
street, parkway, sidewalk or alley in as neat and serviceable condition as
prior to the occupation thereof.



(Code 1972, § 8-4-3; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-289  Space Limit:



   (a)   The occupation of a street for the storage of building
materials shall never extend more than one-third (1/3) of the way across the
street pavement or alley, nor to a greater extent than is authorized by the
permit.



   (b)   It shall not be lawful to occupy with building materials any
street, parkway, sidewalk or alley or any part thereof other than that
immediately in front of or adjoining the lot or land upon which the building
is being erected; provided, that if the written consent of the owners,
tenants or occupants of properties adjoining the site of any proposed
building is first obtained and filed with the building commissioner, the
occupation of the street, parkway, sidewalk or alley may be extended in front
of the property so consenting, upon the same terms and conditions as those
fixed for the occupation of the street in front of building site.



   (c)   It shall be unlawful to mix mortar, concrete or any other
building material upon the surface of any sidewalk in the village. During the
progress of building operations, a sidewalk not less than five feet (5') in
width, or an equal width, of a clear hard roadway, made available and safe
for a footway, and with adequate guard railings shall at all times be kept
open, clean and unobstructed for the purpose and uses of a passageway in
front of such lot or lots.



   (d)   It is not intended hereby to prohibit the maintenance of a
driveway for the delivery of material across such sidewalk from the street to
the building site; but such driveway shall be under the supervision of the
building commissioner.



(Code 1972, § 8-4-4; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-290  Barricades, Lights 1:



   (a)   Any person to whom a building or street occupation permit is
issued shall erect and maintain such substantial and suitable fences,
railings or barricades to guard all excavations, embankments or obstructions
along the street, parkway, sidewalk or alley abutting upon or adjacent to
such lot or tract as the building commissioner deems necessary for the
protection of the lives and limbs of the public; and shall place and maintain
proper and sufficient amber lights to protect the public using such street or
sidewalk. Such lights shall be placed at each end of every such obstruction
or excavation and at intervals of not more than seventy five feet (75') along
the same.



   (b)   Any person who maliciously or wantonly, and without legal
cause, removes, extinguishes diminishes or disturbs such light or removes or
disturbs such barricades shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Code 1972, § 8-4-5; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



1.   625 ILCS 5/11-301.



Sec. 8-291  Reserved:



Sec. 8-292  Fees:



   The fee to be paid to the village for a street occupation permit
desired in connection with any work governed by this article shall be ten
dollars ($10.00) for each six (6) months or any part thereof for each forty
feet (40') or fractional part thereof of frontage so occupied. In addition to
such permit fee a deposit shall be required to ensure the safety of the
street and its complete restoration, of two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) per
foot; upon the removal of such obstruction so much (if any) of the deposit as
shall be necessary to so restore the street shall be retained by the village
and the remainder of the deposit shall then be returned to the depositor;
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall preclude the village
from maintaining an action against the person to recover the damage done to
any street or sidewalk.



(Ord., 8-5-1965; Code 1972, § 8-4-7; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-293–8-305.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VIII.  SUBDIVISIONS



Sec. 8-306  Scope:



   This article governs the subdivision of real property within the
corporate limits of the village including, but not limited to, any change or
alteration in the boundary lines of a lot, the consolidation of lots, and the
division of a single lot into two or more lots.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-307  Subdivision Of Land Required:



   No person shall change or alter the boundary lines of any lot or parcel
of real property, consolidate lots or parcels of real property, divide a lot
or parcel of real property into two (2) or more lots parcels, whether an
original subdivision or re-subdivision, or transfer title to less than the
entire area of a lot or parcel of real property, without subdividing the same
in accordance with the provisions of this article.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-308  Preliminary Plat; Submission:



   The record owner of land ("developer") desirous of subdividing any real
property within the corporate limits of the village shall submit to the
village a preliminary plat of subdivision, drawn to a minimum scale of one
hundred feet to one inch (100':1"), and providing for and/or depicting the
following information:



      (1)   Names: The name of the developer and subdivision.



      (2)   Area: The area to be subdivided, areas adjoining the
property to be subdivided, their respective boundary lines, any section and
half-section lines, permanent buildings or structures existing thereon (with
dimensions), watercourses, and such other features as may be pertinent to
review.



      (3)   Municipal Boundaries: The corporate boundary lines of
the village when such lines are within or adjacent to the area to be
subdivided.



      (4)   Streets And Easements: The name and entire width of any
street, right-of-way or easements adjacent, intersecting or through such area
to be subdivided.



      (5)   Contour Map: A contour map of the entire area to be
subdivided specifying the foundation elevations of any existing building and
structure, and the elevations of any existing public improvement, including
features of improved or unimproved right-of-ways and easements.



      (6)   Public Improvements: Site improvement plans with
specifications for all public improvements to be constructed within the area
to be subdivided.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-309  Preliminary Plat; Review and Approval:



   The preliminary plat and site improvement plans shall be submitted to
the village engineer for review. The village engineer shall examine the
preliminary plat and site improvement plans to ensure conformance with all
applicable laws. The developer shall address each comment of the village
engineer until such time as the preliminary plat and site improvement plans
are approved by him or her. The village engineer shall deliver an approved
copy of the preliminary plat of subdivision to the village board.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-310  Final Plat; Submission:



   A developer shall submit a final plat of subdivision to the village
board after the preliminary plat and site improvement plans have been
approved by the village engineer. The submission shall consist of an original
Mylar and ten (10) copies of the final plat of subdivision, drawn to a
minimum scale of one hundred feet to one inch (100': 1"), conforming to,
providing for, and/or depicting the following information:



   (1)   Name: The name of the developer and of the subdivision.



   (2)   Date: The date of preparation, notes of changes per village
engineer comment.



   (3)   Survey: A survey of the area to be subdivided with a proper
north sign.



   (4)   Legal Description: The legal description for the area to be
subdivided.



   (5)   Street Names: Street names conforming to the street naming
plan of the village or with adjoining streets. Provided, however, in the case
of diverging streets, the name shall be repeated, and in the case of an
extension of an existing street, the street name shall be the same.



   (6)   Lot Lines: All lot lines; numbering or lettering of lots and
blocks; and building lines and easements determined by measurement.



   (7)   Dimensions: All dimensions, linear and angular, all deflecting
angles, radii, areas, and central angles of all corners along the property
lines of each street. Linear dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals
of a foot.



   (8)   Monuments: The description and location of all survey
monuments erected in the subdivision. Such monuments shall consist of an iron
pipe not less than one inch (1") in diameter and thirty inches (30") long, or
stone or concrete not less than four inches (4") in diameter and twenty-four
inches (24") long. Permanent monuments shall be erected at all street
corners, at all points where street lines intersect, the angle points of
curve in each street, and the exterior boundaries of the subdivision.



   (9)   Street Connections: All streets within a subdivision shall
have direct connections with streets outside of the subdivision.



   (10)   Dedication Of Lands: All lands to be dedicated for public use
such as streets, school-land donations, parks, and easements shall have
written within such area: "dedicated to the village and the public in general
for use as a public _________." Attached to the plat shall be a certificate
of title certifying ownership of all such lands to be dedicated to the
village.



   (11)   Certifications: All certifications required by applicable law
shall be shown.



   (12)   Streets Widths: Rights-of-way for streets running parallel to
and along or on a section line shall be no less than one hundred feet (100')
wide; rights-of-way for streets running parallel to and along or on a half
section line shall be no less than eighty feet (80') wide; and secondary and
residential right-of-way for streets shall be no less than sixty-six feet
(66') wide.



   (13)   Alleys: Alleys to be platted shall be no less than twenty
feet (20') wide.



   (14)   Easements: Where no alleys are platted, a public utility
easement of no less than ten feet (10') wide shall be platted across and
along the rear property line of all lots in the subdivision. All easements
shall be platted to effectuate continuity.



   (15)   Setbacks: Set back lines conforming to the requirements of
the zoning district in which they are located.



   (16)   Block Sizes: No blocks platted shall be more than one
thousand two hundred feet (1,200') long nor less than two hundred fifty feet
(250') wide.



   (17)   Streets Along Railroads: The nearest point of a street
running parallel to and along a railroad right-of-way shall be no closer than
one hundred twenty-five feet (125') from the nearest line of such railroad.



   (18)   Lot Sizes: The width, depth and area of all lots shall
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which they are located.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-311  Final Plat; Supporting Documentation:



   Each developer shall submit to the village board the following
supporting documentation in conjunction with the final plat of subdivision:



   (1)   Grading Plan And Profile: A grading plan and profile, approved
by the village engineer, depicting the existing and proposed centerline
elevations of all streets and alleys in the subdivision. All elevations shall
be in reference to permanent benchmarks as identified by the village
engineer. Profiles shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of fifty feet to one
inch (50':1") and a vertical scale of five feet to one inch (5':1").



   (2)   Site Improvement Plans And Statement: Final site improvement
plans with specifications for all public improvements, and a notarized
statement by the developer promising to complete those improvements at his or
her own expense (subject to the approval of the final plat by the village
board) within such time as may be prescribed by the village board.



   (3)   Village Engineer Approval: A statement signed by the village
engineer approving the site development plans, certifying that the public
improvements depicted in the site improvement plans comply with or exceed the
minimum requirements of this code, and an estimate as to the cost to complete
the construction of such public improvements.



   (4)   Contour Map: A contour map of the entire area to be subdivided
specifying the foundation elevations of any existing building and structure,
and the elevations of any existing public improvement, including features of
improved or unimproved right-of-ways and easements.



   (5)   Letter Of Credit: An irrevocable letter of credit issued by a
sound and reputable banking or financing institution authorized to do
business in the State of Illinois (hereinafter "bank"), in favor of the
village. The letter of credit shall specify that its purpose is to guarantee
developer's completion of the public improvements as depicted in the final
plat and site improvement plans approved by the village ("subdivision
improvements"). The letter of credit shall be in the amount of no less than
one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the estimated cost to complete the
subdivision improvements (as determined by the village engineer), and said
letter of credit shall specify that said funds are available at the bank, to
be drawn upon by the village at sight, without notice to, or consent of,
developer or customer. The letter of credit shall be valid and shall not
expire for a minimum of two (2) years or such longer period as shall be
jointly agreed. Notwithstanding the expiration date, the letter of credit
shall provide that it shall not expire, and will continue to be valid and
honored until, the later of the expiration date or ninety (90) days after the
village receives prior written notice of said expiration by certified mail,
return receipt requested. The letter of credit shall not be cancelled prior
to its expiry date without the expressed written consent of the village. The
letter of credit shall be increased by the developer upon written notice from
the village if the amount remaining is inadequate to complete all remaining
subdivision improvements, as reasonably determined by the village engineer.
The letter of credit, prior to final acceptance of the subdivision
improvements, may be reduced by an amount equal to the value of the such
improvements so installed, provided that the amount of the letter of credit
shall not be reduced to an amount less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the
cost of such improvements. The funds shall not, however, be reduced, in the
event that, at any time, the funds remaining are inadequate to complete the
improvements as shall be determined by the village engineer's estimate,
taking into account such increased costs, if any, applicable due to laws
governing public construction projects. All reductions in security must be
approved by the village. The letter of credit shall not be released until the
village board has approved all such improvements.



   (6)   No Tax Arrearage: Evidence that all real estate taxes,
including special assessments, levied against the property have been paid.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-312  Public Improvements; Standards:



   The following public improvements shall be provided throughout each
subdivision, and shall be constructed of such materials authorized by, and
designed in conformance with the specifications and standards set forth in,
this code:



   (1)   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be constructed in the public
right-of-way.



   (2)   Streets: Streets shall be constructed in the public right of
way and shall be accessible to each lot in the subdivision without need for a
private easement.



   (3)   Street Name Signs: Street name signs shall be provided at all
intersections.



   (4)   Water Mains: Water mains shall be constructed in a public
utility easement such that each lot may be serviced by means of a lateral
within its own frontage. All public water improvements shall be of a size and
of a design acceptable to the village and the west suburban water commission,
and shall be transferred to the later entity by bill of sale, upon its
approval and acceptance of the improvements.



   (5)   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout the
entire subdivision at intervals of not exceeding three hundred feet (300').
All fire hydrants shall have a five inch (5") barrel and shall be provided
with two and one-half inch (2-1/2") hose connections and one (1) steamer
connection. Each fire hydrant shall be provided with an auxiliary valve.



   (6)   Sanitary Sewer: Sanitary sewer mains shall be constructed in a
public utility easement such that each lot may be serviced by means of a
lateral within its frontage. All sanitary sewer improvements shall be of a
size and of a design acceptable to the village, and shall be transferred to
the village by bill of sale, upon its approval and acceptance of the same by
resolution.



   (7)   Streetlights: Streetlights of a type and design approved by
the village board shall be installed at every corner of an intersection,
unless already existing, and at intervals of no less than one (1) per three
hundred (300') feet.



   (8)   Drainage: Storm water mains and management areas of such size
and design acceptable to the village engineer, but minimally, according to
standards set forth in this code.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-313  Exemption:



   Single-family residential subdivisions of one (1) lot into two (2) or
three (3) lots shall be exempt from the requirements related to the
construction and installation of public improvements in this article.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-314  Variations:



   The village board may approve variations from the provisions of this
article requiring the construction of public improvements in cases of
hardship, provided the same will not undermine the intent of this article or
burden future development. Any such variation shall be  reviewed and
recommended for approval by the zoning board of appeals. All such variances
shall be considered and reviewed in conjunction with the underlying petition
for the subdivision of the real property at issue. All costs and expenses
associated with the procedure, review and/or approval of a variation shall be
paid by the developer in accordance with sections 12-7 through  12-14 of
this code.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-315  Review Expenses:



   Each developer shall be responsible for reimbursing the village for the
costs associated with village engineer's review of the preliminary plat,
final plat and plans, and specifications of the subdivision. The amount shall
be calculated at the current hourly rate of the village engineer in
accordance with the provisions of section 2-34.1(a) of this code.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-316  Final Approval:



   When the village board is satisfied with the final plat of subdivision,
site improvement plans, and all other documentation required to be submitted
as a part of that process, it shall approve the final plat of subdivision, by
ordinance, and direct the village president and village engineer to execute
the same. No such final plat of subdivision shall be approved until:



   (1)   The village is reimbursed for the review expenses of the
village engineer;



   (2)   Recording and copying fees costs have been tendered to the
village; and



   (3)   All other signatures required by applicable law to be present
on a final plat of subdivision are affixed thereto.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5- 23-2016)



Sec. 8-317  Recording Of Plat:



   The village will record a final plat of subdivision in the office of
cook county recorder of deeds no later than thirty (30) days of the passage
of the ordinance approving the subdivision.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-318  Construction:



   No construction shall commence within a subdivision until such time as
the final plat of subdivision has been recorded, and all applicable permits
and licenses for such work required to be obtained under applicable law have
been acquired. All construction shall be conducted and completed in a good
and workmanlike manner, and otherwise in conformance with the final plat of
subdivision and site improvement plans approved by the village.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-319  Inspections:



   All public improvements shall be subject to inspection by the village
during the course of construction and at the time of completion. The
developer shall bear the expense associated with any such inspection in
accordance with fee structure established in section 13-1 of this code. In
the event access is denied to the village for an inspection, a stop-work
order will be issued, and no further construction or work attending the
development shall commence until such time as the inspection is allowed.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-320  Acceptance of Public Improvements:



   The village shall inspect the public improvements at the conclusion of
construction in order to determine if they are complete and in accordance
with the final plat of subdivision and the site improvement plans. The
village shall accept completed public improvements by resolution, which shall
identify the land (in the case of dedication) and/or personal property (to be
transferred by bill of sale). No such public improvement shall be accepted
until such time as the developer has tendered to the village funds sufficient
to satisfy real estate taxes through the date of acceptance, which are not
otherwise due and owing, as determined by the proportion of the land to be
dedicated from the greater, at one hundred three percent (103%) of the last
ascertainable tax bill.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-321  Penalty:



   Any entity found to be in violation of this article shall be fined no
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seventy hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be
held to have been committed each day any entity continues to violate any of
the provisions hereof.



(Ord. 2014-18, § 1, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-322–8-340.  Reserved:



ARTICLE IX.  SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 1



1.   Prior ordinance history: Ord. 92-2, 1-13-1992; Ord. 96-6, 2-12-1996;
Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998.



Sec. 8-341  Purpose:



   This article is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this
village by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2.
The purpose of this article is to maintain this village’s eligibility in
the national flood insurance program; to minimize potential losses due to
periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve
economic and natural values and provide for the wise utilization of water and
related land resources. This article is adopted in order to accomplish the
following specific purposes:



   (1)   To meet the requirements of 615 ILCS 5/18g, Rivers, Lakes and
Streams Act;



   (2)   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or
drainage hazards to others, or creating unstable conditions susceptible to
erosion;



   (3)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings
from flood damage;



   (4)   To protect human life and health from hazards of flooding;



   (5)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control
projects, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood
rescue and relief operations;



   (6)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for
property in the village by fulfilling the requirements of the national
insurance program;



   (7)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood
insurance program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended, and which are hereby
adopted by reference and filed in the office of the village clerk, pursuant
to Illinois law and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2 and 5/11-30-2. Three (3) copies of said
rules and regulations shall be maintained on file with the village and one
(1) copy shall be available there for public inspection.



   (8)   To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of
land and water resources; and



   (9)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of water
courses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts,
improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian
habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and
enhance community and economic development.



(Ord. 2000-58, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord.
2009-15, § 38, 6-22-2009 Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-342  Definitions:



   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions are adopted:



   Accessory Structure: A non-habitable structure which is on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of
which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.



   Act: An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes, and
streams of the State of Illinois, 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.



   Applicant: Any person, firm corporation or agency which submits an
application.



   Appropriate Use: Only uses of the designated floodway that are
permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that
will be allowed are as specified in section 8-347(2) of this article.
(Preventing Increased Damages and a List of Appropriate Uses).



   Base Flood: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any
location is as defined in section 8-345 of this article.



   Base Flood Elevation (“BFE”): The elevation in relation to mean sea
level of the crest of the base flood.



   Basement: That portion of the building; having its floor sub-grade
(below ground level) on all sides.



   Building: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, including; manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also
includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.



   Channel: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainageway, which has a definite bed
and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either
perennially or intermittently.



   Channel Modification: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, rip-rapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the
bottom or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead
or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a
severe form of channel modification involving a significant change in the
channel cross-section and typically involving relocation of the existing
channel (e.g., straightening).



   Compensatory Storage: An artificially excavated, hydraulically
equivalent volume of storage within the special flood hazard area
(“SFHA”) used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when
artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. The
uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase off-site
floodwater elevations and flows.



   Conditional Approval Of A Designated Floodway Map Change:
Preconstruction approval by Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Illinois
Office of Water Resources (“IDNR/OWR”) and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (“FEMA”) of a proposed change to the floodway map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to this part, gives assurances to the
property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to
permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon
review and acceptance of as-built plans.



   Conditional Letter Of Map Revision (“CLOMR”): A letter which
indicates that FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate
zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective flood hazard
boundary map or flood insurance rate map, once the as-built plans are
submitted and approved.



   Control Structure: A structure designed to control the rate of flow
that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream
water surface elevation.



   Critical Facility: Any facility which is critical to the health and
welfare of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to
the disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of
vital services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community,
or can put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where
flood protection should be required include: emergency services facilities
(such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and
senior care facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites
(telephone switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous
material storage facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic
substances). Examples of critical facilities where flood protection is
recommended include: sewage treatment plants, water treatment plants, and
pumping stations.



   Dam: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with
their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of
storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs,
restrictive culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage
tanks are not included.



   Designated Floodway: The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that
portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally
depicted on the FEMA FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the
existing 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth
(0.1) foot increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage,
and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities.



   (1)   The floodways are designated for on the countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008.
When two floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway
limit shall prevail.



   (2)   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of village that may be
annexed into the village are designated for the 71st Street Ditch, Chicago
Sanitary and Ship Canal, the Justice Ditch, the Illinois and Michigan Canal,
and the Des Plaines River, on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map
prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008.



   (3)   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the
designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map
and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated
floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.



   Development: Any man-made change to real estate, including:



   (1)   Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a
building or any addition to a building.



   (2)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle
on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the travel trailer
or recreational vehicle is on site for more than one hundred eighty (180)
days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway use.



   (3)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges, or similar projects.



   (4)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.



   (5)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.



   (6)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or
culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating,
paving, or other non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage
of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste.



   (7)   Any other activity of man that might change the direction,
height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation
removal.



   (8)   Substantial improvement of an existing building. Development
does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities
such as re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there is no increase in
elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do
not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.



   Elevation Certificates: A form published by FEMA that is used to
certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated.



   Erosion: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water
or wave action.



   Exempt Organizations: Organizations which are exempt from this article
per Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) including state, federal or local units
of government.



   Existing Manufactured Home Park Or Subdivision: A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed
before April 1, 1990.



   Expansion To An Existing Manufactured Home Park Or Subdivision: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR
59-79, as amended.



   Flood: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves,
or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.



   Flood Frequency: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis,
during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or
exceeded.



   Flood Fringe: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway. See definition of “designated floodway.”



   Flood Insurance Rate Maps (“FIRM”): A map prepared by FEMA that
depicts the special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map
includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict
floodways.



   Flood Insurance Study. An examination, evaluation and determination of
flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.



   Floodplain: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground
surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas,
ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA).



      (1)   The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction
of the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood. The SFHAs of the village are generally identified as such on
map number 17031C, and panel numbers 0488J, 0489J, 0601J, and 0602J of the
countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of the village prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated August 19, 2008.



      (2)   The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may
be annexed into the village are generally identified as such on map number
17031C, and panel numbers 0488J, 0489J, 0601J, and 0602J of the countywide
Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for Cook County by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated August 19, 2008.



   Flood-Proofing: Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   Flood-Proofing Certificate: A form published by FEMA that is used to
certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally
dry flood-proofed to the flood protection elevation.



   Flood Protection Elevation (“FPE”): The elevation of the base flood
or 100-year frequency floods plus one foot of freeboard at any given location
in the SFHA.



   Floodway: See definition of “designated floodway.”



   Historic Structure: Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of
the Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district
preliminary determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district;



      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic
places by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency;



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places that has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.



   Hydrologic And Hydraulic Calculations: Engineering analysis which
determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land
characteristics and rainfall events.



   IDNR/OWR: Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources.



   Letter Of Map Amendment (“LOMA”): Official determination by FEMA
that a specific structure is not in a 100-year floodplain; amends the FIRM.



   Letter Of Map Revision (“LOMR”): Letter that revises base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevations, floodplains or floodways as shown on an
effective FIRM.



   Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this article.



   Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or
without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The
term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers and
other similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days. The term “manufactured home” does not include a
“recreational vehicle.”



   Manufactured Home Park Or Subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   Mitigation: Mitigation includes those measures necessary to minimize
the negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on
the public health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include:
excavation of compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control,
and channel restoration. Mitigation may also include those activities taken
to reduce a structure’s susceptibility to flooding.



   New Construction: New construction means structures for which the start
of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.



   New Manufactured Home Park Or Subdivision: Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after
April 1, 1990.



   NAVD 88: National American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).



   Natural: When used in reference to channels means those channels formed
by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man.
A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross-section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions by man through re-grading and re-vegetation.



   Ordinary High Water Mark (“OHWM”): The point on the bank or shore
up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as
to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily
recognized characteristics.



   Public Bodies Of Waters: All open public streams and lakes capable of
being navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and
purposes, and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition
were capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with
or discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of
water directly accessible thereto.



   Public Flood Control Project: A flood control project which will be
operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to
existing buildings and structures, including a hydrologic and hydraulic study
of



the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this
definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing,
in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are
not public agencies.



   Recreational Vehicle Or Travel Trailer: A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   Regional Permits: Regional permits are offered for pre-approved
projects which are considered minor projects that are permissible per
IDNR/OWR Part 3708 rules for Northeastern Illinois regulatory floodways. A
complete listing of the terms and conditions for specific project types can
be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.



   Registered Land Surveyor: A land surveyor registered in the State of
Illinois, under The Illinois Land Surveyors Act, (225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.).



   Registered Or Licensed Professional Engineer: An engineer registered in
the State of Illinois, under The Illinois Professional Engineering Practice
Act, (225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.).



   Repair, Remodeling Or Maintenance: Development activities which do not
result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any
changes to the dimensions of a structure.



   Repetitive Loss: Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds
twenty-five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the
damaged occurred.



   Retention/Detention Facility: A retention facility stores storm-water
runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage
of storm-water runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after
a flood or storm.



   Riverine SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified
channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.



   Runoff: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.



   Sedimentation: The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other
materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or
watercourses.



   Special Flood Hazard Area (“SFHA”): See definition of a
“floodplain.”



   Start Of Construction: Includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation.



   Statewide Permits: Statewide permits are offered for pre-approved
projects that are considered minor projects which are permissible per the
IDNR/OWR Part 3700 rules. A complete listing of the statewide permits and
permit requirements can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.



   Structure: See the definition of “building.”



   Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cumulative percentage of damage during a 10-year period equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor
and materials must be included in this determination. The term includes
repetitive loss buildings. (See the definition of “repetitive loss.”)



   Substantial Improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or improvement of a structure taking place during a 10-year period in which
the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair
is started.



      (1)   Substantial Improvement is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building. This term includes structures which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.



      (2)   The term does not, however, include either:



         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or



         (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure”
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register
of Historic Places, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.



   Transition Section: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows
from a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa.



   Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.



(Ord. 2000-58, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2001-08, § 1, 3-26-2001; Ord. 2008-28,
§§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-343  Administration And Enforcement:



   The building commissioner, in conjunction with the village engineer,
shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this
article including the duties listed in section 8-344.



   (1)   To fulfill these duties, the building commissioner in
conjunction with the village engineer, should first use the criteria listed
in section 8-345 of this article concerning base flood elevations, to
determine whether the development site is located within a floodplain.



   (2)   Once it has been determined that a site is located within a
floodplain, it must be determined whether the development site is within a
flood fringe, a designated floodway, or within a SFHA or floodplain for which
no floodway has been identified.



   (3)   If the site is within a flood fringe, the building
commissioner, in conjunction with the village engineer, shall require that
the minimum requirements of section 8-346 of this article be met.



   (4)   If the site is within a floodway, the building commissioner,
in conjunction with the village engineer, shall require that the minimum
requirements of section 8-347 of this article be met.



   (5)   If the site is located within a SFHA or floodplain for which
no detailed study has been completed and approved, the building commissioner,
in conjunction with the village engineer, shall require that the minimum
requirements of section 8-348 of this article be met.



   (6)   In addition, the general requirements of section 8-349 of this
article shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of
sections 8-346, 8-347, or 8-348.



   (7)   The building commissioner, in conjunction with the village
engineer, shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the
requirements of section 8-350.



   (8)   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the building
commissioner, in conjunction with the village engineer, shall review the
requirements of section 8-351, to make sure they are met. In addition, the
building commissioner, in conjunction with the village engineer, shall
complete all notification requirements.



   (9)   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as
required in this article, the building commissioner, in conjunction with the
village engineer, may take any and all actions as outlined in section 8-353
of this code.



(Ord. 2000-58, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-344  Duties Of The Building Commissioner, In Conjunction With The
Village Engineer:



   (1)   Determining The Floodplain Designation:



      (a)   Check all new development sites to determine whether
they are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA).



      (b)   If new development sites are in a SFHA, determine
whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe, or in a floodplain for which a
detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one (1)
square mile.



      (c)   Check whether the development is potentially within an
extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than one (1) square mile),
indicating that the development would have adverse impacts regarding storage,
conveyance, or inundation which would be the basis for the applicant being
required to delineate the floodplain and floodway and be subject to the
remaining sections of this article.



   (2)   Professional Engineer Review:



      (a)   If the development site is within a floodway or in a
floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains
more than one (1) square mile, the permit shall be referred to a licensed
professional engineer under the employ or contract of the village for review
to ensure that the development meets sections 8-347 or 8-348.



      (b)   In the case of an appropriate use, the professional
engineer shall state in writing that the development meets the requirements
of section 8-347.



   (3)   Dam Safety Requirements:



      (a)   Dams are classified as to their size and their
hazard/damage potential in the event of failure.



      (b)   The construction or major modification of all Class I
(high hazard) and Class II (moderate hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam
safety permit.



      (c)   Some Class III (low hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam
safety permit, depending on the drainage area to the dam, the height of the
dam and the impounding capacity behind the dam. Most off-channel detention
basins that have an embankment are non-jurisdictional Class III dam. It is
not required that IDNR/OWR “sign off” on all non-jurisdictional Class III
dams.



      (d)   A consulting engineer with dam safety knowledge can
estimate a hazard classification and determine if an IDNR/OWR dam safety
permit is required.



      (e)   A permit application submittal must be made to IDNR/OWR
for the construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams.



      (f)   Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts
or impoundment structures.



   (4)   Other Permit Requirements: Ensure any and all required
federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit.



   (5)   Plan Review And Permit Issuance:



      (a)   Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs
of the jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements of this article; and



      (b)   Issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with
the provisions of this article and other regulations of this community when
the development meets the conditions of this article.



   (6)   Inspection Review:



      (a)   Inspect all development projects before, during and
after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this article; and



      (b)   Schedule on an annual basis an inspection of the
floodplain and document the results of the inspection.



   (7)   Damage Determinations: Make damage determinations of all
damaged buildings in the SFHA after a flood to determine substantially
damaged structures which must comply with section 8-349(3)(c).



   (8)   Elevation And Flood-Proofing Certificates: Maintain permit
files including an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) of a residential or non-residential
building subject to section 8-349 of this article, and/or; the elevation to
which a nonresidential building has been flood-proofed, using a
flood-proofing certificate, for all buildings subject to section 8-349 of
this article.



   (9)   Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection
and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps,
copies of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation,
conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map
amendment and “as-built” elevation and flood-proofing and/or elevation
certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this article.



   (10)   State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has
been granted by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to sections
8-347 and 8-348 of this article, unless enforcement responsibility has been
delegated to the village. However, the following review approvals are not
delegated to the village and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:



      (a)   Organizations which are exempt from this article, as per
the Illinois Compiled Statutes;



      (b)   IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as
defined in section 8-342 and all other state, federal or local unit of
government projects, including projects of the village and county, except for
those projects meeting the requirements of section 8-347(2)(a);



      (c)   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge or
culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating
the proposed flood profile, per section 8-347(2)(c)5.;



      (d)   An engineer’s analysis of the flood profile due to
section 8-347(2)(c)4.;



      (e)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically
equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in section 8-347(2)(c);
{8-347(2)(c)l.; 8-347(2)(c)2.; 8-347(2)(c)8.}.



      (f)   Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over
publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams;



      (g)   Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood
profiles.



   (11)   Cooperation With Other Agencies:



      (a)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management
agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data
and to improve the administration of this article;



      (b)   Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions
of a regulatory map within six (6) months whenever a modification of the
floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the
floodplain map;



      (c)   Submit reports as required for the national flood
insurance program; and



      (d)   Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this article.



   (12)   Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as
necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, subject
however to the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any ordinance
changes.



(Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-345  Base Flood Elevation:



   This article’s protection standard is based on the flood insurance
study for the village.



   (1)   If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood
elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection
standard shall be according to the best existing data available from federal,
state or other sources.



      (a)   When a party disagrees with the best available data,
they shall submit a detailed engineering study needed to replace existing
data with better data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and
consideration prior to any development of the site.



   (2)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the
SFHAs of the 71st Street Ditch, Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal, the Justice
Ditch, the Illinois and Michigan Canal, and the Des Plaines River, shall be
as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of
Cook County prepared by FEMA dated August 19, 2008 and such amendments to
such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.



   (3)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the
SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the
village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood
insurance study of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008,
and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared
from time to time.



   (4)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each
SFHA delineated as an “AH Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation
(or depth) delineated on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Cook
County.



   (5)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each
of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an “A Zone” on the countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Cook County shall be according to the best existing
data available from federal, state or other sources. Should no other data
exist, an engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine
base flood elevations.



      (a)   When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation
exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine
SFHA shall be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, HECRAS, or a
dynamic model such as HIP.



      (b)   The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be
obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-1, TR-20, or HIP, or
by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States
Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges.



      (c)   For a non-riverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall
be the historic flood of record plus three (3) feet, unless calculated by a
detailed engineering study.



      (d)   For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less
than one square mile) which has been identified by the building commissioner,
in conjunction with the village engineer, pursuant to section 8-344(1)(c),
the base flood elevation shall be determined by the applicant utilizing a
method as approved in section 8-345(5).



(Ord. 2000-58, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-346  Occupation And Use Of Flood Fringe Areas:



   Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions
of this article. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the
capacity of drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the
flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the
requirements of section 8-349.



   (1)   Development Permit:



      (a)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not
exempted by law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first
obtaining a development permit from the building commissioner.



      (b)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a
form provided by the building commissioner.



      (c)   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the
site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description
for the property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land
surveyor; existing grade elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum
of 1988, and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the
location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings.



      (d)   For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the
submitted plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of
section 8-349 of this article.



      (e)   Upon receipt of a development permit application, the
building commissioner shall compare the elevation of the site to the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.



         1.   Any development located on land that can be shown
to be higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance
rate map and which has not been filled after the date of the site’s first
flood insurance rate map without a permit as required by this article is not
in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this article.
Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood
elevation and hydraulically connected, but shown on the current flood
insurance rate map is subject to the provisions of this article.



         2.   The building commissioner shall maintain
documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and
certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site’s first flood insurance rate map identification.



      (f)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed
areas shall be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the
sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control
measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also
include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and
the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction
maintenance.



      (g)   The building commissioner shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local
permits, approvals or waivers that may be required for this type of activity.
The building commissioner shall not issue a permit unless all other federal,
state, and local permits have been obtained.



   (2)   Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood
fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety.



      (a)   If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit
sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the
purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.



   (3)   Compensatory Storage:



      (a)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for
use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be
compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation.



      (b)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and
one-half (1.5) times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.



      (c)   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation
shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.



      (d)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall
be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.



      (e)   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain
freely and openly to the watercourse.



   (4)   Construction Of The Lowest Floor Below The Base Flood
Elevation (BFE): A person who has obtained a letter of map revision based on
fill that removes a site in the flood fringe from the floodplain due to the
use of fill to elevate the site above the BFE, may apply for a permit from
the village to construct the lowest floor of a residential building below the
BFE in the flood fringe. The building commissioner shall not issue such a
permit unless the applicant has complied with all the criteria set forth in
the following subsection.



      (a)   Compensatory storage shall be provided per section
8-346(3).



      (b)   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall
(i.e., window wells, access ways) shall be at or above the flood protection
elevation (FPE).



      (c)   The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at
or above the FPE, for a minimum distance of ten (10) feet beyond the outside
face of the structure. However, if site conditions are such that this
requirement cannot be met, the building commissioner may waive the ten (10)
foot minimum setback if an Illinois licensed professional engineer certifies
that an alternative method to protect the building from damage due to
hydrostatic pressures has been met. The certifications shall be in the form
of a detailed soils and structural design analysis, which shall be submitted
to the building commissioner for review. The building commissioner may
require such additional documentation as necessary to prove that the proposed
shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe. In no case
shall the setback distance be less than four (4) feet.



      (d)   The grade around the perimeter of the structure,
measured at a distance of twenty (20) feet from the structure, shall be above
the BFE. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be
obtained, the building commissioner, in conjunction with the village
engineer, may waive the twenty (20) foot minimum setback distance if an
Illinois licensed professional engineer certifies that an alternative method
to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures have been
met. A detailed soils analysis and structural design proving that a shorter
setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe from flooding, shall
be submitted to the village for review. In no case shall the setback distance
be less than four (4) feet.



      (e)   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill
that meets all requirements of this subsection and is at least five (5) feet
thick under the basement floor slab. Nothing in this subsection shall be
interpreted to require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as
part of a LOMR-F, if such fill consists of material, including soils of
similar classification and degree permeability, such as those classified as
CH, CL, SC or ML according to ASTM standard D-2487, Classification of Soils
for Engineering Purposes.



      (f)   The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic;
that is, the soil must be all of one material, and the engineering priorities
must be in the same direction.



      (g)   All fill material and compaction shall be designed,
certified and inspected by an Illinois licensed professional engineer, as
warranted by the site conditions.



      (h)   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no
more than five (5) below the BFE.



      (i)   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the
floor slab, and minimum of one quarter (1/4) horsepower sump pump with a
backup power supply shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall
be rated at four (4) times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge
above the BFE and away from the building in order to prevent flooding of the
basement or uplift of the floor under the effect of the seepage pressure.



      (j)   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive
means of preventing backflow.



      (k)   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand
hydrostatic pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.



      (l)   If the applicant is unable to meet all of the
requirements set forth in the preceding paragraphs of this subsection, the
building commissioner, in conjunction with the village engineer, may allow
the construction of a basement below the BFE only if the applicant
demonstrates that the proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines and
requirements set forth in FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably
safe from flooding. In order to demonstrate that the proposed structure is
reasonably safe from flooding, the applicant shall submit a detailed
engineering analysis of the proposed fill and foundation wall. The engineered
basement study shall be completed in accordance with the latest edition of
FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01, with the analysis of the fill being prepared
by an Illinois licensed professional engineer.



      (m)   In order to provide the required compensatory storage on
site, in no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of
the lot exceed eighteen (18) inches, as measured from the previously existing
natural grade. The rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of
excavation, if necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain
freely and openly to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of
mechanical means to drain the compensatory storage area will not be permitted.



(Ord. 2000-58, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-347  Occupation And Use Of Designated Floodways:



   This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site
modification or building modification within a designated floodway. The
designated floodway for the 71st Street Ditch, Chicago Sanitary and Ship
Canal, the Justice Ditch, the Illinois and Michigan Canal, and the Des
Plaines River, shall be as delineated on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate
Map of Cook County and referenced in section 8-342 (Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRM)). Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the
criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum
necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall
also meet the requirements of section 8-349.



   (1)   Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or
governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in
a floodway without first obtaining a development permit from the building
commissioner and IDNR/OWR.



      (a)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a
form provided by the building commissioner. The application shall include the
following information:



      1.   Name and address of applicant;



      2.   Site location (including legal description) of the
property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether
it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;



      3.   Name of stream or body of water affected;



      4.   Description of proposed activity;



      5.   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;



      6.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of
activity;



      7.   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject
property if different from the applicant;



      8.   Signature of the applicant or the applicant’s agent;



      9.   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other
authorized officer shall sign the application form;



      10.   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall
sign the application form; and



      11.   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer
shall sign the name of the trustee by him or her as trust officer. A
disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the application, identifying each
beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective
interests therein.



      12.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which
include as a minimum:



         i.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity,
name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the
site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;



         ii.   A plan view of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum
of 1988, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads,
distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated
floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any
proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of cross-sections,
north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale;



         iii.   Cross-section views of the project and
engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including
principal dimensions; of the work as shown in plan view, existing and
proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood
elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphic or numerical
scales (horizontal and vertical);



         iv.   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for
disturbed areas.



            This plan shall include a description of the sequence
of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures
to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.



         v.   A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to
reflect any proposed change in the designated floodway location.



      13.   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or
approval letters that may be required for this type of development.



      14.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of
section 8-347(2).



      15.   If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project,
the application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated
conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may
be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.



      16.   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and
existing ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any
proposed excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by
a licensed professional engineer, licensed architect or licensed land
surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 8-349 of this
article.



      17.   If the proposed project involves a channel modification,
the applicant shall submit the following information:



         i.   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the
proposed work;



         ii.   A discussion of the feasibility of using
alternative locations or methods (see section 8-347(2)(c)(9)) to accomplish
the purpose of the proposed work;



         iii.   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the
impacts each feasible alternative identified in 8-347(2)(c)(9) of this
section would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected; and



         iv.   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed
project, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological
conditions of the body of water affected.



   (b)   The building commissioner shall be responsible for obtaining
from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits and
approvals that may be required for this type of activity.



      1.   The building commissioner shall not issue the development
permit unless all required federal and state permits have been obtained.



      2.   A licensed professional engineer, under the employ or
contract of the village shall review and approve applications reviewed under
this section.



   (2)   Preventing Increased Damages And A List Of Appropriate Uses:



   (a)   The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are
appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation,
and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in
flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and
welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the
floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic
habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation
methods as called for in this article. Only those appropriate uses listed in
17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 will be allowed. The approved appropriate uses
are as follows:



      1.   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public
works or private improvements  relating to the control of drainage,
flooding, erosion, or water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife.



      2.   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or
requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment
facilities, and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating,
commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;



      3.   Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls;



      4.   Underground and overhead utilities;



      5.   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail
systems, including any related fencing (at least fifty percent (50%) open
when viewed from any one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood
flows, and including open air pavilions and toilet facilities (four (4) stall
maximum) that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage.



      6.   Detached garages, storage sheds, or other non-habitable
accessory structures that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway
storage;



      7.   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways
and taxiways and any modification thereto;



      8.   Parking lots built at or below existing grade where
either:



         i.   The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency
flood event will not exceed one (1) foot; or



         ii.   The applicant of a short-term recreational use
facility parking lot formally agrees to restrict access during overbank
flooding events and accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular
access during all overbank flooding events.



      9.   Designated floodway regarding, without fill, to create a
positive non-erosive slope toward a watercourse.



      10.   Flood-proofing activities to protect previously existing
lawful structures including the construction of water tight window wells,
elevating structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential,
commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the
floodwall shall be no more than ten (10) feet away from the exterior wall of
the existing structure, and, which are not considered substantial
improvements to the structure.



      11.   The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged
building, provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the
building was damaged to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value
before the damage occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to
the flood protection elevation.



      12.   Modifications to an existing building that would not
increase the enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency
flood elevation, and which will not block flood flows including but not
limited to, fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and second story
additions. If the building is improved to fifty percent (50%) or more of the
market value before the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial
improvement), the building will be protected from flooding to the flood
protection elevation.



   (b)   Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement
of any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts,
excavation or channel modifications done: to accommodate otherwise
nonappropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping or
planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as
specifically defined above as an appropriate use.



   (c)   Within the designated floodway, the construction of an
appropriate use, will be considered permissible provided that the proposed
project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so
stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a licensed
professional engineer and provided that any structure meets the protection
requirements of section 8-349 of this article:



      1.   Preservation Of Flood Conveyance, So As Not To Increase
Flood Stages Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert
crossings, on-stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway
conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up
to and including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective
designated floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into
consideration:



         i.   Designated floodway conveyance, “K” =
(1.486/n)(AR2/3) where “n” is Manning’s roughness factor, “A” is
the effective flow area of the cross-section, and “R” is the ratio of the
area to the wetted perimeter. (See Ven Te Chow, Open Channel Hydraulics,
(McGraw-Hill, New York 1959)).



         ii.   The same Manning’s “n” value shall be used
for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance
agreement with a federal, state, or local unit of government can assure the
proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a
vegetative to a non-vegetative land cover.



         iii.   Transition sections shall be provided and used in
calculations of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following
expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant’s
engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model
tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:



            a.   When water is flowing from a narrow section
to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a
rate of one (1) foot horizontal for every four (4) feet of the flooded
stream’s length.



            b.   When water is flowing from a wide section to
a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a
rate of one (1) foot horizontal for every one (1) foot of the flooded
stream’s length.



            c.   When expanding or contracting flows in a
vertical direction, a minimum of one (1) foot vertical transition for every
ten (10) feet of stream length shall be used.



            d.    Transition sections shall be provided
between cross-sections with rapid  expansions and contractions and when
meeting the designated floodway delineation on adjacent properties.



            e.   All cross-sections used in the calculations
shall be located perpendicular to flood flows.



      2.   Preservation Of Floodway Storage  So As Not  To
Increase Downstream Flooding:



         i.   Compensatory storage shall be provided for any
designated floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of
fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control
projects.



         ii.   Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall
be equal to at least one and one-half (1.5) times the volume of floodplain
storage lost.



         iii.   Artificially created storage lost due to a
reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.



         iv.   The compensatory designated floodway storage shall
be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed
100-year flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the
existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year
flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost above the existing
10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood
elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse.



         v.   If the compensatory storage will not be placed at
the location of the proposed construction, the applicant’s engineer shall
demonstrate through a determination of flood discharges and water surface
elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.



         vi.   There shall be no reduction in floodway surface
area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is
necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure.



      3.   Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase
Stream Erosion Or Flood Heights:



         i.   For all appropriate uses, except bridges or
culverts or on-stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an
increase in the average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.



         ii.   In the case of bridges or culverts or on-stream
structures built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during
normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if
scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or
other design measures.



      4.   Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And
Roadway Approaches:



         i.   The proposed structure shall not result in an
increase of upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth (0.1) foot when
compared to the             existing conditions for all flood
events up to and including the 100-year frequency event; or the upstream
flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or within
existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design
protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood
easements.



         ii.   If the proposed construction will increase
upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth (0.1) feet, the developer must
contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a permit for a dam or waiver.



            a.   The engineering analysis of upstream flood
stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding
flood  elevations for tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in
section 8-345 of this article. Bridges and culverts must be analyzed using
any commonly accepted FEMA approved hydraulic models.



            b.   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for
per section 8-347(2)(c)2.



            c.   Velocity increases must be mitigated per
section 8-347(2)(c)3.



            d.   If the crossing is proposed over a public
water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR
permit must be received.



            e.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater
caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory
profile must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not
required by section 8-347(2).



            f.   All excavations for the construction of the
crossing shall be designed per section 8-347(2)(c)8.



      5.   Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges,
Culverts, And Approach Roads:



         i.   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach
reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than
one-tenth (0.1) foot increase in backwater over the existing flood profile
for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the
existing structure is not a source of flood damage.



         ii.   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway
approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the
upstream floodplain, the applicant’s engineer shall evaluate the
feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater,
taking into consideration the effects on flood stages on upstream and
downstream properties.



         iii.   The determination as to whether or not the
existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must
be prepared in accordance with 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 (Floodway
Construction in Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review
and concurrence before a permit is issued.



      6.   On-Stream Structures Built For The Purpose Of Backing Up
Water:



         i.   Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than
zero (0) feet when compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events
up to and including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within
the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel
banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood
walls or within recorded flood easements.



         ii.   A permit or letter indicating a permit is not
required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the
purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow.



         iii.   All dams and impoundment structures as defined in
section 8-342 shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Adm. Code
Part 3702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity
involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an
impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:



            a.   The impoundment is determined to be in the
public interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional
stormwater detention;



            b.   The impoundment will not prevent the
migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas
as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning;



            c.   The impoundment will not cause or contribute
to degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should
include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a
presedimentation basin.



            d.   A non-point source control plan has been
implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment
runoff as well as minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals,
and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream
watershed, the municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should
coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed
control;



            e.   The project otherwise complies with the
requirements of section 8-347.



      7.   Flood-Proofing Of Existing Habitable,  Residential And
Commercial Structures:



         i.   If construction is required beyond the outside
dimensions of the existing building, the outside perimeter of the
flood-proofing construction shall be placed no further than ten (10) feet
from the outside of the building.



         ii.   Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will
not be required for flood-proofing activities.



      8.   Excavation In The Floodway:



         i.   When excavation is proposed in the design of
bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement
of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost
conveyance or other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided
for the excavation.



         ii.   The following expansion and contraction ratios
shall be used unless an applicant’s engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through
engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be
used with the same efficiency:



            a.   When water is flowing from a narrow section
to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a
rate of one (1) foot horizontal for every four (4) feet of the flooded
stream’s length; and



            b.   When water is flowing from a wide section to
a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a
rate of one (1) foot horizontal for every one (1) foot of the flooded
stream’s length; and



            c.   When expanding or contracting flows in a
vertical direction, a minimum of one (1) foot vertical transition for every
ten (10) feet of stream length shall be used; and



            d.    Erosion/scour protection shall be provided
inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections.



      9.   If the proposed activity involves a channel modification,
it shall be demonstrated that:



         i.   There are no practicable alternatives to the
activity which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural
conditions of the body of water affected. Possible alternatives include:
levees, bank stabilization, flood-proofing of existing structures, removal of
structures from the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or
the establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel
modification is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions
and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat;



         ii.   Water quality, habitat, and other natural
functions would be significantly improved by the modification and no
significant habitat area may be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the
replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values;



         iii.   The activity has been planned and designed and
will be constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the
natural conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the
following criteria:



            a.   The physical characteristics of the modified
channel shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in
length, cross-section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been
previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should
be incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.



            b.    Hydraulically effective transitions shall be
provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed
such that they will prevent erosion.



            c.    One-sided construction of a channel shall be
used when feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be
limited to one side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading
and stabilization effects of the vegetation.



            d.   Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be
limited to that which is essential for construction of the channel.



            e.   Channel banks shall be constructed with a
side slope no steeper than 3:1 horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable.
Native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or rip-rap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as
concrete, gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are
no practicable alternatives.



            f.   All disturbed areas associated with the
modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon
completion of construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall
be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of
the vegetative cover.



            g.   If the existing channel contains considerable
bottom  diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other  similar
features,  such  features  shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning
and nesting areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall
also be established, where appropriate.



            h.   A sediment basin shall be installed at the
downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of
downstream water quality.



            i.   New or relocated channels should be built in
the dry and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be
completed prior to diversion of water into the new channel.



            j.   There shall be no increases in stage or
velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency
flood unless necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an
increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control
project.



            k.   Unless the modification is for a public flood
control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater
storage outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and



         iv.   The project otherwise complies with the
requirements of section 8-347.



      10.   Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities
located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by
the applicant.



      11.   Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all
activities in the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in
which there is potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the
following criteria:



         i.   The construction area shall be minimized to
preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to
minimize the time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the
existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than
fifteen (15) days prior to the initiation of improvements.



         ii.   Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization
shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil
stabilization shall be provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is
reached on any portion of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded
areas which may not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer
than sixty (60) days.



         iii.   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed
before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent
the movement of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential
sediment control devices include             filter fences, straw
bale fences, check dams, diversion ditches, and sediment traps and basins.



         iv.   A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty-five
(25) feet in width shall be preserved and/or re-established, where possible,
along existing channels. (See section 8-347(2)(c)16.) Construction vehicle
use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be
constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in
or along channels shall be re-stabilized immediately.



         v.   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures
shall be designed and implemented consistent with “Procedures and Standards
for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois” (1988) also
known as the “Green Book” and “The Illinois Urban Manual” (NRCS,
1995).



      12.   Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control
projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met
if the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or
easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event.



      13.   General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:



         i.   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the
designated floodway study, referenced in section 8-345, must be used for
analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or
conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval and
concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.



         ii.   If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at
the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a
downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed
construction shall be shown to meet:



            a.   The requirements of this section for the
100-year frequency flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions; and



            b.    Conditions with the receiving stream at
normal water elevations.



         iii.   If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local
governments, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or
culvert is scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional
flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or
modified within the next five years, the proposed construction shall be
analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the
existing conditions and the expected flood profile conditions when the
bridge, culvert or flood control project is built.



      14.   Conditional Letter Of Map Revision:



         i.   If the appropriate use would result in a change in
the designated  floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation,
the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations
and documents necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map
revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the
designated floodway change before a permit is issued.



         ii.   The final designated floodway map will not be
changed by FEMA until as-built plans or record drawings of initial filling,
grading, dredging, or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by
FEMA and IDNR/OWR.



         iii.   In the case of non-government projects, the
municipality in incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas
shall concur with the proposed conditional designated floodway map revision
before IDNR/ OWR approval can be given.



         iv.   No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall
take place until a conditional approval is issued.



         v.   After initial filling, grading, dredging or
excavating, no activities shall take place until a final letter of map
revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.



      15.   Professional Engineer’s Supervision: All engineering
analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a licensed
professional engineer.



      16.   For all activities in the floodway involving
construction within twenty-five (25) feet of the channel, the following
criteria shall be met:



         i.   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be
preserved within at least twenty-five (25) feet of the ordinary high water
mark of the channel.



         ii.   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer
strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip
shall be established upon completion of construction.



      17.   After receipt of conditional approval of the designated
floodway change and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map
revision, construction as necessary to change the floodway designation may
proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction that is not an
appropriate use may be placed in that area until the designated floodway map
is changed and a final letter of map revision is received. The designated
floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and
FEMA of the “as-built” plans.



   (3)   Development Activities In Delegated Communities Requiring
State Review: For those projects listed below located in a designated
floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their
review and concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a
community or county delegated state permitting authority in the floodway.



   (a)   An engineer’s analysis of the flood profile due to a
proposed bridge pursuant to section 8-347(2)(c)4.



   (b)   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge or
culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating
the proposed flood profile, pursuant to section 8-347(2)(c)5.



   (c)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
storage pursuant to section 8-347(2)(c)1., 2., and 8.



   (d)   The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in
section 8-342) and all other federal, state, or local units of government
projects, including projects of the municipality or county.



   (e)   An engineer’s determination that a proposed bridge affected
by backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller
opening.



   (f)   Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood
profiles.



   (g)   Projects in public bodies of water.



   (4)   Other Permits:



   (a)   In addition to the other requirements of this article, a
development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued
unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a
permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.



   (b)   No correspondence from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the
project meets the requirements of Regional Permit 3.



   (c)   No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has
delegated this responsibility to the village.



   (5)   Permits For Dams:



   (a)   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal
of a dam as defined in section 8-342 per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules
for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start
of construction of a dam.



   (b)   If the building commissioner, in conjunction with the village
engineer finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the building
commissioner, shall immediately notify the IDNR/ OWR Bartlett office.



   (c)   If building commissioner, in conjunction with the village
engineer, finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the
building commissioner, shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the
IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).



   (6)   Activities That Do Not Require A Licensed Professional
Engineer’s Review: The following activities may be permitted without a
licensed professional engineer’s review. Such activities shall still meet
the other requirements of this article, including the mitigation requirements.



   (a)   Regional Permit 3 which authorizes, for example, underground
and overhead utilities, storm and sanitary sewer outfalls, sidewalks, patios,
athletic fields, playground equipment and stream bank protection activities.



(Ord. 2000-58, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-348  Occupation And Use Of SFHA Areas Where Floodways Are Not
Identified:



   In SFHA or floodplains, (including AE, AH, AO and Unnumbered A Zones)
where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more
than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative
effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase
the flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.



   (1)   Development Permit:



   (a)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not
exempted by state law, shall commence any development in a SFHA or floodplain
without first obtaining a development permit from the building commissioner.



   (b)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the building commissioner.



      1.   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the
site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade
elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling,
sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to
the requirements of section 8-349 of this article.



      2.   The application for a development permit shall also
include the following information:



         i.   A detailed description of the proposed activity,
its purpose, and intended use;



         ii.   Site location (including legal description) of the
property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether
it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;



         iii.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of
activity;



         iv.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided
which include as a minimum:



            a.   A vicinity map showing the site of the
activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the
vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;



            b.   A plan view of the project and engineering
study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal
dimensions of the structure or work, elevations, using the North American
Vertical Datum of 1988, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and
flood control easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation
channel (when the proposed construction is in or near a commercially
navigable body of water), floodplain limit, location and orientation of
cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;



            c.    Cross-section views of the project
perpendicular to the flow of floodwater and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work
as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water
elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency (horizontal
and vertical); and



            d.   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan
for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.



      3.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of section
8-348(2).



      4.   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or
approvals that may be required for this type of development.



   (c)   Based on the best available existing data according to
federal, state or other sources, the building commissioner shall compare the
elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.



      1.   Should no elevation information exist for the site, the
developer’s engineer shall calculate the elevation according to section
8-345(5).



      2.   Any development located on land that can be shown to have
been higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate
map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this article.



      3.   The building commissioner shall maintain documentation of
the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that
this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site’s first flood
insurance rate map identification.



      4.   The building commissioner shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local
permits, approvals or waivers that may be required for this type of activity.
The building commissioner shall not issue the development permit unless all
required federal, state, and local permits have been obtained.



   (2)   Preventing Increased Damages:



   (a)   No development in the SFHA where a floodway has not been
determined shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood
heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair
the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or
impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall
be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this article.



   (b)   Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been
determined, the following standards shall apply:



      1.   The developer shall have a licensed professional engineer
state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations, and data
that the project meets the engineering requirements of section 8-347(2)(c)1.
through 8-347(2)(c)9. for the entire floodplain as calculated under the
provisions of section 8-345(5) of this article.



         i.   As an alternative, the developer should have an
engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that
engineering study to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for acceptance as a designated
floodway.



         ii.   Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR and
FEMA, the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the
requirements of section 8-347 for the designated floodway. The floodway shall
be defined according to the definition in section 8-342 (Designated Floodway)
of this article.



      2.   A development permit shall not be issued unless the
applicant first obtains an IDNR/OWR permit or a determination has been made
that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required.



      3.   Permits For Dams:



         i.   Any work involving the construction, modification
or removal of a dam as defined in section 8-342 per 17 Ill. Adm.



            Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall
obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a dam.



         ii.   If the building commissioner finds a dam that does
not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the building commissioner shall immediately
notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.



         iii.   If the building commissioner finds a dam which is
believed to be in unsafe condition, the building commissioner shall
immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and
the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).



   (3)   The following activities may be permitted without a licensed
professional engineer’s review or calculation of base flood elevation and
designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements
of this article.



   (a)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 2;



   (b)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 3;



   (c)   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 4;



   (d)   Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit No. 5;



   (e)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 6; activities (not involving fill or positive
change in grade) are covered by this permit;



   (f)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7;



   (g)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8;



   (h)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 9;



   (i)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10;



   (j)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 11;



   (k)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings
meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12;



   (l)   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 13;



   (m)   Special Uses of Public Waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 14; and



   (n)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.



   (4)   The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.



   (5)   Compensatory Storage:



   (a)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use,
the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be
compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation.



   (b)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and
one-half (1.5) times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.



   (c)   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall
be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.



   (d)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations
shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.



(Ord. 2000-58. § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-349  Permitting Requirements Applicable To All  Floodplain Areas:



   In addition to the requirements found in sections 8-346, 8-347 and
8-348 for development in flood fringes, designated floodways, and SFHA or
floodplains where no floodways have been identified, the following
requirements shall be met.



   (1)   Public Health Standards:



   (a)   No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers,
flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below
the flood protection elevation (FPE) unless such materials  are stored in a
flood-proofed and  anchored storage tank and certified by a professional
engineer or flood-proofed building constructed according to the requirements
of section 8-349(3) of this article.



   (b)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and
electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.



   (c)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall
be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.



   (d)   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary
sewer lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE are watertight.



   (e)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed
so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.



   (2)   Carrying Capacity And Notification:



   (a)   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or
stream maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse shall be maintained.



   (b)   In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse.



   (3)   Protecting Buildings:



   (a)   All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known
as a SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. This building protection criteria applies to the following
situations:



      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration
or addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($ 1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.



      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made
to an existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty
percent (20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%).
Alteration shall be figured cumulatively during a ten (10) year period. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.



      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These
repairs shall be figured cumulatively during a ten (10) year period. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.



      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site (the building protection requirements
do not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage).



      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year; and



      6.   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in
section 8-342. This building protection requirement may be met by using the
methods set out by the flood protection standards of this section.



   (b)   A residential or non-residential building, when allowed, may
be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:



      1.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or
above the flood protection elevation; and



      2.   Fill Requirements:



         i.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than
six (6) inches deep before compaction and should extend at least ten (10)
feet beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below the flood
protection elevation; and



         ii.   The top of the fill shall be above the flood
protection elevation. However, the ten (10) foot minimum may be waived if a
structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building
from damages due to hydrostatic pressures; and



         iii.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and
scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or other structural
measure; and



         iv.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not
incorporate debris or refuse materials; and



         v.   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or
surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties, and when necessary,
stormwater management techniques such as swales or basins shall be
incorporated.



   (c)   A  residential  or  non-residential  building  may  be 
elevated in accordance with the following:



      1.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl
space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to
flood waters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood. Designs must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or architect or the permanent openings, one
(1) on each wall, shall be no more than one (1) foot above existing grade,
and consist of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total
net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every one (1) square foot
of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation; and



      2.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored
and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to
minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice
and floating debris; and



      3.   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage; and



         i.   The lowest floor (including basement) and all
electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection
elevation; and



         ii.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone
lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be
located below the flood protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;
and



      4.   The areas below the flood protection elevation may only
be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space;
and



      5.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to
comply with these requirements may be certified by licensed professional
engineer or architect.



      6.   Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed
on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to
or above the flood protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance
with the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act
issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 870. In addition, all manufactured
homes shall meet the following elevation requirements:



         i.   In the case of manufactured homes placed or
substantially improved (1) outside of a manufactured home park or
subdivision, (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (3) in an
expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (4) in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home
has incurred substantial damage from a flood, the top of the lowest floor
shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation.



         ii.   In the case of manufactured homes placed or
substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision,
the manufactured home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest
floor is above the base flood elevation or the chassis is at least thirty-six
(36) inches in height above grade and supported by reinforced piers or other
foundations of equivalent strength, whichever is less.



      7.   Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be
required to meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of Subsection
8-349(3)(c)6. above unless:



         i.   They are on site for fewer than one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days; and



         ii.   They are fully licensed, ready for highway use,
and used only for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as
a permanent dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it
is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached
additions.



   (d)   Only a non-residential building may be structurally dry
flood-proofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that:



      1.   A licensed professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the building has been structurally dry flood-proofed below the
flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities
are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or
100-year frequency flood.



      2.   The building design shall take into account flood
velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the
effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice.



      3.   Flood-proofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms,
floodwalls and similar works are not considered flood-proofing for the
purpose of this subsection).



   (e)   A building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below
the flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:



      1.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
and



      2.   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation
shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each
wall having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch per one (1)
square foot of enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one (1) foot
above grade; and



      3.   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood
protection elevation must not be more than two (2) feet below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade; and



      4.   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the
interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed
four (4) feet at any point; and



      5.   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event; and



      6.   Portions of the building below the flood protection
elevation must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and



      7.   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated
above the flood protection elevation.



   (f)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical
facilities shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain.
Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the
floodplain if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities
constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated or structurally dry flood proofed to the 500-year flood frequency
elevation or three feet above the level of the 100-year flood frequency
elevation whichever is greater. Flood-proofing and sealing measures must be
taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released
into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base
flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities.



   (g)   Tool sheds, detached garages, and other minor accessory
structures on an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with
the lowest floor below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the
following:



      1.   The building is not used for human habitation; and



      2.   All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures
located in a designated floodway shall be constructed and placed on a
building site so as not to block the flow of flood waters and shall also meet
the appropriate use criteria of section 8-347. In addition, all other
requirements of section 8-346, 8-347, and 8-348 must be met; and



      3.   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation; and



      4.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or flood-proofed to the flood protection
elevation; and



      5.   The building shall be valued at less than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) and be less than five hundred (500) square feet in floor
size; and



      6.   The building shall be used only for the storage of
vehicles or tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or
similar uses and cannot be modified later into another use; and



      7.   The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of
section 8-349(3)(c)1.



      8.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint,
insecticides, fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection
elevation; and



      9.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the
owner advised of the flood insurance implications.



   (h)   Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall
also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in section
8-347. Nonconforming structures located in a designated floodway may remain
in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered in
accordance with section 8-347(2). A nonconforming structure damaged by flood,
fire, wind or other natural or man-made disaster may be restored unless the
damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged,
in which case it shall conform to this article.



(Ord. 2000- 58, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-350  Other Development Requirements:



   The village of Justice board of trustees shall take into account flood
hazards, to the extent that they are known in all official actions related to
land management, use and development.



   (1)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation
agreements, and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be
reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with
sections 8-346, 8-347, 8-348 and 8-349 of this article and the need to
minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks
and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a
licensed professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in
the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS
205/2).



   (2)   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks,
travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to
manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations.



      (a)   Where this information is not available from an existing
adopted study, the applicant’s engineer shall be responsible for
calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per section
8-345(5) and the floodway delineation per the definition in section 8-342
(Designated Floodway).



   (3)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be
located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural
streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included
within parks or other public grounds.



   (4)   The village of Justice board of trustees shall not approve any
planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the
corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in accordance with the
provisions of this article.



   (5)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed
so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.



(Ord. 2000-58, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-351  Variances:



   (1)   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
designated floodway as defined in section 8-342 (Dams).



      (a)   Whenever the standards of this article place undue
hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the
village of Justice zoning board of appeals for a variance.



      (b)   The village of Justice zoning board of appeals shall
review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its
recommendation to the village board of trustees. The village may attach such
conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the
flood protection intent of this article.



   (2)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates
that all of the following conditions are met:



      (a)   The development activity cannot be located outside the
SFHA; and



      (b)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance
were not granted; and



      (c)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary; and



      (d)   There will be no additional threat to public health,
safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or
creation of a nuisance; and



      (e)   There will be no additional public expense for flood
protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief
operations, policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities,
or other public facilities; and



      (f)   The provisions of sections 8-346(2) and 8-348(2) of this
article shall still be met; and



      (g)   The activity is not in a designated floodway; and



      (h)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not
establish a pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and



      (i)   The granting of the variance will not alter the
essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses; and



      (j)   All other required state and federal permits or waivers
have been obtained.



   (3)   The Building Commissioner shall notify an applicant in writing
that a variance from the requirements of section 8-349 that would lessen the
degree of protection to a building will:



         a.   Result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per one
hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and



         b.   Increase the risks to life and property; and



         c.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge
of these risks and that the applicant will acknowledge in writing the
assumption of the risk and liability.



   (4)   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a
historic site or historic structure as defined in 8-342 (Historic
Structures), may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections 8-351(2) and 8-351(3), subject to the conditions
that:



         a.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure; and



         b.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the
structure being removed as a certified historic structure.



(Ord. 2000-58, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-352  Disclaimer of Liability:



   (1)   The degree of flood protection required by this article is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available
information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.



   (2)   Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes.



   (3)   This article does not imply that development, either inside or
outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.



   (4)   This article does not create liability on the part of the
village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results
from reliance on this article or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.



(Ord. 2000-58, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-353  Penalty:



   (1)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days’ notice to correct
the violation:



      (a)   The village may make application to the circuit court
for an injunction requiring conformance with this article or make such other
order as the court.



      (b)   Any person who violates this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than one hundred ($100.00) or more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.



      (c)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



      (d)   The village shall record a notice of violation on the
title to the property.



   (2)   The building commissioner shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and,
therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.



      (a)   The building commissioner is authorized to issue an
order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop-work
order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and
shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring
the stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the
permit.



      (b)   No site development permit shall be permanently
suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the village of Justice board
of trustees. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee
and shall state: (1) the grounds for compliant or reasons for suspension or
revocation; and (2) the time and place of the hearing. At such hearing, the
permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on his or her
behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the village of Justice board of
trustees shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.



   (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 2000-58, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-354  Flood Elevation Determination:



   (1)   Flood Elevation Determination Application: Each applicant
requesting a flood elevation determination shall file a written application
with the building department stating:



      (a)   The full legal name, address, and home and work
telephone numbers of each and every legal and beneficial owner of the
property.



      (b)   The common postal address of the property.



      (c)   All property identification numbers associated with the
property.



   (2)   All application fees as enumerated in section 13-1 shall be
due and payable upon application.



   (3)   The completed application will be forwarded to the village
engineer of record, for processing.



   (4)   Upon completion by the village engineer, the flood elevation
determination shall be returned to the building department for delivery to
the applicant.



(Ord. 2007-24, § 2, 10-9-2007; Ord. 2007-28, § 2, 11-12-2007; Ord. 2008-28,
§§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-355  Abrogation And Greater Restrictions:



   (1)   This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.



   (2)   Where this article and other ordinance, easements, covenants,
or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.



   (3)   This article is intended to repeal the original ordinance or
resolution which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program
regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the village
passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program.



(Ord. 2000-58, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-356  Separability:



   If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this article shall be
held invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any other provision of
this article. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed insofar as they conflict
herewith.



(Ord. 2000-58, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-357  Effective Date:



   This article shall be immediately in full force and effect after
passage, approval, and publication as required by law. This article is
authorized to be published in pamphlet form.



(Ord. 2000-58, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. 2008-28, §§ 2, 3, 8-11-2008; Ord.
2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-358–8-399.  Reserved:



ARTICLE X.  DISCRIMINATION



Sec. 8-400  Definitions:



   Unless otherwise specified, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them for the purposes of this article:



   Age shall mean the chronological age of not less than forty (40) years
except as pertaining to any practice concerning training or apprenticeship
programs.



   Covered Accessible Multi-Family Dwellings shall mean: 1) buildings
consisting of four (4) or more units, that were first occupied after March
13, 1991, if such buildings have one or more elevators; or, 2) ground floor
units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more units, that were
first occupied after March 13, 1991.



   Credit Transaction shall mean the grant, denial, extension or
termination of credit to an individual.



   Elderly/Older Person shall mean a person fifty-five (55) years of age
or older.



   Employee shall mean any individual whether paid or unpaid, engaged in
employment for an employer, or an applicant for employment.



   Employer shall mean any person employing one (1) or more employees, or
seeking to employ one (1) or more employees: 1) if the person has its
principal place of business within the village of Justice; or 2) does
business within the village of Justice. Employer does not mean: 1) the
government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the
government of the United States; 2) an Indian tribe or a corporation wholly
owned by an Indian tribe; 3) the State of Illinois or an agency or department
thereof; or, 4) a unit of local government in the County of Cook.



   Employment shall mean the performance of services for an employer for
remuneration, as a volunteer, or as a participant in training or
apprenticeship program.



   Employment Agency shall mean a person that undertakes the procurement
of employees or employment opportunities for potential employees, through
interviews, referrals, advertising, or any combination thereof.



   Familial Status shall mean:  one (1) or more individuals (who have not
attained the age of eighteen (18) years) being domiciled with 1) a parent or
person having legal custody of such individual or individuals, or the
designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written
permission of such parent or other person; 2) any person who is pregnant; or
3) any person who is in the process of securing legal custody of any
individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years.



   Gender Identity shall mean the actual or perceived appearance,
expression, identity, or behavior of a person as being male or female,
whether or not that appearance, expression, identity, or behavior is
different from that traditionally associated with the person’s designated
sex at birth.



   Handicap shall mean: 1) a physical or mental impairment that
substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of an
individual; 2) a record of such an impairment; or, 3) being regarded as
having such impairment. Excluded from this definition is an impairment
relating to the illegal use, addiction, possession or distribution of
controlled substances as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances
Act (21 U.S.C. § 802).



   Housing Accommodation shall mean any improved or unimproved real
property, or part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended,
arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of one
(1) or more individuals.



   Housing For Older Persons shall mean housing: 1) provided under any
government program designed and operated to assist elderly persons; 2)
intended for, and solely occupied by persons sixty-two (62) years of age or
older; or 3) intended or operated for occupancy by at least one (1) person
fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit.



   Labor Organization shall mean any organization, labor union, or craft
union, or any voluntary unincorporated association designed to further the
cause of union labor, which is constituted for the purpose in whole or in
part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with an employer concerning
grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or apprenticeships or
applications for apprenticeships, or of other mutual aid or protection in
connection with employment, including apprenticeships or application for
apprenticeships.



   Marital Status shall mean the legal status of being married, single,
separated, divorced or widowed.



   Military Discharge Status shall mean a person’s status as having been
discharged from the armed forces of the United States of America, their
reserve components or any national guard or naval militia, other than by a
dishonorable discharge.



   National Origin shall mean the place in which a person or one (1) of
his or her ancestors was born.



   Operator shall mean any owner, lessee, proprietor, manager,
superintendent, agent or occupant of a place of public accommodation, or an
employee of any such person or persons.



   Parental Status shall mean the status of living with one (1) or more
dependent minors or disabled children.



   Person shall mean one (1) or more individuals, corporations,
partnerships, associations or organizations, labor organizations, labor
unions, joint apprenticeship committees, or union labor associations,
corporations, receivers, mutual companies, joint-stock companies,
unincorporated organizations, fiduciaries, the State of Illinois and its
instrumentalities, political subdivisions, units of local government, legal
representatives, trusts, trustees in bankruptcy or receivers, state
governments other than Illinois, or commercial operations or entities
controlled by governments other than those of Illinois or of the United
States.



   Public Accommodation shall mean any person, place, business
establishment, or agency that sells, leases, provides, or offers any product,
facility, or service to the general public, regardless of ownership or
operation by a public body or agency for or without regard to profit, or for
a fee or not for a fee. Additionally, Public accommodation means an
institution, club, association, or other place of accommodation, whether or
not open to the general public, that provides regular meal service on behalf
of nonmembers for the furtherance of trade or business. Public accommodation
further means any products, facilities, or services of a non-public
accommodation that are made available to the general public or to the
customers or patrons of another establishment that is a public accommodation.



   Public Official shall mean any officer or employee of the state or any
agency thereof, including state political subdivisions, municipal
corporations, park districts, forest preserve districts, educational
institutions and schools.



   Real Estate Broker Or Salesman shall mean a person, whether licensed or
not, who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists,
sells, purchases, exchanges, rents, or leases real property, or who
negotiates or attempts to negotiate any of these activities, or who holds
himself or herself out as engaged in these.



   Real Estate Transaction shall mean the sale, exchange, rental or lease
of real property.



   Real Property shall mean buildings, structures, real estate, lands,
tenements, leaseholds, interest in real estate cooperatives, condominiums,
and hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein.



   Religion shall mean any belief protected by the Free Exercise Clause of
the lst Amendment of the Constitution of the Unites States, including all
aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as beliefs or the
actual identification with, or perceived identification with, a religion.



   Sex shall mean the status of being male or female.



   Sexual Orientation shall mean the status or expression, whether actual
or perceived, of heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality.



   Source of Income shall mean the lawful manner by which an individual
supports themselves and his or her dependents.



   Unlawful Discrimination shall mean discrimination against a person
because of the actual or perceived status, practice, or expression of that
person’s race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin,
ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, military
discharge status, source of income, gender identity, or housing status, or
the actual or perceived association with such a person.



(Ord. 94-5, § 1, 4-20-1994; Ord. 96-42, § 1, 12-9-1996; Ord. 2008-04, § 2,
2-11-2008; Ord. 2012-20, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-401  Real Estate Transactions:



   (a)   For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases
shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:



   Person shall mean any person as defined in section 8-400 that is also
an owner, lessor, sublessor, assignor, managing agent, or other individual,
firm, or corporation having the right to sell, rent, lease, or sublease any
housing unit within the village of Justice, or any agent, real estate broker,
salesman, or other individual working on behalf of any such individual, firm,
or corporation.



   Real Estate Transaction shall mean the sale, exchange, rental,
occupancy, lease, sublease, or lease renewal of real property for residential
purposes in the village of Justice, or the provision of services or utilities
in connection with such sale, exchange, rental, occupancy, lease, sublease or
lease renewal. Real estate transaction also means, with respect to activities
conducted or property located within the village of Justice, the brokering or
appraising of residential real property and the making, purchasing, or
guaranteeing of loans or mortgages, or providing any other financial
assistance either for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling, secured by residential real property.



   (b)   It is a violation for any person engaging in a real estate
transaction because of unlawful discrimination, or because of familial
status, to:



      (1)   Refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with a
person or to discriminate in making available such transaction;



      (2)   Alter terms, conditions or privileges of a real estate
transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection
therewith;



      (3)   Refuse to receive or to fail to transmit a bona fide
offer to engage in a real estate transaction from a person;



      (4)   Refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a
person;



      (5)   Represent to a person that real property is not
available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease when in fact it is so
available, or to fail to bring a property listing to his or her attention, or
to refuse to permit him or her to inspect real property;



      (6)   Print, circulate, post, mail, publish or cause to be
published a written or oral statement, advertisement or sign, or to use a
form of application for a real estate transaction, or to make a record or
inquiry in connection with a prospective real estate transaction, which
expresses any limitation founded upon, or indicates, directly or indirectly,
an intent to engage in unlawful discrimination;



      (7)   Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing or real
property with knowledge that unlawful discrimination in a real estate
transaction is intended.



(Ord. 94-5, § 1, 4-20-94; Ord. 2012-20, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1,
5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-402  Reserved:



Sec. 8-403  Handicap:



   It is a violation to deny or refuse to sell or rent, or to otherwise
make available, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of:



   (a)    A handicap of a buyer or renter, a handicap of a person
residing or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or
made available, or a handicap of any person associated with the buyer or
renter.



   (b)   To refuse to permit, at the expense of a handicapped person,
reasonable modifications to the premises occupied, or to be occupied, by such
person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification
on the lessee agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the
condition that existed before modifications, reasonable wear and tear
excepted. The landlord may not  increase any customarily required security
deposit on the basis of a person’s handicap.



      However, where it is necessary in order to ensure with reasonable
certainty that funds will be available to pay for the restorations at the end
of the tenancy, the landlord may negotiate as part of such a restoration
agreement, a provision requiring that the tenant pay into an interest bearing
escrow account, over a reasonable period, a reasonable amount of money not to
exceed the cost of the restorations. The interest in any such account shall
accrue to the benefit of the tenant. A landlord may condition permission for
a modification on the lessee providing a reasonable description of the
proposed modifications as well as reasonable assurances that the work will be
done in a workmanlike manner and that any required building permits will be
obtained.



   (c)   To refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules,
policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary
to afford such person of equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.



   (d)   To fail to design and construct subject multi-family dwellings
in such a manner that the public use and common use portions of such
dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons.
Specifically, all doors shall be designed to allow handicapped persons in
wheelchairs passage into and within all premises within such dwellings.
Additionally, all premises within such dwellings shall feature: 1) an
accessible route into and through the dwelling; 2) utility controls in
accessible locations; 3) reinforcements in bathroom walls for the
installation of grab bars and usable kitchens; and 4) bathrooms such that an
individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.



(Ord. 94-5, § 1, 4-20-94; Ord. 2012-20, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1,
5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-404  Blockbusting:



   It is a violation for any person to:



   (a)   Solicit for sale, lease, list or purchase any residential real
estate, on the grounds of loss of value due to the present or prospective
entry into the vicinity of the property any person or persons of a particular
race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, marital status or
handicap.



   (b)   Distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or
statements designed to induce any owner of residential real estate to sell or
lease his or her property because of any present or prospective changes in
the race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, marital
status or handicap of residents in the vicinity of the property involved.



   (c)   Intentionally create alarm among residents of any community by
transmitting communications in any manner, including a telephone call,
whether or not a conversation thereby ensues, designed to induce any owner of
residential real estate to sell or lease his or her property because of any
present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property involved of
any person of any national origin, ancestry, age, sex, marital status or
handicap.



(Ord. 94-5, § 1, 4-20-94; Ord. 2012-20, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1,
5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-405  Public Accommodations:



   It is a violation for any person on the basis of unlawful
discrimination to:



   (a)   Deny or refuse to another the full and equal enjoyment of the
facilities and services of any public place of accommodation;



   (b)   Directly or indirectly, as the operator of a place of public
accommodation, to publish, circulate, display or mail any written
communication, except a private communication sent in response to a specific
inquiry, through which the operator communicates that the facilities of the
place of public accommodation will be denied to any person, or that any
person is unwelcome, objectionable or unacceptable, because of unlawful
discrimination;



   (c)   Deny or refuse to another, as a public official, the full and
equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantage, facilities or privileges of
the official’s office or services or of any property under the official’s
care because of unlawful discrimination.



(Ord. 94-5, § 1, 4-20-94; Ord. 2012-20, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1,
5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-406  Exemptions Concerning Public Accommodations:



   It is a violation for any person on the basis of unlawful
discrimination to:



   (a)   Deny or refuse to another the full and equal enjoyment of the
facilities and services of any public place of accommodation;



   (b)   Directly or indirectly, as the operator of a place of public
accommodation, to publish, circulate, display or mail any written
communication, except a private communication sent in response to a specific
inquiry, through which the operator communicates that the facilities of the
place of public accommodation will be denied to any person, or that any
person is unwelcome, objectionable or unacceptable, because of unlawful
discrimination;



   (c)   Deny or refuse to another, as a public official, the full and
equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantage, facilities or privileges of
the official’s office or services or of any property under the official's
care because of unlawful discrimination.



(Ord. 94-5, § 1, 4-20-94; Ord. 2012-20, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1,
5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-407  Definitions - Specific:



   For purposes of sections 8-407 through 8-410, the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:



   Absolute Liability shall mean liability without regards to intent,
knowledge, recklessness, or negligence.



   Agent shall mean any person who is authorized by contract or authority
to act on behalf of another person.



   Broker shall mean as defined in the Real Estate License Act of 1983,
225 ILCS 455/1 et seq.



   Occupant shall mean any person who lives, dwells, or resides at any
real estate.



   Owner shall mean any person having any legal or equitable title to all
or a portion of any real estate. It shall be sufficient for purposes of this
article that a part-owner of real estate take action, and nothing herein
shall require or imply that all owners of any real estate must take action.



   Person shall mean as defined in the Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS
5/1-1 et seq.



   Real Estate shall mean as defined in the Real Estate License Act of
1983, 225 ILCS 455/1 et seq.



   Salesperson shall mean as defined in the Real Estate License Act of
1983, 225 ILCS 455/1 et seq.



   Solicit shall mean any communication by or on behalf of an agent on
behalf of an owner or occupant of real estate:



   (a)   Which is intended to induce the sale, rental, or listing for
sale or rental of real estate, or which is intended to offer or promote
services in connection with the sale, rental, or listing for sale or rental
of real estate (including market analysis); and,



   (b)   Which is distributed by means of in-person contacts, written
or electronic media.



The term solicit shall not refer to a communication carried out by means of
print or electronic media of general circulation, such as newspaper, radio,
television or yellow pages, which is not intended for, or targeted at, any
specific real estate or area of real estate.



(Ord. 94-5, § 1, 4-20-94; Ord. 2012-20, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1,
5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-408  Solicitation Prohibited:



   It shall be unlawful to solicit an owner or occupant of real estate at
any time after that owner or occupant has filed with the village of Justice a
notification that he or she does not wish to be solicited. Any entity  shall
be absolutely liable for any violation of this section.



(Ord. 94-5, § 1, 4-20-94; Ord. 2009-15, § 39, 6-22-2009; Ord. 2012-20, §
1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-409  Broker Responsibility:



   A broker shall be absolutely liable for and responsible for the actions
of any employee or salesperson who is affiliated with, employed by, or has a
contract (written or unwritten) as an independent contractor with the broker.



(Ord. 94-5, § 1, 4-20-1994; Ord. 2012-20, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, §
1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-410  Reserved:



Sec. 8-411  Employment:



   (a)   Coverage: This section shall apply to employment or employment
activities within the village of Justice, or when the act of unlawful
discrimination takes place in the village of Justice.



   (b)   Prohibitions:



      (1)   Employment: No employer shall directly or indirectly
discriminate against any individual in hiring, classification, grading,
recruitment, discharge, discipline, compensation, selection for training and
apprenticeship, or other term, privilege, or condition of employment on the
basis of unlawful discrimination.



      (2)   Employment Agency: No employment agency shall directly
or indirectly discriminate against any individual in hiring, classification,
grading, recruitment, discharge, discipline, compensation, selection for
training and apprenticeship, or other term, privilege, or condition of
employment on the basis of unlawful discrimination.



      (3)   Labor Organizations: No labor organization shall limit,
segregate, or classify its membership, or limit employment opportunities,
selection, and training for apprenticeship in any trade or craft, or
otherwise take, or fail to take, any action which affects adversely any
individual's status as an employee, or as an apprentice, or as an applicant
for apprenticeships, or wages, tenure, hours of employment, or apprenticeship
conditions, on the basis of unlawful discrimination.



   (c)   Exceptions: The prohibitions contained in this section 8-411
shall not apply to any of the following:



      (1)   Hiring or selecting between individuals for bona fide
occupational qualifications;



      (2)   Use of an individual's unfavorable discharge from
military services as a valid employment criterion where: (i) authorized by
federal law or regulation; (ii) where the affected position of employment
involves the exercise of fiduciary responsibilities and the reasons for the
unfavorable discharge relate to his or her fiduciary capacity; or (iii) where
the reasons for the unfavorable discharge specifically relate to criteria
which constitute a bona fide occupational qualification for a particular job.



      (3)   Giving preferential treatment to veterans or their
relatives as required by the laws or regulations of the United States of
America or the State of Illinois;



      (4)   Giving preference in employment by a religious
corporation, association, educational institution, or society to individuals
of a particular religion to help carry out the religious missions of the
religious corporation, association, educational institution, or society.



   (d)   Religious Accommodation:



      (1)   No employer shall refuse to make all reasonable efforts
to accommodate the religious beliefs, observances, and practices of employees
or prospective employees unless the employer demonstrates that he or she is
unable to reasonably accommodate such religious beliefs, observances or
practices without undue hardship. Reasonable efforts to accommodate shall
include, but not be limited to, allowing an employee: 1) to take a day of
paid leave or vacation, where applicable under the employment contract; 2) to
be excused from work without pay and without discipline or other penalty; or
3) to elect to take the day off with pay in order to practice the employee's
religious beliefs and make up the lost work time at a time and date
consistent with the operational needs of the employer's business. Any
employee who elects such deferred work shall be compensated at his or her
regular rate of pay, regardless of the time and date at which the work is
made up.



   (e)   Sexual Harassment:



      (1)   No officer, employee, or agent of an employer,
employment agency, or labor organization (hereinafter referred to
collectively in this section as "employer") shall engage in sexual
harassment. Sexual harassment means, but is not limited to: 1) any unwelcome
sexual advance; 2) any unwelcome requests for sexual favors; 3) unwelcome
verbal comments of a sexual nature; 4)  unwelcome displays or distribution
of sexually-oriented material; or 5) conduct of a sexual nature when: a)
submission to such conduct is an explicit or implicit term or condition of an
individual's employment, b) submission to or rejection of such conduct by an
individual is used as the basis for any employment decision, or c) such
conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an
individual's work performance or crating an intimidating, hostile, or
offensive working environment.



      (2)   An employer is responsible for its acts and those of its
agents and supervisory employees regardless of whether the specific acts
complained of were authorized or even forbidden by the employer, or whether
the employer knew or should have known of their occurrence. An employer is
responsible for acts of sexual harassment between employees in the workplace
where the employer (or it agents or supervisory employees) knew or should
have known of the conduct, unless it can show that the employer took
immediate and appropriate corrective action. An employer may also be
responsible for the acts of non-employees, with respect to sexual harassment
of employees in the workplace, where the employer (or it agents or
supervisory employees) knew or should have known of the conduct and failed to
take immediate and appropriate corrective action.



   (f)   National Origin: No employer may discriminate based on
national origin under the guise of discrimination based on the individual's
foreign education or training. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
conflict with federal or state licensing or certification requirements.



   (g)   Workplace Harassment: Includes, but is not limited to, any
unwelcome verbal, written, or physical conduct that denigrates or shows
hostility or aversion towards a person on the basis of a protected
characteristic that:



      (1)   Has the purpose or effect of creating an intimidating,
hostile, or offensive work environment;



      (2)   Has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an employee's work performance; or



      (3)   Affects an employee's employment opportunities or
compensation.



(Ord. 2012-20, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-412  Credit Transactions:



   No person shall discriminate against any individual in any aspect of a
credit transaction, or in any term or condition of bonding, on the basis of
unlawful discrimination. No person shall engage in sexual harassment in any
aspect of a credit transaction, or in any term or condition of bonding.



(Ord. 2012-20, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-413  Village Facilities, Services And Programs:



   No person shall engage in unlawful discrimination or sexual harassment
in the provision or distribution of any village facilities, service or
programs.



(Ord. 2012-20, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-414  Additional Civil Rights Violations:



   (a)   Retaliation: No person shall retaliate against any person
because that person, in good faith, has opposed that which he or she
reasonably believed to be unlawful discrimination, sexual harassment, or any
other violation of this article, or has made a complaint, testified,
assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under
this article.



   (b)   Aiding And Abetting: No person shall aid, abet, compel, or
coerce a person to commit a violation of this article.



(Ord. 2012-20, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-415  Enforcement:



   (a)   Complaint Process: When an employee believes that he or she
has been subjected to conduct prohibited by this policy, the individual is to
inform the alleged offender that the conduct in question is unwelcome or
offensive.



   Advice And Information – Any individual may seek advice or
information on matters related to this policy without having to lodge a
formal complaint. Employees may contact the human resources coordinator or
trustee liaison for their department.



   Formal Complaints – A formal complaint may be filed by the employee
who has been subjected to the prohibited conduct, by an employee who has
observed prohibited conduct, or by a supervisor or trustee liaison for that
department.



Any person complaining of a violation of this article shall comply with the
following procedures:



      (1)   File a written complaint with the human resources
coordinator or trustee liaison that includes, at a minimum, the name,
address, and telephone number of the person who is alleging that a violation
took place (complainant); the name, address, and telephone number (if
available) of the person your complaint is against (respondent); a short
description of the alleged violation (the event that caused you to believe
your rights were violated); and the date(s) of the alleged violation.



      (2)   The original, completed and executed compliant shall be
referred to the appropriate agency as provided in subsection (b)(l). One copy
of the complaint form shall be retained in the office of the village clerk
and a second copy shall be provided to the complainant with forwarding
information according to subsection (b)(l).



   (b)   Referral:



      (1)   All complaints received by the office of the village
clerk or trustee liaison shall be referred to the appropriate agency
depending upon the type of discrimination covered, and the geographical or
jurisdictional limitations of the particular agency:



         a.   Cook County Commission on Human Rights, 69 W.
Washington Street, Suite 3040, Chicago, IL 60602.



         b.   Illinois Department of Human Rights, 100 W.
Randolph, 10th Floor, Chicago, IL 60601.



         c.   U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, 77 W. Jackson, Suite
2101, Chicago, IL 60604.



(Ord. 2012-20, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-416  Fair Housing Action Plan:



   The village president and the board of trustees shall adopt and update
from time to time, a fair housing action plan to:



   (a)   Improve, strengthen, aggressively enforce, and recommend any
needed updates to this article.



   (b)   Promote this article through written and electronic media.



   (c)   Create partnerships and work with partners through the fair
housing initiative program that offer and provide services to assist
municipalities with training, complaint processes, dissemination of
information, and developing fair housing action plans.



   (d)   Work with realtors to actively market all listings and meet
with individuals who contact the village about purchasing or renting in
Justice.



   (e)   Encourage residents and work with schools, churches, and
community groups to promote a greater understanding and appreciation of the
village’s fair housing action plan and the values of community diversity.



   (f)   Conduct seminars with all village employees concerning fair
housing action plans.



   (g)   Refer all violations of human rights to the Cook County
Commission on Human Rights, the Illinois Department of Human Rights, or the
U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, as appropriate.



   (h)   Ensure that the rights of all citizens are protected from any
type of discrimination practices.



(Ord. 2012-20, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-417–8-420.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XI.  BELOW GRADE/CONFINED SPACE WORK PERMITS



Sec. 8-421  Definitions:



   Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following
definitions are hereby established:



   (1)   Below Grade And/Or Confined Space: Any areas as defined by the
United States government occupational safety and health administration and/or
the United States bureau of mines.



   (2)   Permit Required Below Grade/Confined Space: A permit is
required for any work performed below grade or in a confined space a
described in section 8-423 of this code.



   (3)   Schedule Of Fees: Fees to be reimbursed by any person, firm,
corporation, contractor or other entity requiring emergency or other services
by the village of Justice and mutual aid companies in a below grade or
confined space incident.



(Ord. 96-26, § 1, 9-9-1996; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-422  Responsibility:



   The building commissioner is charged with the administration of the
provisions of this article and shall enforce same in coordination with the
chief of police of the village. Such administration shall include the review
and issuance of any below grade/confined space permits  required hereunder
and the establishment of the schedule



of fees.



(Ord. 96-26, § 2, 9-9-1996; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-423  Permit Required:



   (a)   Any person, firm, corporation, contractor or other entity
working below grade and/or in confined spaces shall secure from the building
department a below grade/confined space permit for such work in accordance
with this section.



   (b)   Any person, firm, corporation, contractor or other entity
which works below grade and/or in a confined space as a regular part of its
business operation shall apply for a below grade/confined space permit at the
same time that it is required to apply for a business license pursuant to
section 8-45 of this code. Such below grade/confined space permit shall be
for the same period as the annual business license.



   (c)   Any person, firm, corporation, contractor or other entity
which desires to work below grade and/or in a confined space within the
village shall, prior to the commencement of such work, secure a below
grade/confined space permit from the building department. Said below
grade/confined space permit shall be effective for one year from the date of
its issuance.



   (d)   The annual fee for a below grade/confined space permit shall
be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).



   (e)   Such permit shall be issued by the building commissioner.



(Ord. 96-26, § 3, 9-9-1996; Ord. 2009-15, § 40, 6-22-2009; Ord. 2016-20, §
1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-424  Reimbursement Of Cost:



   Any person, firm, corporation, contractor or other entity requiring
emergency or other services by the village of Justice or mutual aid companies
shall reimburse the village in accordance with the schedule of fees within
fifteen (15) days after receipt of an invoice for such services from the
village. The fees shall include actual costs and expenses of the village of
Justice and those of any other municipality or agency that renders aid to the
village.



(Ord. 96-26, § 4, 9-9-1996; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-425  Penalty And Late Fee:



   (a)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be held to have been
committed each day any person, firm or corporation continues to violate any
of the provisions hereof.



   (b)   In the event any building or structure erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this article, the building
commissioner, director of the code enforcement or any owner or tenant of real
property or land in question, in addition to other remedies, may institute an
appropriate action or proceeding: 1) to prevent the unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or
use; 2) to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land; 3) to
prevent any illegal action, conduct, business or use in or about the
premises; or 4) to restrain, correct, or abate the violation.



   (c)   Any person, firm or corporation who fails to obtain a permit
when required to do so shall pay a late penalty of five hundred dollars
($500.00) in addition to the one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) permit fee and
any penalties imposed upon connection for failure to obtain said permit.



(Ord. 96-26, § 5, 9-9-1996; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-426–8-500.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XII.  ANNUAL INSPECTION FOR RESIDENTIAL APARTMENT UNITS



Sec. 8-501  Purpose And Declaration Of Policy:



   It is the purpose of this article and the policy of the village, in
order to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of its
citizens, to establish rights and obligations of the landlord and the tenant
in the rental of dwelling units in the village and to encourage the landlord
and the tenant to maintain and improve the quality of rental housing within
the community. This article shall be liberally construed and applied to
promote its purposes and policies.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-502  Scope:



   (a)   Territorial Application: This article applies to, regulates
and determines rights, obligations and remedies under a rental agreement,
wherever made, for a dwelling unit located within the village.



   (b)   Exclusions: The following arrangements are not governed herein:



      (1)   Residence at a public or private medical, geriatric,
educational, religious, nursing or retirement institution;



      (2)   Residence in a residential care home as provided for and
approved by the village;



      (3)   Transient occupancy in a hotel or motel licensed by the
village.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-503  Definitions:



   As used in this article:



   Action: Recoupment, counter claim, set off, suit at law or in equity,
and any other proceeding in which rights are determined, including an action
for possession and/or an action for unpaid rent.



   Code: Any state statute, village ordinance or governmental regulation
concerning fitness for habitation, or the construction, maintenance,
operation, occupancy, use or appearance of any premises or dwelling unit.



   Conditional License: Any license issued to a premises which has a
violation or violations of applicable regulations.



   Dwelling Unit: One (1) or more rooms physically arranged so as to
create an independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by one (1)
family with separate bathroom and facilities for cooking and sleeping.



   Fair Rental Value: The prevailing value of comparable rental units in
the village.



   Inspection Group: That portion of a building or those buildings within
an apartment complex as may be under the same legal and/or beneficial
ownership.



   Landlord: The owner, lessor or sublessor of the dwelling unit or the
building of which it is a part.



   Multi-Family Rental Structure: A building which contains two (2) or
more dwelling units. For the purposes of this article, multi-family includes,
but is not limited to, any structure with two (2) or more units that houses
different families of origin. Townhomes, rental condominiums, and two-flats
that house distinct families, either related or unrelated, fall under this
article, irrespective of whether actual rent is charged that family.



   Notice: Unless otherwise stated, all notices required herein shall be
in writing and shall be served by one (1) party upon the other by registered
or certified mail, return receipt requested, or personally upon the landlord,
lessee or member of his household over the age of twelve (12).



   Owner: One (1) or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested
all or part of the legal title to the premises, or all or part of the
beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the
premises, including a mortgage holder in possession. If owner is unknown,
required notices under this article shall be served to the address listed
with the village for billing for village services.



   Person: An individual or a corporation, government, governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or
association, receiver, mutual company, joint-stock company, unincorporated
organization, fiduciary, or any other legal or commercial entity.



   Premises: A dwelling unit and the structure of which it is a part, and
facilities and appurtenances therein, and grounds, areas and facilities held
out for the use of tenants.



   Rent: All payments to be made to the landlord under the rental
agreement.



   Rental Agreement: All written agreements and valid rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to agreement, embodying the terms and conditions
concerning the use and occupancy of a specified dwelling unit and premises.



   Rental Unit: A dwelling unit in a multi-family rental structure
occupied or available for occupancy by one (1) or more persons, other than
the owner of record, under a rental agreement.



   Tenant: A person entitled under a rental agreement to occupy a rental
unit.



   Term Usage: Whenever herein the term “person”, “landlord” or
“tenant” is used in the masculine or singular form, said term shall also
include and refer to the feminine or plural form.



   Village: The village of Justice.



   Warning Condition: A deviation or variance from the standards of the
property maintenance code which typically does not threaten the health or
safety of the residents in a structure which is otherwise in good repair. It
is recognized that such conditions, in sufficient number, may become a threat
to the welfare of the village. Warning conditions shall not disqualify an
inspection group from participating in the incentive program unless at the
time of an annual or other inspection the inspection group has a total number
of warning conditions that exceeds the number of units in the inspection
group; and all of those warning conditions are corrected within six (6)
months of the inspection. If all of the warning conditions are not corrected
within the six (6) month time period, the inspection group may become subject
to the regular schedule and the unresolved warning conditions may be deemed
violations which may lead to revocation.



   Examples of warning conditions are:



   (1)   Small nonstructural crack in wall or ceiling;



   (2)   Screen with a tear or hole less than one-half inch (1/2");



   (3)   Loose but functioning doorknob;



   (4)   Dripping faucet;



   (5)   Crack less than one-half inch (1/2") in width and hole less
than three inches (3") in diameter in walkway;



   (6)   Nonfunctioning closet door;



   (7)   Loose hinge on cabinet door;



   (8)   Minor peeling paint occurring on less than five percent (5%)
of painted surface;



   (9)   Tree or bush branches scraping against a structure;



   (10)   Other nonsafety related condition that is consistent with the
definition and character of these examples.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2003-17, § 1, 5-27-2003; Ord. 2016-20, §
1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-504  Rental Agreements:



   (a)   Terms And Conditions:



      (1)   The landlord and tenant may include in a rental
agreement terms and conditions not prohibited by this article and other rules
of law, including rent, term of the agreement and other provisions governing
the rights and obligations of the parties.



      (2)   All rental agreements between landlords and tenants must
be in writing, dated and signed by both parties with signed copies provided
to both at the time of signing.



      (3)   Rent is to be payable without demand or notice at the
time and place agreed upon by the parties. Unless otherwise agreed, rent is
payable at the landlord’s place of business at the beginning of any term of
one (1) month or less and otherwise in equal monthly installments at the
beginning of each month. Unless otherwise agreed, rent shall be uniformly
apportionable from day to day.



      (4)   Unless the rental agreement fixes a definite term, the
tenancy shall be week to week in the case of a tenant who pays weekly rent,
and in all other cases month to month.



      (5)   The lease shall inform the tenant that the interior of
the unit may be subject to regular inspection and/or investigation by the
village of complaints of violations for compliance with village codes to
ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the residents and the public.



   (b)   Effect Of Unsigned Or Undelivered Agreement:



      (1)   If the landlord does not sign and deliver a written
rental agreement to the tenant which has been signed and delivered by the
tenant to the landlord, acceptance of rent without reservation by the
landlord gives the rental agreement the same effect as if it had been signed
and delivered by the landlord, for the term set forth in the rental agreement.



      (2)   If the tenant does not sign and deliver a written rental
agreement to the landlord which has been signed and delivered by the landlord
to the tenant, acceptance of possession and payment of rent without
reservation gives the rental agreement the same effect as if it had been
signed and delivered by the tenant.



   (c)   Prohibited Provisions: Except as otherwise provided by this
article, no rental agreement may provide that the tenant or the landlord
agrees to waive or to forego rights or remedies under this article.



   (d)   Attachment Of Article To Rental Agreement: Following the
effective date of this article, a copy thereof, or excerpts thereof in a form
provided to the landlord by the village, shall be attached to each rental
agreement, along with a copy of the village’s occupancy requirements from
the village’s property maintenance code, delivered by or on behalf of a
landlord when any such agreement is presented for signing to any tenant.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-505  Tenant Obligations:



   The tenant shall:



   (1)   Comply with all obligations imposed upon tenants by provisions
of the codes applicable to the rental unit;



   (2)   Keep that part of the premises that the tenant occupies and
uses as safe as the condition of the premises permit so that the condition of
the premises does not endanger the health or safety of persons or property by
reason of faulty construction or improper maintenance or repair, or any other
cause especially liable to fire, or to cause injury or damage by collapsing
or otherwise;



   (3)   Dispose of all ashes, rubbish, garbage and other waste from
the rental unit in a clean and safe manner;



   (4)   Keep all plumbing fixtures in the rental unit or used by the
tenant as clean as its condition permits;



   (5)   Use in a reasonable manner all electrical, plumbing, sanitary,
heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other facilities and appliances,
including elevators, in the premises;



   (6)   Not deliberately or negligently destroy, deface, litter,
damage, impair or remove any part of the premises or knowingly permit any
person to do so;



   (7)   Conduct her or himself and require other persons on the
premises and within the rental unit to conduct themselves in a manner that
will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of the premises by others;



   (8)   Maintain the rental unit in a clean and sanitary condition and
provide for a general cleaning of the rental unit prior to departure. As part
of such cleaning, the tenant will broom sweep the floors, vacuum all the rugs
and carpeting, clean appliances and plumbing fixtures and patch nail holes;



   (9)   Unless otherwise permitted, occupy the rental unit only as a
dwelling unit. Tenant shall obtain written approval of the landlord for use
of the premises as a home occupation business and must comply with provisions
of the code regarding a home occupation business license;



   (10)   Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the landlord, not
apply any part of a security deposit as part of obligated rent payments;



   (11)   Comply with representations made in the rental application.
Any material misrepresentation made in the application shall be cause for
termination of the rental agreement;



   (12)   Not be in possession of any alcoholic beverage in a public
street or other public place unless the alcoholic beverage is in its original
container with the seal unbroken. For the purpose of this subsection, a
public place shall include, but not be limited to, all village streets and
all parking areas and common areas serving multi-family residential
structures containing three (3) or more dwelling units, provided that this
prohibition shall apply to such multi-family common areas only if the owner,
manager, or owner’s association has stated, in writing, that it is the
intention of the ownership of such owner of common area that the prohibition
be applied. The written statement may reserve the right of management to give
one day permits for residents or tenants to hold social gatherings in a
common area;



   (13)   Sublet only in accordance with the terms of the lease. Under
no circumstances shall the tenant sublet the unit or rent any portion of the
unit for any consideration whatsoever so long as the tenant uses the unit as
the tenant’s own residence, domicile or sleeping quarters for more than one
(1) day in any thirty (30) day period.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-506  Landlord Obligations:



   (a)   Disclosure:



   (1)   The landlord or any person authorized to enter into a rental
agreement on his behalf shall disclose to the tenant in writing on or before
the commencement of the tenancy:



      a.   The name, address and telephone number of the person
authorized to manage the premises; and



      b.   The name and address of the owner of the premises or the
person authorized to act on behalf of the owner for the purpose of service of
process and for the purpose for receiving notices and demands.



   (2)   A person who fails to comply with subsection (a)(1) of this
section becomes an agent of each person who is a landlord for:



      a.   Service of process and receiving of notices and demands;
and



      b.   Performing the obligations of the landlord under this
article and under the rental agreement.



   (3)   The information required to be furnished by subsection (a)(1)
of this section shall be kept current. Subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this
section extend to and are enforceable against any successor landlord or
manager.



   (4)   Before a tenant initially enters into or renews a rental
agreement for a rental unit, the landlord or any person authorized to enter
into a rental agreement on his behalf shall disclose to the tenant in writing
any existing code violations which have been cited by the village for the
rental unit.



   (b)   Maintenance Of Premises:



   (1)   The landlord shall maintain the premises in substantial
compliance with applicable codes of the village and shall promptly make any
and all repairs necessary to fulfill this obligation.



   (2)   The landlord and tenant of any rental unit may agree that the
tenant is to perform specified repairs, maintenance tasks, alterations or
remodeling only if:



      a.   The agreement of the parties is entered into in good
faith and not for the purpose of evading the obligations of the landlord or
tenant and is set forth in a separate writing signed by the parties and
supported by adequate consideration; and



      b.   The agreement does not diminish or affect the obligation
of the landlord to other tenants in the premises.



   (c)   Access To Rental Unit: The landlord shall not abuse the right
to access the rental unit or use it to harass the tenant. Except in cases of
emergency, the landlord shall give the tenant a reasonable notice of his or
her intent to enter and may enter only at reasonable times. The landlord may
enter the rental unit in order to conduct an inspection or permit the village
inspectors to inspect the premises, make necessary or agreed repairs,
decorations, alterations or improvements, supply necessary or agreed services
or show the dwelling unit to prospective or actual purchasers, mortgagees,
tenants or contractors. The landlord or his or her agent may display a “for
rent” sign in or on the demised premises within thirty (30) days prior to
termination of the lease.



   (d)   Limitation On Liability:



   (1)   Unless otherwise agreed, a landlord who sells the premises is
relieved of liability under the rental agreement and this article for events
occurring subsequent to notice to the tenant that the sale has occurred.
However, he remains liable to the tenant for any property and money to which
the tenant is entitled under this article and all unpaid rent unless the
tenant receives notice that such property, money and prepaid rent have been
transferred to the buyer, and that the buyer has accepted liability for such
property, money and prepaid rent.



   (2)   Unless otherwise agreed, the manager of the premises is
relieved of liability under the rental agreement and this article for events
occurring after notice to the tenant of the termination of his management.



   (e)   Receipts: Upon request of the tenant, a landlord must provide
a written receipt for any payment made (i.e., rent, security deposits, etc.).
If payment is made by personal check, the canceled check shall be considered
a receipt.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-507  Civil Action By Village To Enforce Compliance:



   Whenever the village building commissioner or his duly authorized
designee has reasonable cause to believe that any landlord or tenant is
engaged in a pattern or practice of violating the provisions of this article,
or the landlord’s operating license has been suspended, the village, in
addition to all other remedies provided herein, may bring a civil action by
filing a complaint, setting forth the facts pertaining to such cause and
shall have a right to one (1) or more of the following: a permanent or
temporary injunction, restraining order, the appointment of a receiver, and
damages as hereinbefore provided. Such relief may be obtained against the
landlord or tenant responsible and shall be as is necessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this article and the full enjoyment of the
rights herein established. Before filing a complaint in court with respect to
a violation of this article, the village shall provide notice of the
violation to the offending tenant, landlord, operating licensee or other
party designated to receive notices and service of process on behalf of such
landlord or licensee requesting compliance.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-508  License To Operate Multi-Family Rental Structure:



   (a)   License To Operate Multi-Family Rental Structure:



   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or offer to
rent, within the village, a multi-family rental structure whether vacant or
not, without first obtaining a license as provided in this article. The
license shall be issued only to an "inspection group" (a building or group of
buildings on the same parcel of land, owned by the same property owner).



   (2)   It is unlawful for a person to enter into a lease, either as
lessor or lessee, for a multi-family rental structure if the premises is
posted as being unlicensed or having a revoked license.



   (3)   It is unlawful for any person to occupy, renew a lease, offer
for rent or permit occupancy of any vacant dwelling unit or any dwelling unit
that becomes vacant in an inspection group that is unlicensed or while a
license is under revocation.



   (4)   These licensing requirements shall not apply to the following
structures:



      a.   Hotels and motels which rent rooms to occupants who
typically make use of the facilities for a period of less than thirty (30)
days.



      b.   Nursing homes, retirement centers and rest homes which
are subject to licensing and inspection by the state or the federal
government.



   (5)   A license for a multi-family structure cannot be transferred
to another multi-family rental structure nor to a succeeding owner.



   (b)   License Application:



   (1)   Each applicant for a license to maintain a multi-family rental
structure shall file a written application with the building department
stating:



      a.   The full legal name, address, and home and work telephone
numbers of each and every legal and beneficial owner.



      b.   The address of the multi-family rental structure.



      c.   The number of dwelling units within the structure.



      d.   In the case of an owner who is not a resident of the
village then either:



         1.   The name, address and phone number of a duly
authorized agent within the village with authority to accept service or
notice of a violation; or



         2.   A statement by the owner that service by regular
mail upon the owner at the address stated in the application will be
considered sufficient service for all purposes.



   (2)   All license fees shall be due and payable on or before June 1
of each year. All licenses shall expire on May 31, next after the date of
issue.



   (3)   Each license application shall be accompanied by a fee as set
forth in section 13-1 of this code, per unit for multi-family rental
structures. If an application for renewal of an existing license is received
after June 1, the fee shall be increased to that rate per unit as specified
in section 13-1 of this code for late fees.



   (4)   Whenever there is a change in the ownership of a multi-family
rental structure or a change in the owner's property agent, the owners shall,
within fifteen (15) days of such change, file a written notice with the
building department indicating such change.



   (5)   Application for license renewal shall be made in the same
manner as a new application except that the application shall state that it
is for renewal.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2003-09, § 1, 4-14-2003; Ord. 2006-02, §
4, 1-9-2006; Ord. 2013-03, § 1, 3-25-2013; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-509  Inspection By Village:



   (a)   Inspection Requirements; License Issuance Or Denial:



   (1)   Each multi-family rental structure, and each unit within the
structure shall be subject to inspection, in accordance with this article,
for compliance with all applicable regulations. A license may be denied if
the property has been inspected and is not in compliance with applicable
regulations. In such a case, the licensee may apply for a conditional license.



   (2)   Initial and subsequent annual licensing inspections shall
include the building exterior, common areas, basement and not less than
twenty percent (20%) of the individual dwelling units ("regular schedule").
All units within the structure shall be inspected every five (5) years unless
inspections are required less frequently pursuant to the incentive provisions
of this article. However, no multi-family structure which is less than ten
(10) years old shall be subject to individual dwelling unit inspections
unless independent cause exists to make such an inspection. The age of the
structure shall be established from the date of the original certificate of
occupancy or if not available, by proof otherwise acceptable to the village.



   (3)   The owner or authorized agent will be given at least thirty
(30) days' notice by regular mail prior to any inspection being conducted.
Upon receipt of the notice of inspection, the owner shall notify the tenant,
on a form provided by the village, of the date and time of the inspection by
either placing the completed form under or on the door of the unit at least
seventy two (72) hours prior to the inspection. The form shall contain a
certification that the owner has served the notice as set forth in this
subsection (a)(3). Each notice shall inform the owner and occupant of their
right to refuse to consent to the inspection and to require the village to
obtain an administrative warrant or other appropriate court order authorizing
such inspection. The building commissioner or his authorized designee shall
establish procedures for attempting to assure reasonable notice in
circumstances (i.e., lack of cooperation by owner) where service and posting
are not necessarily in accordance with this subsection (a)(3).



   (4)   If any owner, property agent, tenant or other person in
control of a multi-family rental residential structure or a dwelling unit
fails or refuses to consent to free access and entry to the property or
dwelling unit for any inspection pursuant to this article, the code official
or designee may, upon approval of the village president, apply to the circuit
court for an administrative warrant or other appropriate court order
authorizing such inspection. Such an application shall not be a waiver of the
village's right to seek other remedies pursuant to this article.



   (5)   When a licensing inspection of a multi-family rental structure
reveals any violation, a time period for compliance shall be set by the code
official in accordance with village property maintenance code. The code
official shall send notice of the violations and the compliance period to the
property owner or the listed property agent by regular U.S. mail at the
address provided on the most recent license application. The notice shall
include the following:



      a.   Identification of the property;



      b.   A statement listing the violations and applicable code's
sections;



      c.   The time period for compliance and a proposed date for
re-inspection;



      d.   An explanation that if all violations have not been
corrected within that compliance time period the license is subject to
revocation and nonrenewal.



   (6)   A re-inspection fee is hereby imposed of forty dollars
($40.00) per unit to be re-inspected, which fee is to be paid prior to the
end of the compliance time period. If violations still exist, the procedures
described in section 8-512 of this article shall take effect, and any
subsequent re-inspection fee per unit re-inspected, shall be paid within the
compliance period set by the code official. In addition, the village will
conduct inspections at other times at the request of the tenant or the owners
of the building at an inspection fee of forty dollars ($40.00).



   (7)   If during a licensing inspection or re-inspection any dwelling
unit is determined to be unfit for



      human occupancy as specified in the village's property
maintenance code, an additional twenty percent (20%) of the dwelling units in
the subject rental residential property shall be inspected. If similar
violations are observed in the additional dwelling units, the owner's entire
rental residential property shall be subject to inspection. All additional
dwelling units inspected shall be subject to an additional inspection fee of
forty dollars ($40.00) per unit.



   (8)   If, during any licensing period the village finds no
violations or only warning conditions, then subsequent inspections shall be
made according to the following schedule:



      An inspection group with twenty (20) or more units shall have
only five percent (5%) of the units inspected for the next license year.



      A change in ownership of an inspection group shall not affect the
incentive schedule status of the inspection group.



   (9)   The village inspector shall, prior to entering an occupied
apartment, give the resident manager or owner a reasonable opportunity to be
present during the inspection. Unless otherwise specified in a court order or
warrant, the inspector will not inspect or search personal property of the
occupant. The inspector, while performing the duties of office, will
otherwise fully consider the privacy and dignity of the occupant and will not
enter or open closets, medicine cabinets or the other closed cabinets or
lockers unless the inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that to do so
would establish evidence of code violations. If a resident desires to be
present for an inspection and it would result in an unusual hardship for that
resident to be present during regular village business hours, the inspector
shall attempt to conduct the inspection at a time reasonably convenient to
the resident.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 98-34, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-1998; Ord. 2013-03,
§ 2, 3-25-2013; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2015)



Sec. 8-510  Notification Of Violations; Correction, Appeal And Reinspection:



   Whenever any violations or warning conditions are found in any
inspection group, the owner or property agent shall be notified of the
finding of these violations or warning conditions. Upon the expiration of the
time limit set by the code official for repairs, and if the property is not
in full compliance, the owner may be subject to enforcement proceedings and
penalties as set forth in village ordinances  and revocation or denial of a
license, as set forth in sections 8-511 and 8-512 of this article.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-511  Notice Of Failure To License:



   Whenever an owner or property agent of a rental property fails to
license the property with the village, the code official shall post a notice
at all entrances to the rental property containing the following statement:



      You are hereby notified that the owner or agent of this rental
structure has failed to license this rental property with the Village of
Justice in violation of the Justice Municipal Code. No new leases may be
entered into and no leases may be renewed until the proper license is secured.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-512  Revocation Or Denial Of License:



   (a)   Whenever, upon reinspection of an inspection group or any
portion of an inspection group, the code official finds that conditions or
practices remain which are in violation of any applicable regulations, the
code official shall serve the owner or operator with a final notice of
violation. The notice shall state that unless all violations cited are
corrected within a reasonable time of not less than five (5) days nor more
than thirty (30) days, the operating license will be revoked. In the case of
a renewal, the notice shall state that the license will be denied.



   (b)   At the end of the time allowed for correction of any violation
cited, the village shall reinspect the multi-family rental structure and if
it is determined that the violations have not been corrected, an order shall
be issued revoking or denying the operating license. The order shall take
effect eight (8) days following mailing to the landlord unless a hearing is
requested as set forth in subsection (c) of this section.



   (c)   Any person whose license to operate a multi-family structure
is subject to revocation or denial shall be entitled to a hearing on that
revocation or denial action by filing with the village president a written
request for a hearing before the village board within eight (8) days
following the mailing of the revocation order. Upon receipt of the request,
the hearing shall be scheduled at a date not more than twenty-one (21)
business days thereafter. Upon completion of the hearing, the village board
may:



      (1)   Confirm the revocation or denial; or



      (2)   Hold the revocation in abeyance and allow additional
compliance time not to exceed thirty (30) days; or



      (3)   Rescind the revocation or issue the license.



      (4)   A conditional license may be issued subject to any
conditions deemed appropriate by the village board. If the village board,
upon written report of the code official finds that the conditions of the
conditional license have not been met, the license may be summarily revoked
and a written notice of the conditional license revocation specifying the
defects shall be sent by regular U.S. mail to the owner or agent.



   (d)   If a timely request for a hearing is not filed then the
revocation or denial order shall be permanent.



   (e)   In the event an operating license is revoked or denied then:



      (1)   No existing rental agreement or lease shall be renewed
and no new rental agreement or lease shall be entered into with respect to
any rental unit located within the inspection group; and



      (2)   The village shall have the right to proceed under
section 8-507 of this article.



   (f)   A license which has been revoked or denied shall not be
reinstated. The property owner may, however, obtain a new license after all
violations have been corrected and by following the procedures for obtaining
a new license as set forth in this article.



   (g)   Whenever a license is revoked or denied, the code official
shall send notice to the property owner or the listed property agent at the
last address provided on the most recent license application. The notice
shall be sent by registered mail, return receipt requested. The code official
shall also notify all tenants of the rental residential structure by posting
a notice on all entrances to the rental residential structure. The notice to
the tenants shall include the following statement:



      You are hereby notified that the license for this structure has
been revoked or denied pursuant to the Justice Municipal Code. No existing
rental agreement or lease shall be renewed and no new rental agreement or
lease shall be entered into with respect to any rental unit located within
this building.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-513  Violations, Notice Of Court Proceeding:



   (a)   The following shall constitute violations of this chapter:



      (1)   Failure of the owner or owners of the rental residential
property to obtain a license for such property.



      (2)   Failure of the owners of the rental property to maintain
the structure and premises in compliance with applicable village regulations.



      (3)   To remove or deface any notice which has been posted
pursuant to this article.



   (b)   Before filing a complaint in court with respect to a violation
of this article, the code official shall deliver or mail a violation notice
to the landlord, operating licensee or other party designated to receive
notices and services for process on behalf of such landlord or licensee
requesting compliance.



   (c)   No person acting as managing agent or collector of rents of
any property involved in any proceeding because of violations or alleged
violations of the provisions of this article shall be liable therefor if such
person shall, within five (5) days after receipt of notice of any alleged
violation, have notified the owner or owners of the property or the employer
of such person of the purported violation or violations of any provision or
provisions of this article and shall have delivered to the village president
a copy of such notice with proof of service thereof on the owner, owners or
employer.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-514. Penalties:



   (a)   In addition to any other remedy or penalty specified for a
violation of any particular provision of this article, any person violating
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. A separate and distinct offense shall be held to have been
committed each day any person continues to violate any provisions hereof.



   (b)   Nothing in this article shall prevent the village from taking
any action available under the code or any other applicable regulation.
Further, nothing in this article shall prevent the village from taking any
emergency action permitted by law when any portion of a multi-family rental
structure is a danger to person or property.



   (c)   Where application is made and consent given for an inspection,
no evidence obtained in such inspection shall be used in the prosecution of
any criminal or ordinance violation against the owner of the property when
the inspection was made.



Where application is made and consent given for an inspection, and no
deficiencies or violations of this code are revealed by the inspection or
reinspection, but only a violation of the zoning code or occupancy
regulations is discovered, the owner may file an appropriate petition for
variance with the village.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-515  Severability:



   If any provision or part thereof of this article is declared by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid and of no further force and effect,
such invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this article
which shall remain in full force and effect.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-516  Effective Date:



   This article shall apply to and govern every lease or renewal thereof
for a “rental unit”, as defined herein, within the village entered into
or renewed after May 1, 1998.



(Ord. 98-10, § 1, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-517–8-520.  Reserved:



ARTICLE XIII.  CONDOMINIUMS AND COMMON INTEREST COMMUNITY ASSOCIATIONS



Sec. 8-521  Condominiums and Common Interest Community Associations 1:



1  The provisions of the Illinois Condominium Property Act, 765 ILCS 605,
and the Illinois Common Interest Community Association Act, 765 ILCS 160
shall take precedence.



(Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-522  Definitions:



   For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:



   Blanket Encumbrance: A trust deed, mortgage, judgment or other lien or
encumbrance including an option or contract to sell or a trust agreement
affecting a condominium including any lien or other encumbrance arising as a
result of the imposition of any tax assessment by a public authority.



   Common Elements: All of the condominium except the condominium property
or common interest property, except the exterior of the individual units
themselves.



   Common Interest Community: means real estate other than a condominium
or cooperative with respect to which any person by virtue of his or her
ownership or a partial interest or a unit therein is obligated to pay for the
maintenance, improvement, insurance premiums or real estate taxes of common
areas described in a declaration which is administered by an association.
“Common interest community” may include, but not be limited to, an
attached or detached townhome, villa, or single-family home. A “common
interest community” does not include a master association. 1



   Condominium Property: means all land, property and space comprising the
parcel, all improvements and structures erected, constructed or contained
therein or thereon, including the building and all easements, rights and
appurtenances belonging thereto, and all fixtures and equipment intended for
the mutual use, benefit or enjoyment of the unit owners, submitted to the
provisions of the Illinois Condominium Property Act. 1



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



1  The provisions of the Illinois Condominium Property Act, 765 ILCS 605,
and the Illinois Common Interest Community Association Act, 765 ILCS 160
shall take precedence.



Sec. 8-523  Reserved:



Sec. 8-524  Discrimination:



   No person shall be denied the right to purchase or lease a unit because
of race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry,
sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, military discharge
status, source of income, gender identity, or housing status, or the actual
or perceived association with such a person.



(Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



State law reference—Illinois Human Rights Act, 775 ILCS 5



Sec. 8-525–8-528.  Reserved:



Sec. 8-529  Administration Of Provisions:



   The board of trustees shall administer this article and shall be
allowed to designate any official to administer this article on its behalf
and may adopt rules and regulations for the effective administration of this
article.



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-530  Compliance Required; Enforcement:



   The rights, obligations and remedies set forth in this article shall be
cumulative and in addition to any other available at law or in equity. The
village or any prospective purchaser, purchaser or owner of a unit may seek
compliance of any provision of this article; provided, however, that only the
village may enforce any provisions of section 8-531 of this code. In any
action brought to enforce provisions of this article except section 8-531 of
this code, the prevailing plaintiff shall be entitled to recover, in addition
to any other remedy available, his reasonable attorney fees.



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-531  Penalty:



   Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
article, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than three hundred dollars
($300.00) for the first offense and not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in any one hundred
eighty (180) day period; provided, however, that all actions seeking the
imposition of fines only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to
the provisions of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure. Repeated offenses in
excess of three (3) within any one hundred eighty (180) day period may also
be punishable as a misdemeanor or by incarceration in the county jail for a
term not to exceed six (6) months under the procedure set forth in section
1-2-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code and under the provisions of the
Illinois Municipal Code and under the provisions of the Illinois Code of
Criminal Procedure of 1963 in a separate proceeding. Each failure to comply
with the provisions of this article with respect to each person shall be
considered  a separate offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be
regarded as committed each day on which such person shall continue or permit
any such violations. In addition to such fines and penalties, violations of
any provision of this article shall be cause for revocation of any license
issued to such violator or offending party by the village. Nothing herein
shall be construed to preclude the revocation of any license for violation of
any other provision of this code.



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-532  Severability:



   If any provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this
article, or application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall, for any
reason, be adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall
not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this article and the
application of such provision to other persons, firms, corporations, public
agencies or circumstances, but shall be confined in its operation to the
provisions, clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part thereof, directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered
and to the person, firm, corporation, public agency, or circumstances
involved. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the board of
trustees that this article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional
or invalid provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof,
not been included.



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-533  Reserved:



Sec. 8-534  Inspections; Code Compliance Certificate1:



   (a)   A developer submitting a property to the provisions of the
Illinois Condominium Property Act or the Common Interest Community
Association Act shall file a notice of intent to convert with the building
commissioner of the village within three (3) business days from the date the
notice is given to the tenants of the property. A code inspection of the
property, including all projected condominium or common interest units and
common elements and facilities, shall be scheduled by agreement between the
developer and the building commissioner when the building commissioner
receives the notice of intent to convert.



   (b)   Any code violations and deficiencies detected during an
inspection of projected condominium or common interest units and common
elements and facilities shall be corrected by the developer at least thirty
(30) days prior to the closing of a sales contract on any condominium or
common interest units. The correction shall be evidenced by a code inspection
report and certificate of code compliance, except as provided in subsection
(c) of this section, issued by the building commissioner.



   (c)   If substantial rehabilitation is being performed as part of a
conversion to condominium or common interest units, the building commissioner
may issue a partial certificate of code compliance to permit the closing of
sales contracts for those condominium or common interest units in which
rehabilitation is complete and all code violations are corrected. Partial
certificates also may be issued for common elements and facilities on which
rehabilitation is complete and all code violations are corrected. However,
prior to the issuance of a certificate of code compliance for the entire
property, a reinspection shall be made on all common elements and facilities
and units for which sales contracts have not been closed. Any recurrence of
code violations in the common elements and facilities covered by a partial
certificate of code compliance shall be corrected by the developer at the
developer’s expense unless control of the building has passed to the board
of managers.



   (d)   Until such time as all units in a condominium or common
interest property are sold, the building commissioner shall conduct annual
building inspections of all common elements and common facilities, and at
least ten percent (10%) of the unsold units. Once all units are sold, the
building commissioner shall conduct annual building inspections on all common
elements and facilities. After the initial purchase of each condominium unit,
said unit(s) must comply with the provisions of section 8-54 of this code.



   (e)   Subsequent to the sale of all condominium or common interest
units, the building commissioner shall conduct an annual inspection of all
the common elements and facilities of a condominium or common interest
community property. The condominium or common interest community building
shall be subject to all applicable village ordinances which may be enforced
as to the developer, unit owners, or any other person to whom the ordinances
are applicable.



   (f)   A developer shall be required to provide a prospective
purchaser with a copy of a code inspection report and a certificate or
partial certificate of code compliance prior to or at the closing of a
condominium or common interest unit sales contract.



   (g)   Inspections will require fees as covered in this code.



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-535  Off Street Parking Regulations:



   Parking spaces shall be provided as follows: There shall be three (3)
designated parking spaces per unit plus one-half (1/2) auxiliary parking
space per unit in addition to any added garage not attached to or not
primarily part of the original building.



   All parking spaces are to be common areas maintained by the association.



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-536  Area:



   Each and every condominium and townhouse shall have an area of at least
two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of lot or tract of land per
unit. The minimum width of each lot or tract of land shall be eighty feet
(80') and a minimum depth of one hundred twenty five feet (125'). The minimum
frontage of each lot or tract of land shall be eighty feet (80').



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-537  Building Regulations:



   Easement requirements shall be ten feet (10') from the rear lot line of
each lot or tract of land; the setback line shall be thirty feet (30') from
the front lot line and not less than ten percent (10%) of the lot width or a
minimum of five feet (5'), whichever is greater, from the side lot lines,
except where an easement exists along the side lot line the setback shall be
not less than ten feet (10') from the side lot line. The street side setback
on a corner lot shall be not less than twenty feet (20'), attached garages
shall be set not less than five feet (5') from the side lot line; detached
garages shall not be set less than five feet (5') from the side lot line and
be not less than ten feet (10') from the rear lot line. The height limit for
public buildings shall be a maximum forty-five feet (45') from grade level;
the height limit for single-family residential buildings (R-1 residence) or
one two-family apartment house or duplex (R-2 residence) shall not exceed
twenty five feet (25') from grade level. The height limit for all other
residential buildings shall be thirty-five feet (35') from grade level. No
building shall contain more than three (3) stories including a basement used
for residential purposes.



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-538  Reserved:



Sec. 8-539  Limit Of One Storage Facility For Vehicles:



   Storage facilities for vehicles are limited to one (1) per lot, in all
residential districts, whether attached to the dwelling unit or freestanding.



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Secs. 8-540–8-580.  Reserved:



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002)



Sec. 8-581  License To Operate Condominium And Common Interest Community
Associations:



   (a)   License To Operate Condominium And Common Interest Community
Associations:



   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or manage
within the village a condominium or common interest community association
without first obtaining a license as provided in this article. The license
shall be issued only to an association, as defined in this article.



   (2)   It is unlawful for a person to enter into a contract, lease,
either as lessor or lessee, for a condominium or common interest community
structure if the association is posted as being unlicensed or having a
revoked license.



   (3)   It is unlawful for any person to occupy, renew a lease, offer
for rent or permit occupancy of any vacant dwelling unit or any dwelling unit
that becomes vacant in an association that is unlicensed or while a license
is under revocation.



   (4)   These licensing requirements shall not apply to the following
structures:



      a.   Hotels and motels that rent rooms to occupants who
typically make use of the facilities for a period of less than thirty (30)
days.



      b.   Nursing homes, retirement centers and rest homes that are
subject to licensing and inspection by the state or the federal government.



   (5)   A license for an association cannot be transferred to another
association nor to a succeeding owner.



   (b)   License Application:



   (1)   Each applicant for a license to maintain an association shall
file a written application with the building department stating:



      a.   The full legal name, address, and home and work telephone
numbers of each governing board member and property management.



      b.   The addresses of the association's company owner.



      c.   The number of dwelling units within the association.



      d.   The name, address and phone number of an agent within the
association with authority to accept service or notice of a violation; or



      e.   A statement by the association that service by regular
mail upon the agent of the association at the address stated in the
application will be considered sufficient service for all purposes.



   (2)   Whenever there is a change in the governing body of the
association, in the association's owner's property agent, the association
shall, within fifteen (15) days of such change, file a written notice with
the code official indicating such change.



   (3)   Application for license renewal shall be made in the same
manner as a new application except that the application shall state that it
is for renewal. 



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-582  Inspection By Village:



   (a)   Inspection Requirements; License Issuance Or Denial:



   (1)   Each association's common elements, area and facilities
(collectively the "common areas") shall be subject to inspection, in
accordance with this code, for compliance with all applicable regulations. A
license may be denied if the property has been inspected and is not in
compliance with applicable regulations. In such a case, the licensee may
apply for a conditional license.



   (2)   Initial and subsequent annual licensing inspections shall
include the building exterior, common areas, and common facilities units
("regular schedule"). However, no structure with units less than ten (10)
years old shall be subject to individual dwelling unit inspections unless
independent cause exists to make such an inspection. The age of the structure
shall be established from the date of the original certificate of occupancy
or if not available, by proof otherwise acceptable to the village.



   (3)   The association or authorized agent will be given at least
thirty (30) days notice by regular mail prior to any inspection being
conducted. Each notice shall inform the owner and occupant of their right to
refuse to consent to the inspection and to require the village to obtain an
administrative search warrant or other appropriate court order authorizing
such inspection. The building commissioner or his authorized designee shall
establish procedures for attempting to assure reasonable notice in
circumstances (i.e., lack of cooperation by owner) where service and posting
are not necessarily in accordance with this subsection (a)(3).



   (4)   If any association fails or refuses to consent to free access
and entry to the property for any inspection pursuant to this article, the
code official or his authorized designee may, upon approval of the village
president, apply to the circuit court for an administrative warrant or other
appropriate court order authorizing such inspection. Such an application
shall not be a waiver of the village's right to seek other remedies pursuant
to this article.



   (5)   When a licensing inspection reveals any violation, a time
period for compliance shall be set by the code official in accordance with
the village property maintenance code. The code official shall send notice of
the violations and the compliance period to the association by regular U.S.
mail at the address provided on the most recent license application. The
notice shall include the following:



      a.   Identification of the property;



      b.   A statement listing the violations and applicable code
sections;



      c.   The time period for compliance and a proposed date for
reinspection;



      d.   An explanation that if all violations have not been
corrected within that compliance time period the license is subject to
revocation and nonrenewal.



   (6)   A reinspection fee is hereby imposed of forty dollars ($40.00)
per unit or common area to be reinspected, which fee is to be paid prior to
the end of the compliance time period. If violations still exist, the
procedures described in section 8-512 of this chapter shall take effect. In
addition, the village will conduct inspections at other times at the request
of the owner or the owners.



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-583  Notification Of Violations; Correction, Appeal And Reinspection:



   Whenever any violations or warning conditions are found in any
association, the association shall be notified of the finding of these
violations or warning conditions. Upon the expiration of the time limit set
by the code official for repairs, and if the property is not in full
compliance, the owner may be subject to enforcement proceedings and penalties
as set forth in village ordinances and revocation or denial of a license, as
set forth in sections 8-511 and 8-512 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-584  Notice Of Failure To License:



   Whenever an association or property agent of a rental property fails to
license the property with the  village, the code official shall post a
notice on all entrances to the property containing the following statement:



      “You are hereby notified that the owner or agent of this
Association has failed to license this property with the Village of Justice
in violation of the Justice Municipal Code. No new contracts or leases may be
entered into and no leases may be renewed until the proper license is
secured.”



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-585  Revocation Or Denial Of License:



   (a)   Whenever, upon reinspection of an association or any portion
of an association, the code official finds that conditions or practices
remain which are in violation of any applicable regulations, the code
official shall serve the association with a final notice of violation. The
notice shall state that unless all violations cited are corrected within a
reasonable time of not less than five (5) days, nor more than thirty (30)
days, the operating license will be revoked. In the case of a renewal, the
notice shall state that the license will be denied.



   (b)   At the end of the time allowed for correction of any violation
cited, the village shall reinspect unit(s) or common areas and if it is
determined that the violations have not been corrected, an order shall be
issued revoking or denying the operating license. The order shall take effect
eight (8) days following mailing to the association or agent unless a hearing
is requested as set forth in subsection (c) of this section.



   (c)   Any person whose license to operate an association is subject
to revocation or denial shall be entitled to a hearing on that revocation or
denial action by filing with the village president a written request for a
hearing before the village board within eight (8) days following the mailing
of the revocation order. Upon receipt of the request, the hearing shall be
scheduled at a date not more than twenty one (21) business days thereafter.
Upon completion of the hearing, the village board may:



      (1)   Confirm the revocation or denial; or



      (2)   Hold the revocation in abeyance and allow additional
compliance time not to exceed thirty (30) days; or



      (3)   Rescind the revocation or issue the license;



      (4)   A conditional license may be issued subject to any
conditions deemed appropriate by the village board. If the village board,
upon written report of the code official finds that the conditions of the
conditional license have not been met, the license may be summarily revoked
and a written notice of the conditional license revocation specifying the
defects shall be sent by regular U.S. mail to the agent.



   (d)   If a timely request for a hearing is not filed, then the
revocation or denial order shall be permanent.



   (e)   In the event an operating license is revoked or denied then:



      (1)   No existing rental agreement or lease shall be renewed
and no new rental agreement, lease, or contract, shall be entered into with
respect to any unit located within the association; and



      (2)   The village shall have the right to proceed under
section 8-507 of this chapter.



   (f)   A license which has been revoked or denied shall not be
reinstated. The association may, however, obtain a new license after all
violations have been corrected and by following the procedures for obtaining
a new license as set forth in this article.



   (g)   Whenever a license is revoked or denied, the code official
shall send notice to the association or agent at the last address provided on
the most recent license application. The notice shall be sent by registered
mail, return receipt requested. The code official shall also notify all
tenants of the rental residential structure by posting a notice on all
entrances to the rental residential structure. The notice to the tenants
shall include the following statement:



      “You are hereby notified that the license for this Association
has been revoked or denied pursuant to the Justice Municipal Code. No
existing rental agreement, lease or contract shall be renewed and no new
rental agreement, lease or contract shall be entered into with respect to any
unit located within this building.”



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-586  Violations, Notice Of Court Proceeding:



   (a)   The following shall constitute violations of this article:



      (1)   Failure of the association to obtain a license for such
property.



      (2)   Failure of the association and the owners of the rental
property to maintain the structure and premises in compliance with applicable
village regulations.



      (3)   To remove or deface any notice which has been posted
pursuant to this article.



   (b)   Before filing a complaint in court with respect to a violation
of this article, the code official or his authorized designee shall deliver
or mail a violation notice to the association, operating licensee or other
party designated to receive notices and services for process on behalf of
such landlord or licensee requesting compliance.



   (c)   No person acting as managing agent or collector of assessment
dues and rents of any property involved in any proceeding because of
violations or alleged violations of the provisions of this article shall be
liable therefor if such person shall, within five (5) days after receipt of
notice of any alleged violation, have notified the owner or owners of the
property or the employer of such person of the purported violation or
violations of any provision or provisions of this article and shall have
delivered to the village president a copy of such notice with proof of
service thereof on the owner, owners or employer.



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-587  Penalties:



   (a)   In addition to any other remedy or penalty specified for a
violation of any particular provision of this article, any person violating
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. A separate and distinct offense shall be held to have been
committed each day any person or association continues to violate any of the
provisions hereof.



   (b)   Nothing in this article shall prevent the village from taking
any action available under the code or any other applicable regulation.
Further, nothing in this article shall prevent the village from taking any
emergency action permitted by law when any portion of a multi-family rental
structure is a danger to person or property.



   (c)   Where application is made and consent given for an inspection,
no evidence obtained in such inspection shall be used in the prosecution of
any criminal or ordinance violation against the owner of the property or
association when the inspection was made.



      Where application is made and consent given for an inspection,
and no deficiencies or violations of the building code or fire prevention
code are revealed by the inspection or reinspection, but only a violation of
the zoning code or occupancy regulations is discovered, the association or
owner may file an appropriate petition for variance with the village.



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-588  Severability:



   If any provision or part thereof of this article is declared by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid and of no further force and effect,
such invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this article,
which shall remain in full force and effect.



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



Sec. 8-589  Effective Date:



   This article shall apply to and govern every rental agreement, lease,
contract or renewal thereof for an association, as defined herein, within the
village entered into or renewed after May 1, 1998.



(Ord. 2002-15, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2016-20, § 1, 5-23-2016)



CHAPTER 9
POLICE DEPARTMENT 1,2,3



   Art. I.   In General, §§ 9-1-9-15



   Art. II.   Regulations, §§ 9-16-9-155



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 9-16-9-24



      Div. 2.   Chief Of Police, §§ 9-25-9-40



      Div. 3.   Commanding Officers, §§ 9-41-9-48



      Div. 4.   Other Officers, Special Units, Etc., §§ 9-49-9-60



      Div. 5.   General Rules Of Conduct, §§ 9-61-9-130



      Div. 6.   Powers And Duties Generally, §§ 9-131-9-146



      Div. 7.   Complaints Against Officers, §§ 9-147-9-155



   Art. III.   Auxiliary Police, §§ 9-156-9-170



   Art. IV.   Property In Custody; Evidence, §§ 9-171-9-180



   Art. V.   Arrest, Trial Procedures, $§ 9-181-9-194



1 See administration, chapter 2 of this code; fire prevention and protection,
chapter 4 of this code; motor vehicles and traffic, chapter 6 of this code;
civil emergencies, § 2-381 et seq. of this code; police protection tax, §
2-401 of this code; emergency services and disaster agency, § 2-496 et seq.
of this code; board of fire and police commissioners, § 2-576 et seq. of
this code; police pension board, § 2-651 et seq. of this code; reports to
police department by hospitals, § 3-481 of this code; police assistance to
health officer, § 5-19 of this code; abandoned vehicles, § 6-41 et seq. of
this code.



2 40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.; 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1 et seq.; 720 ILCS 5/31-8; 725
ILCS 5/107-1 et seq.; 765 ILCS 1030/1 et seq.



3  Prior ordinance history: Ord. 64-4, 3-5-1964; Ord., 4-16-1966; Code 1969,
chapters 8, 8A, and 19, article 1; Ord. 71-12, 6-24-1971; Ord. 71-22,
10-21-1971; Code 1972, §§ 6-1-1, 6-1-2, 6-1-3, 6-1-4, 6-1-5, 6-1-6, 6-1-7,
6-1-8, 6-1-9, 6-1-10, 6-1-11, 6-1-12, 6-1-13, 6-1-14, 6-1-15, 6-1-16, 6-1-17,
6-1-18, 6-1-19, 6-1-20, 6-1-21, 6-1-22, 6-1-23, 6-2-1, 6-2-2, 6-2-3, 6-2-4,
6-2-5, 6-2-6, 6-3-1, 6-3-2, 6-3-3, 6-3-4, 6-3-5, 6-3-6, 6-3-7, 6-3-8, 6-3-9,
6-3-10, 6-3-11, 6-3-12, 6-3-13, 6-3-14, 6-9-1, 6-9-2, 6-9-3, 6-9-4, 6-9-5,
6-10-1, 6-10-2, 6-15-1; Ord. 70-5, 3-26-1970; Ord. 72-18, 7-6-1972; Ord.
74-25, 10-3-1974; Ord. 75-14, 9-4-1975; Ord. 77-40, 9-1-1977; Ord. 77-43,
9-1-1977; Ord. 79-1, 1-18-1979; Ord. 81-4, 1-15-1981; Ord. 81-16, 6-18-1981;
Ord. 83-28, 8-18-1983; Ord. 85-15, 8-26-1985; Ord. 85-18, 9-23-1985; Ord.
85-26, 12-23-1985; Ord. 86-19, § 1, 6-9-1986; Ord. 87-17, 7-27-1987; Ord.
89-8, 5-8-1989; Ord. 89-13, 7-24-1989; Ord. 89-14, 7-24-1989; Ord. 90-4, §
1, 3-12-1990; Ord. 90-5, § 1, 3-12-1990; Ord. 90-8, § 1, 5-14-1990; Ord.
91-10, § 1, 6-24-1991; Ord. 91-11, § 1, 6-24-1991; Ord. 93-21, § 1,
8-9-1993; Ord. 93-22, § 1, 8-9-1993; Ord. 93-23, § 1, 8-9-1993; Ord. 93-24,
§ 1, 8-23-1993; Ord. 93-25, § 1, 8-23-1993; Ord. 93-26, § 1, 8-23-1993;
Ord. 93-27, § 1, 8-23-1993; Ord. 93-46, § 1, 12-13-1993; Ord. 95-13, § 1,
6-26-1995; Ord. 96-21, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. 97-21, §§ 1, 2, 3, 4,
6-9-1997; Ord. 97-27, § 1, 8-11-1997; Ord. 99-29, §§ 1, 2, 8-23-1999; Ord.
2001-23, § 1, 5-29-2001.



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



Sec. 9-1.  Established; General Duties; Definition:



   (a)   There is hereby established a police department for the public
protection of the village. It shall be the duty of each member of such
department to enforce all orders relative to the preserving of the peace,
health, good order and quiet of the village, and to the prosecuting of all
violations of the provisions of this code.



   (b)   As used in this chapter, the word "department" means the
police department of the village.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-2.  Personnel:



   The personnel of the department may consist of one (1) chief of police,
up to two (2) deputy chiefs to be appointed by the chief of police in
accordance with 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4, up to three (3) lieutenants, up to six
(6) sergeants, and up to sixteen (16) patrol officers. The number of
authorized full time officers in each rank shall be set from time to time by
the board of trustees. In addition, part time sworn patrol officers, the
number of which shall be determined by the chief of police, may be employed
to supplement the full time personnel. All full time members of the
department shall be not less than twenty-one (21) years of age except as in
the board of fire and police commissioners’ act otherwise provided; and
applicants shall be subject to all other provisions of the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners’ Act. All part time members of the department shall be
not less than twenty-one (21) years of age and must be currently certified by
the Illinois Law Enforcement Training and Standards Board as a full time law
enforcement officer.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2002-40, § 1, 9-9-2002; Ord. 2003-36,
§ 1, 9-22-2003; Ord. 2010-11, § 2, 7-12-2010)



Sec. 9-3.  Appointments:



   (a)   All full time appointments of the police department, with the
exception of the chief of police and deputy chief, shall be by the board of
fire and police commissioners, and shall continue in effect until terminated
by death, retirement, resignation or removal by the board of fire and police
commissioners in accordance with its rules and regulations. Part time sworn
patrol officers shall be appointed by the board of trustees upon the
recommendation of the chief of police, and may be discharged by the board of
trustees upon the recommendation of the chief of police for any reason, with
or without cause.



   (b)   There is hereby created the office of the chief of the police
department of the village. Said police chief shall be considered an officer
of the village, and shall be appointed by the village president, with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees. The chief of police shall hold
such office for a term of one year, or until his or her successor is
appointed and qualified. This person need not be a resident of the village in
order to be appointed to said office.



   The chief of police shall have the authority to appoint members to the
rank of deputy chief with the consent of the village board. Members appointed
to the rank of deputy chief may be removed at any time, with or without
cause, by the police chief with the consent of the village board. Any deputy
chief so removed shall revert to the rank held immediately before being
appointed as a deputy chief.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2002-40, § 2, 9-9-2002)



Sec. 9-4.  Compensation:



   (a)   The chief of police and other members of the police department
shall receive for their services amounts to be fixed in accordance with
section 2-34 of this code by ordinance, including, but not limited to, the
annual budget appropriations ordinance. Employees covered by collective
bargaining agreements shall receive pay and benefits as set forth in the
agreements approved by the village board. Except as specifically provided
otherwise in this chapter, lieutenants shall receive the same benefits as
provided to sergeants in the sergeants' collective bargaining agreement. In
the event of a conflict between the sergeants' contract and lieutenants'
benefits set forth in this chapter, the lieutenants shall receive the greater
of the benefit provisions.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2002-40, § 3, 9-9-2002; Ord. 2004-10,
§ 1, 4-26-2004)



Sec. 9-5.  Payroll Policies And Procedures:



   (a)   Full time commissioned patrol officers and radio communication
officers who normally work a forty (40) hour week shall be referred to as
full time personnel. Part time sworn officers who normally work less than
forty (40) hours a week shall be referred to as part time sworn personnel.
Part time personnel shall not be considered full time personnel by virtue of
the fact that they may occasionally be called upon to work in excess of forty
(40) hours per week in times of emergency or need for additional police
protection.



   (b)   Full time sworn personnel shall normally work a forty (40)
hour week consisting of eight (8) hours a day, five (5) days per calendar
week. The basic schedule of hours shall be determined by the job performed.



   Part time personnel shall work such shifts, times, and schedules as
determined by the chief of police, or his or her designee.



   (c)   Department full time personnel shall be placed in day off
group keys. Each respective key shall allow for two (2) regular days off per
workweek.



   (d)   The following are on file with the village and are
incorporated in this section by reference as if set out in full:



      (1)   An agreement between the village and new police officer
applicants.



      (2)   Collective bargaining agreements between the village and
the labor organizations representing bargaining units of department members.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2009-15, § 41, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 9-6.  Residency Limits:



   As a condition of employment and continued employment, all members of
the department shall be required to establish their residence within a thirty
(30) minute response area of the police department, within six (6) months of
successfully completing their probationary period.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-7.  Holidays, Furloughs, Sick Days And Miscellaneous Benefits-Full
Time/Part Time Police And Civilian Support Service Personnel:



   (a)   Full Time Police Personnel:



      (1)    Scheduled Paid Holidays:



         New Year's Day



         Lincoln's Birthday



         Good Friday (observed date)



         Memorial Day (observed date)



         Independence Day



         Labor Day (observed date)



         Columbus Day (observed date)



         Thanksgiving Day



         Christmas Day



         Compensation for all scheduled paid holidays shall be made
in the following manner:



         a.    Working: Time and one-half (1 1/2 times hourly
rate of pay not to exceed 8 hours worked per such holiday). Holiday pay shall
be due to all full time police personnel who had worked a full eight (8) hour
scheduled work shift during a scheduled paid holiday. Such holiday pay shall
be made payable upon the fifteenth day of the month directly following that
scheduled paid holiday so worked.



         b.    ADMX (Administrative Excused Day): Time and
one-half (1 1/2 times hourly rate of pay not to exceed 8 hours per such
holiday). Holiday pay shall be due to all full time police personnel who
observed an RDO on the same date as a scheduled paid holiday; provided that
the posted duty schedule had previously indicated that those aforesaid
personnel were actually scheduled to work a complete eight (8) hour shift
during that scheduled paid holiday, and that such RDO observance was directly
caused by the chief of police pursuant to manpower needs of the village
police department. Such holiday pay shall be made payable upon the fifteenth
day of the month directly following that scheduled paid holiday so observed
as an ADMX.



         c.    RDO (Regular Day Off): Straight time (8 hours at
the regular rate of hourly pay). Holiday pay shall be due to all full time
police personnel who had observed their RDO on the same date of a scheduled
paid holiday. Such holiday pay shall be made payable upon the fifteenth day
of the month directly following that scheduled paid holiday so observed as an
RDO.



         d.    TD (Time Due): Straight time (8 hours at the
regular rate of hourly pay). Holiday pay shall be due to all full time police
personnel who had observed an authorized TD absence on the same date of a
scheduled paid holiday. Such holiday pay shall be made payable upon the
fifteenth day of the month directly following that scheduled paid holiday so
observed as a TD absence.



         e.    PD (Personal Day): Straight time (8 hours at the
regular rate of hourly pay). Holiday pay shall be due to all full time
personnel who had observed an authorized PD absence on the same date of a
scheduled paid holiday. Such holiday pay shall be made payable upon the
fifteenth day of the month directly following that scheduled paid holiday so
observed as a PD.



         f.    INJ (Duty Related Medical Absence): Straight time
(8 hours at the regular rate of hourly pay). Hourly pay shall be due to all
full time personnel who had observed an authorized INJ absence on the same
date of a scheduled paid holiday. Such holiday pay shall be made payable upon
the fifteenth day of the month directly following that scheduled paid holiday
so observed as an INJ absence.



         g.    V (Vacation/Furlough Day): Compensatory time off
of eight (8) hours and straight time (4 hours at the regular rate of hourly
pay). Holiday pay shall be due to all full time police personnel who have
applied for and have observed an authorized V absence on the same date or the
date directly prior or after a scheduled paid holiday, provided that such
scheduled paid holiday was not the same as an RDO. Such holiday pay (4
straight time hours) shall be made payable upon the fifteenth day of the
month directly following that scheduled paid holiday so observed as or in
conjunction with a V absence.



            No scheduled paid holiday compensation will be made
to any full time police personnel who observe an SK (sick day) or MEX
(nonduty related medical absence) on the same date as a scheduled paid
holiday; nor shall any such compensation be made to any full time police
personnel who observe an SK (sick day) either during the very last day they
were scheduled to work immediately prior to that scheduled paid holiday or
during the very first day they were scheduled to work immediately after that
scheduled paid holiday.



      (2)    Personal Days (PD): All full time police personnel
shall be granted up to twenty four (24) hours of personal leave to attend to
personal business which cannot be performed during nonduty hours.



      (3)    Funeral Leave; Death Within Immediate Family (FL):



         a.    All full time police personnel shall be granted
three (3) consecutive days off from scheduled duty with full pay for explicit
use whenever there is a death of an immediate family member within his/her
own family. Immediate family shall include the following persons. The full
time police person's:



            1.    Mother.



            2.    Father.



            3.    Sibling.



            4.    Spouse.



            5.    Offspring, including step and adopted
children.



            6.    Grandmother.



            7.    Grandfather.



            8.    Mother-in-law.



            9.    Father-in-law.



         b.    All full time police personnel shall, upon demand
of the chief of police, submit written official documentation (a copy of the
obituary or death certificate) showing and verifying the need for the use of
such funeral leave days.



      (4)    Vacation/Furlough Days (V):



         a.    All full time police personnel shall be eligible
for paid vacation/furlough time off after the completion of one year of
continuous full time employment. Employees start to earn vacation time as of
their date of hire. All full time patrol officers shall be granted
vacation/furlough time off in the following manner:



            1.    Twelve (12) days per year for 1-4 years of
service.



            2.    Eighteen (18) days per year for 5-19 years
of service.



            3.    Eighteen (18) days plus one additional day
per year for years over year fifteen (15), up to a maximum of twenty four
(24) days.



         b.    Full time sworn personnel in rank of sergeant
shall be granted vacation/furlough time off in the following manner:



            1.    Eighteen (18) days per year for 1-4 years'
police service.



            2.    Twenty four (24) days per year for 5-14
years' police service.



            3.    Thirty (30) days per year for 15-19 years'
police service.



         c.    Full time sworn personnel in ranks above sergeant
shall be granted thirty (30) days' vacation/furlough time off each year. The
police chief shall receive thirty two (32) days vacation/furlough time off
each year.



         d.    All full time support services division personnel
shall be granted a vacation allowance in the following manner:



 

   End of year 1 through end of year 4
 
96 hours


   Start of year 5 through end of year 14
 
144 hours


   Start of year 15 and thereafter
 
192 hours



 



         e.    Employees shall attempt to take their vacation
during the twelve (12) month period following accrual. The employee shall be
compensated for the unused vacation time at the end of the twelve (12) month
period at that employee's current rate of pay, not to exceed ten (10) days.
However, subject to approval by the chief based on manpower needs, an
employee may carry over up to ten (10) days and use vacation time for up to
three (3) months following the end of the twelve (12) month period. If unused
during that extended time then that employee shall be compensated for all
unused vacation time.



      (5)    Overtime; Nonexempt Commissioned Officers:



         a.    Work Period Established: The village establishes a
work period of twenty eight (28) consecutive days in which a one hundred
sixty eight (168) hour work period shall be in full force and effect for all
commissioned officers.



         b.    Chief Of Police: The twenty eight (28) consecutive
day work period shall be as is from time to time established by the chief of
police.



         c.    Administrative Changes: The chief of police may
from time to time administratively change any individual commissioned
officer's work period; provided that such change is pursuant to the manpower
needs of the village police department; and, also, provided that such officer
receiving such an administrative work period change has been given, aside
from emergency situations which may arise, forty eight (48) hours' notice
before such change is implemented.



         d.    Hours At Regular Rate: All authorized hours worked
by a commissioned patrol officer during a single twenty eight (28)
consecutive day work period which do not exceed a total of one hundred sixty
eight (168) hours worked shall be compensated at the officer's regular rate
of hourly pay.



         e.    Hours At Time And A Half: All authorized hours
worked by a commissioned officer during a single twenty eight (28)
consecutive day work period which exceed one hundred sixty eight (168) hours
worked shall be compensated at one and one-half (1 1/2) times that officer's
regular rate of hourly pay.



         f.    Overtime Compensation For Sergeants: A sergeant
will receive overtime compensation for all hours worked in excess of one
hundred sixty (160) hours when the sergeant is scheduled to work between one
hundred forty four (144) and one hundred fifty two (152) hours in a twenty
eight (28) day period. A sergeant will receive overtime compensation for all
hours worked in excess of one hundred sixty eight (168) hours when that
sergeant is scheduled to work one hundred sixty (160) hours in a twenty eight
(28) day period.



         g.    Sick Days, Medical Absences: Sick days (SK) and/or
nonduty related medical absence days (MEX) appropriately observed by a
commissioned officer during a twenty eight (28) consecutive day work period
will not be counted as authorized hours worked by that officer for that
twenty eight (28) day period and, therefore, shall not be used in computing
hours worked toward overtime hours for that officer during that twenty eight
(28) day work period.



         h.    Payment Of Compensation: All monetary compensation
of overtime pay shall be made payable upon the fifteenth day of the month
which directly follows the last day of the twenty eight (28) consecutive day
period in which it was earned. If the aforesaid fifteenth day of the month is
less than five (5) workdays from the aforesaid last day of the twenty eight
(28) day work period, then such compensation shall be made payable on the
very next fifteenth day of the very next following month.



         i.    Compensatory Time: Accrual and use of compensatory
time (time due) (TD) absence may be used by commissioned officers in lieu of
monetary compensation of overtime pay. All such time due (TD) absence hours
used shall have the same value as they were earned. (Example: An hour earned
at 1 1/2 times an officer's regular rate of hourly pay shall allow that
officer 1 1/2 hours' absence due to time due (TD)). All officers who desire
to make use of earned time due (TD) shall make proper application for such
use in accordance with the current rules/regulations of the village police
department. All such time due (TD) absence from work shall be observed either
during the twenty eight (28) consecutive day work period in which it was
earned or, if so approved by the chief of police, the very next twenty eight
(28) consecutive day work period following the twenty eight (28) consecutive
day work period in which it (the TD) was earned. Commissioned officers may
accumulate up to a maximum of forty (40) hours of compensatory time.



         j.    Scheduling Time Due: The chief of police, may,
from time to time, pursuant to budgetary and scheduling restraints, schedule
the time due (TD) or other accrued paid time off absence of commissioned
officers in an effort to appropriately manage the level of monetary
compensation for overtime and time off schedules throughout the police
department.



         k.    Court Time: An officer who is required by the
village police department to be in court while off duty, shall be compensated
for his/her regular rate of pay for hours spent on court time with a minimum
of three (3) hours' pay.



            Actual time spent in court will be counted toward the
accumulation of hours for the purpose of determining time and one-half (1
1/2) overtime payments.



         l.    Call Back: A "call back" is defined as an official
assignment of work which does not immediately follow or precede the officer's
regular scheduled working hours. "Call back" does not include scheduled
meetings, range practice, training programs, court appearances or similar
events. All officers on call back status shall be compensated at their
regular rate of pay, with a minimum of two (2) hours' pay. Actual time spent
on call back will be counted toward the accumulation of hours for the purpose
of paying overtime at the rate of time and one-half (1 1/2).



      (6)    Overtime; Civilian Support Service Personnel:



         a.    The village establishes a work period of seven (7)
24-hour periods in which a forty (40) hour work period shall be in full force
and effect for all civilian support service personnel.



         b.    The seven (7) consecutive twenty four (24) hour
work period shall be as is from time to time established by the chief of
police pursuant to the current duty schedule for civilian support service
personnel.



         c.    The chief of police may from time to time
administratively change any civilian support service person's work period;
provided that such change is pursuant to the manpower needs of the village
police department; and, also, provided that such civilian support service
person receiving such a work period change has been given, aside from any
emergency situations which may arise, forty eight (48) hours' notice before
such change is implemented.



         d.    All authorized hours worked by a civilian support
service person which exceed the forty (40) hour work period shall be
compensated at one and one-half (1 1/2) times that civilian support service
person's regular rate of hourly pay.



         e.    All monetary overtime compensation pay shall be
made payable upon the fifteenth day of the month directly following the last
day of the month in which such compensation pay was earned. If the aforesaid
fifteenth day of the month is less than five (5) workdays from the aforesaid
last day of the twenty eight (28) day work period, then such compensation
shall be made payable on the very next fifteenth day of the very next
following month.



         f.    Time due (TD) absence may be used by a civilian
support service person in lieu of monetary compensation pay. All such time
due (TD) absence hours used shall have the same value as they were earned.
(Example: An hour earned 1 1/2 times that civilian support service person's
regular rate of hourly pay shall allow that person 1 1/2 work hours absence
due to time due (TD).) All civilian support service personnel who desire to
make use of earned time due (TD) shall make proper application for such in
accordance to the current rules and regulations of the village police
department. All such time due (TD) absence from work shall be observed either
during the calendar month in which it was earned or, if so approved by the
chief of police, the very next calendar month directly following the calendar
month in which it (the TD) was earned.



         g.    The chief of police may, from time to time
pursuant to budgetary and scheduling restraints, schedule the time due (TD)
or other accrued paid time off absence of civilian support service personnel
in an effort to appropriately manage the level of monetary overtime
compensation and time off schedules throughout the village police department.



      (7)    Sick Days (SK) (Noncumulative):



         a.    Nonprobationary full time sworn officers below
rank of sergeant shall earn sick leave at the rate of four (4) hours for each
complete month of service.



         b.    Full time sworn officers in rank of sergeant and
above:



            Effective January 1, 1995, patrolmen who have
achieved the rank of sergeant shall have their hourly rate increased by using
the following formula:



            Base hourly rate multiplied by forty eight (48)
divided by two thousand eighty (2,080) in lieu of noncumulative sick days,
formerly referred to as SK. Therefore, any sergeant calling in sick will
receive no sick time compensation of any kind for said time off from work.



         c.    Nonprobationary support services division
employees shall earn sick leave at the rate of five (5) hours for each
complete month of service.



         d.    Any authorized sick time granted to any employee
shall be paid at the employee's regular rate of hourly pay.



         e.    No employee shall be granted any authorized sick
time unless he has appropriately applied for authorized sick time use in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the village police department.



         f.    Any employee who observes twenty four (24) or more
consecutive hours of authorized sick time within one occurrence shall have a
doctor's release before returning to any duty. Such release shall be from a
licensed medical doctor stating the cause for authorized sick time so
observed, and, also, stating that such cause no longer exists, thus enabling
that person to return to their respective duties. The aforesaid release shall
be written upon the doctor's letterhead and shall be promptly submitted to
the chief of police or his designee.



         g.    Employees observing any authorized sick time shall
not participate or in any manner engage in any activity or situation other
than those which are directly conducive to the healing process of that
physical illness or injury causing that person to currently observe
authorized sick time. Activities or situations which are directly conducive
to the healing process are those which are either prescribed for that person
by a licensed medical doctor or are those which are generally accepted by the
licensed medical profession as home remedies for that person's current
physical illness or injury.



         h.    No sick time compensation pay will be made to any
employee who does not completely adhere to all laws and/or village police
department rules and regulations which govern authorized sick time.



      (8)    Nonduty Related Medical Absence (MEX) (Noncumulative):



         a.    Forty five (45) 8-hour workdays of nonduty related
medical absence time per twelve (12) month period per each full time police
person shall be granted to those persons who are unable to report for any
authorized duty for more than forty (40) consecutive work hours due to any
serious nonduty related physical illness or injury to that person; provided
that any such serious physical illness or injury has been properly diagnosed
by a licensed medical doctor as that which medically disables that person
thus preventing that person from being able to perform their respective
duties; and, also, provided that such diagnosis is concurred with by the
current village doctor.



         b.    The twelve (12) month period governing this
nonduty related medical absence time shall commence with the first use of
such leave in a twelve (12) month period and terminate twelve (12) months
later for each current full time police person until otherwise specified by
law.



         c.    Any authorized nonduty related medical absence
time granted to any full time police personnel shall be paid in full at the
regular rate of hourly pay of that person who was granted and, therefore,
observing any such authorized nonduty related medical absence.



         d.    No full time police personnel shall be granted any
authorized nonduty related medical absence time prior to being properly
examined by the aforesaid village doctor who must verify the need for such
nonduty related medical absence. Upon such verification, nonduty related
medical absence compensation pay will be appropriately made retroactive to
the date that the examined person initially had applied for such nonduty
related medical absence pay with any and all authorized sick time being
restored to that person if such authorized sick time was properly observed
while awaiting the authorization of the nonduty related medical absence time.



         e.    No full time police personnel shall be granted any
authorized nonduty related medical absence time unless those persons have
appropriately applied for authorized nonduty related medical absence time use
in accordance with all appropriate governing laws and rules and regulations
of the village police department.



         f.    All full time police personnel who observe
authorized nonduty related medical absence time shall have a doctor's release
before returning to any duty; such release shall be obtained and submitted in
the same manner prescribed for a doctor's release regarding full time police
personnel observing twenty four (24) or more consecutive hours of authorized
sick time. Upon obtaining the aforesaid release and before returning to any
duty, that person shall be properly examined by the aforesaid village doctor
who must verify in writing the aforesaid release. Such written verification
along with the aforesaid release shall then be appropriately submitted by
that person to the chief of police or his designee.



         g.    All full time police personnel who are currently
observing any authorized nonduty related medical absence time shall not
participate or in any manner engage in any activity or situation other than
those which are directly conducive to the healing process of that physical
illness or injury causing that person to currently observe nonduty related
medical absence. Activities or situations which are directly conducive to the
aforesaid healing process are those which are either prescribed for that
person by a licensed medical doctor or are those which are generally accepted
by the licensed medical profession as home remedies for that person's current
physical illness or injury.



         h.    All full time police personnel who are currently
observing any authorized nonduty related medical absence time shall always
promptly make themselves available to the village doctor and/or the chief of
police or his designee.



         i.    Full time police personnel observing any
authorized nonduty related medical absence shall apply for any disability
benefits from any insurance policy provided for by the village. Any such
disability insurance benefits shall be paid over to the village as a
condition to receiving nonduty related medical absence compensation from the
village.



         j.    No nonduty related medical absence compensation
pay will be made to any full time police personnel who do not completely
adhere to all laws and/or village police department rules and regulations
which govern authorized nonduty related medical absences.



      (9)    Leaves Of Absence:



         a.    No full time police personnel shall in any manner
work or seek other employment if granted a leave of absence by the village
board of trustees unless such leave of absence is a military leave of absence
granted by the board of fire and police commissioners of and for the village;
whereupon, that person granted such a military leave of absence shall be
allowed to work only for the armed forces of the United States of America.



         b.    If any such leave of absence is granted (not
including the aforesaid military leave), the full time police personnel
taking such leave shall automatically forfeit all salary and benefits
pertaining to a current full time police personnel of the village police
department for the duration of that leave of absence.



         c.    Upon the return of a full time police person from
an authorized leave of absence (not including the aforesaid military leave),
that person shall resume receiving all salary and benefits pertaining to a
current full time police person of the village police department but shall
not receive any seniority credit consideration for that time the person had
observed his leave of absence. The actual date of return from a leave of
absence (not including the aforesaid military leave) shall be the new
seniority and anniversary date of the village police department
employment/service of that returning person.



      (10)    Uniform/Equipment Allowance:



         a.    The village shall pay to each employee a monthly
uniform allowance for the purpose of providing needed police dress and police
related items of uniform/equipment for all full time police personnel. Sworn
personnel shall receive fifty five dollars ($55.00) per month and support
services division personnel shall receive forty dollars ($40.00) per month.
This payment shall not be considered wages and will be included in the second
pay period of each month as reimbursement for uniforms and equipment expenses.



      (11)    Survivor's Benefit: If a full time sworn member dies
during the lawful performance of duty for the village the designated
beneficiary of that employee shall receive the sum of the employee's salary
in effect at the time of the incident causing the death as a survivor's
benefit. Said sum will be reduced by any life insurance policy currently in
effect for village employees, and will be payable in twenty four (24) equal
installments over one year's time on regular village payroll dates. This
benefit is in addition to any other state or federal line of duty death
benefits to which law enforcement officers are entitled.



      (12)    Extension Of Health Insurance: If any full time sworn
member retires at the age of fifty (50) years or older, and has completed at
least twenty (20) years' service on the police force of the village, he/she
shall have fifty percent (50%) of the premium for single HMO medical
insurance coverage paid by the village until the employee receives medicare
coverage or age sixty five (65), whichever comes first. The village agrees
that should any retired member desire dependent coverage, that employee shall
be allowed to purchase said medical insurance coverage and the retired member
shall be responsible to pay the difference between the premium for his/her
single insurance and that premium in effect for dependent coverage. If a
retired member during retirement receives a gross income of thirty thousand
dollars ($30,000.00) over and above any pension benefits, the aforesaid fifty
percent (50%) paid medical insurance coverage by the village shall be
terminated. The village retains the right to require verification of income
of retired members receiving this benefit. Any retired member who fails to
timely and fully respond to the village's income verification request shall
forfeit the right to receive medical insurance coverage contributions from
the village.



         Full time officers in ranks above sergeant who retire after
age fifty (50) with at least twenty (20) years of full time service shall
receive one hundred percent (100%) of single HMO medical insurance coverage
and fifty percent (50%) of HMO dependent coverage pursuant to the village's
selected plan paid for by the village until the employee receives medicare
coverage or reaches age sixty five (65), whichever comes first. Such retired
employee's benefit shall be terminated if he earns more than thirty five
thousand dollars ($35,000.00) of gross income over and above any pension
benefits received by the retired employee, or if the retired employee has
available to him/her medical insurance from any other source. Income
verification shall be the same as for employees in the ranks of sergeant and
below.



   (b)   Part Time Police Officers And Part Time Police Personnel:



      (1)    Salaries: Salaries and hourly rates of pay for part
time employees shall be set by the board of trustees from time to time.



      (2)    Uniform/Equipment Allowance: The monetary equivalent of
two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per each part time police person to be
used in accordance with the same provisions governing the use of the
uniform/equipment allowance granted to full time police personnel.



      (3)    Other Benefits: Part time police personnel shall not be
entitled to:



         a.    Scheduled paid holiday compensation of any form.



         b.    Personal days of any form.



         c.    Vacation/furlough days of any form.



         d.    Sick day (time) compensation of any form.



         e.    Nonduty related medical absence compensation of
any form.



         f.    Paid health/disability/life insurance compensation
of any form (not including workers' compensation pursuant to law).



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2002-40, § 4, 9-9-2002)



Sec. 9-8.  Support Services Division:



   (a)   The village deems it in the best interests of the citizens of
Justice to establish the division of support services of the police
department.



   (b)   All members of the support services division shall be civilian
employees hired by board of trustees upon the recommendation of the chief of
police. Unless otherwise specified within this particular section, all
members of the support services division shall be full time employees of the
village's police department.



   (c)   All members of the support services division shall be
subordinate to the directions of the chief of police or his designee.



   (d)   The support services division may consist of the following
civilian members:



      (1)    Division Sergeant: One full time division sergeant
whose duties shall include, but not be limited to, the supervision of all
division members assigned to telecommunication, community service, animal
control, school crossing, clerical and matron duties. The division sergeant
shall not be subordinate to any other support services division members.



      (2)    Division Corporals: Not more than three (3) full time
division corporals whose duties shall include, but not be limited to, the
supervision of all division members assigned to telecommunication, community
service, animal control, school crossing, clerical and matron duties whenever
the division sergeant is off duty or otherwise unable to provide such
supervision. Aside from the division sergeant and division corporals having
more village employment seniority, a division corporal shall not be
subordinate to any other support services division member.



      (3)    Division Telecommunication Officers: Not more than
three (3) full time division telecommunication officers whose duties shall
include, but not be limited to, telecommunication, communication, community
service, clerical and (for female members) matron duties. Division
telecommunication officers are subordinate to the division sergeant and
corporals.



      (4)    Part Time Civilian Employees: The division members
specifically employed to perform community service, animal warden, school
crossing, clerical and matron duties shall be kept at a number which is from
time to time deemed appropriate by the village president and board of
trustees. All such division members shall be considered as part time civilian
employees of the police department subject to the same hiring practices,
rules and regulations governing all full time division members.



      (5)    Police Matrons:



         a.    Police matrons shall have charge of all female
prisoners and may, with the approval of the commanding officer, assign to
separate cells or dormitories first offenders and those whom they believe are
worthy of separation from persons who are frequent offenders or disturbers.
They shall investigate the case of arrest of all female prisoners.



         b.    Police matrons shall keep a record of the female
prisoners.



         c.    Police matrons shall accompany female prisoners to
and from the police station and the courts, and shall remain with such
prisoners during the trial.



         d.    Police matrons and police officers assigned to
desk duty shall wear their uniform and shall remain at the desk during their
hours of duty. They shall personally attend to all police business to be
transacted at the police desk and shall see that all police business is given
prompt attention. They shall familiarize themselves with the state laws and
village code provisions.



         e.    Police matrons shall make the proper entries in
all books, records and reports required to be kept by the orders, rules and
regulations of the department. Such records and reports shall be neatly and
legibly kept, indexed and promptly filed by the police matrons in such manner
as to make them readily obtainable when necessary.



         f.    The police matrons, at the conclusion of their
hours of duty, shall outline for their replacement the location of crime
during their hours of duty. The police matrons shall enter all complaints
received by them which require the attention of a police officer.



         g.    The police matrons shall at all times have full
knowledge of all arrests made. They shall be responsible for all persons
held, whether booked or not. They shall be responsible for the safekeeping,
care and comfort of prisoners in custody.



         h.    The police matrons shall take charge of and be
responsible for the safekeeping of all property turned over to them by police
officers, as well as property taken from prisoners.



         i.    The police matrons shall have supervision of all
telephone communications. Calls shall be promptly answered and communications
transmitted without delay. When answering telephone calls, the name of the
police matron or police officer shall be stated.



         j.    The police matrons shall receive and record all
complaints and reports submitted to them by police officers. Citizens making
a complaint shall be treated in a courteous and civil manner. Complaints
shall be given to the proper police officers for investigation as quickly as
possible, after the receipt of same, and a record made in the books of the
department provided for that purpose.



         k.    The police matrons shall not permit persons to
solicit business or loiter in or about the police station.



         l.    Absence from duty shall be posted daily on the
police matron's pull sheet, noting the period of time any police officer was
absent from duty.



   (e)   All newly hired support services division members must be able
to display a satisfactory ability to perform all of their duties prior to the
end of their probationary period, which shall be the first twenty four (24)
months of their employment. The inability to so perform is cause for that
division member's immediate dismissal by the chief of police, without further
cause.



   (f)   All support services division members shall be uniformed as
determined by the chief of police. The uniform will be distinct from that of
a police officer of the police department. No weapons will be issued to,
carried or worn by any support services division member.



   (g)   The promotion of support services division members shall be
made by the chief of police by and with the consent of the village president
and board of trustees based upon employee merit and efficiency.



   (h)   The chief of police may suspend a support services division
member for a period not to exceed five (5) days. The suspended support
services division member may request an appeal hearing of that suspension.
That appeal must be filed in writing with the chairperson of the police and
fire committee of the village board of trustees within five (5) calendar days
from the date that suspension was issued by the chief of police.



   (i)   The chief of police cannot suspend in excess of five (5) days,
demote or dismiss any support services division member without first
officially filing written charges to be heard and adjudicated by the
chairperson and members of the police and fire committee of the village board
of trustees.



   (j)   The chairperson and members of the police and fire committee
of the village board of trustees shall conduct all appeal, suspension,
demotion and dismissal hearings for the purpose of sustaining, varying or
vacating the actions taken by the chief of police.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-9.  Police Pension Fund:



   There is hereby established a police pension fund in and for the
members of the department in accordance with the provisions of 40 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 to 5/3-149 of the Illinois pension code, as amended.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Secs. 9-10-9-15.  Reserved:



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



ARTICLE II.  REGULATIONS



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 9-16.  Definitions:



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Commanding Officer: The person in charge of the department when
assigned as such.



   Member: Any police officer or employee of the police department or
member of the department.



   Officer: A member of the police department above the rank of patrolman.



   Police Officers: All persons who are members of the police department,
regardless of rank.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Secs. 9-17-9-24.  Reserved:



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



DIVISION 2. CHIEF OF POLICE



Sec. 9-25.  Appointment:



   The chief of police shall be appointed by the president with the advice
and consent of the village board. He shall, in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the board of fire and police commissioners, and the provisions
of this code, supervise the work of the police department, its officers, and
its members. He shall have charge of the police station, equipment, books,
records and all other property of the department. He shall have the right and
the power to create duty assignments for administrative purposes only, and
not to constitute a separate rank, to assist him in the performance of his
duties.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-26.  Duty To Enforce Laws:



   The chief of police shall enforce all the laws of the state and the
village.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-27.  General Duties Of Chief:



   All members of the department shall be directly under the chief of
police, and shall aid and assist the chief of police in his functions as he
may direct. The chief of police shall be the keeper of the village jail, and
shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein. He shall keep such
records and make such reports as concerning the activities of his department
as may be required by statute or by the village board. The chief shall be
responsible for the performance by the department of all its functions. He
shall conduct investigations of all accidents wherever the village may become
liable. The chief of police shall arrange for and carry out a regular police
school of planned and approved police courses for the police, such program to
be with the approval of the board. The chief of police may, from time to
time, as he deems fit and necessary for the smooth operation of the police
department, and for such duration as he deems appropriate, designate certain
officers to assist him in the command of the police department.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-28.  Juvenile Officer Assignments By Chief:



   The chief of police shall have the right to assign any regular full
time member of the department to the duties of that of juvenile officer, and
another such regular member of the department to the duties of assistant
juvenile officer of the department. This assignment shall not constitute the
creation of an office but shall merely be constituted a duty assignment.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-29.  Chief To Cooperate With Health Officials:



   All orders of the board of health or health officer relating to the
preservation of the health of the village and directed to the police
department shall be executed by the chief of police or by subordinates, if
the chief so directs.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-30.  Rules And Regulations:



   The chief of police may prescribe and establish such rules and
regulations as he may deem necessary; provided, however, that all such rules
and regulations must be in accord with the rules and regulations of the
village and its board of fire and police commissioners, and a copy of such
rules and regulations should be sent to that board at the time of issuance of
same.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-31.  Absence; Disability:



   In case of the absence of the chief of police from the village or his
or her inability to act, then such person as shall be named acting chief of
police shall have and be permitted, in such case, to exercise the powers and
duties of the chief of police as contained in this chapter.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-32.  Discharge Of Probationers:



   Probationary commissioned officers in the department may be discharged
by the chief of police at any time during their probationary period, which
shall be twenty four (24) months from the date of appointment. The chief of
police shall make monthly reports on probationers to the board of fire and
police commissioners.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2008-17, § 1, 4-14-2008)



Sec. 9-33.  Annual Report:



   The chief of police shall file an annual report with the board of fire
and police commissioners, and furnish a copy to the board of trustees, not
later than the second meeting of the board of trustees in the month of May of
each year.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Secs. 9-34-9-40.  Reserved:



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



DIVISION 3. COMMANDING OFFICERS



Sec. 9-41.  Deputy Chief:



   (a)   Creation Of Position: There is hereby created the rank of
deputy chief. Upon receiving the village board’s authorization to appoint a
commissioned officer to the rank of deputy chief, the commission shall
promote an officer to the position. The deputy chief shall assist the chief
in the performance of his or her duties. The deputy chief shall be the senior
commanding officer in the absence of the chief of police.



   (b)   Compensation And Duties:



      (1)   The deputy chief's salary shall be set in accordance
with section 2-34 of this code. This position is exempt from overtime payment.



      (2)    The deputy chief shall be second in command within the
Justice police department, he or she shall be in command of all police
activities while he or she is on duty, subject only to the orders of the
chief of police, and shall have such authority and perform such duties as
prescribed by the chief of police.



      (3)    The deputy chief shall be required to direct, pursuant
to lawful authority, the work of all police department employees, and require
the satisfactory overall work performance of the department subject to the
orders of the chief of police.



      (4)    The deputy chief shall use all best professional
efforts in meeting the problems, training, appraising effectiveness of police
techniques used and interpreting departmental policies, procedures and rules
as laid down by the chief of police.



      (5)    The deputy chief shall, from time to time, receive
special instructions from the chief of police in unusual situations,
whereupon the work subsequent to those instructions will be reviewed through
observation and evaluation of reports made to the chief of police.



      (6)    The deputy chief shall strive to create and maintain
high morale among the members of the police department, and constantly
evaluate the quality of supervision provided by subordinate police department
supervisors.



      (7)    The deputy chief shall maintain friendly relationships
between this police department and other police departments, the press, other
village departments and the public.



      (8)    The deputy chief shall make personal inspections of all
areas of the police facility and municipal jail at irregular intervals as
frequently as may be necessary to keep thoroughly informed of the conditions
thereof and therein. He or she shall be held responsible for the cleanliness
and sanitary conditions of the police station.



      (9)    The deputy chief shall determine if all subordinate
employees are efficiently performing their duties, and shall take suitable
action to correct any violation of departmental orders, or dereliction of
duty that is discovered or observed.



      (10)    The deputy chief shall note all noncompliance with the
laws and ordinances, and all other matters requiring the attention of the
police department. He or she shall be held strictly accountable for the
enforcement of all laws, ordinances, police rules and regulations.



      (11)    The deputy chief shall be held responsible for the
proper keeping of all books and records of the police department. He or she
shall promptly forward all reports to the chief of police when requested to
do so. He or she shall, from time to time, personally inspect such books and
records to familiarize himself or herself with the contents thereof He or she
shall supervise and review the reports of subordinates and return them to the
appropriate officer if there are any mistakes or omissions found.



      (12)    The deputy chief shall maintain a strict and constant
survey of all subordinate police department members serving a probationary
period with a view toward ascertaining their fitness for the respective
positions they occupy, and shall report periodically, in writing, to the
chief of police on the progress of those probationary members.



      (13)    The deputy chief shall remain aware of, and be present
at if necessary, major crimes and/or unusual occurrences and their respective
scenes, and shall assist and instruct the police department members in the
proper methods of handling those assignments. The deputy chief shall cause
all prisoners to be promptly conveyed to the court in which they are to be
tried.



      (14)    The deputy chief shall, when practical, patrol the
village and interview frequently and at regular intervals each subordinate
department member and observe the manner in which each officer performs their
duties and shall give instructions on the proper and most effective methods
of performing such.



      (15)    The deputy chief shall investigate any delinquent
morale, or any laxity in performance of duty, or in the observance of
departmental orders on the part of subordinate department members, and after
determining the facts, shall report, in writing, all findings and the
subsequent action taken or further recommendation for action to the chief of
police.



      (16)    The deputy chief shall obey all general orders, rules
and regulations, policies and procedures and orders of the chief of police.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-42.  Commanders:



(Rep. by Ord. 2002-40, 9-9-2002)



Sec. 9-43.  Lieutenant-Creation And Duties:



   (a)   Police Lieutenant-Patrol Operations:



      (1)    Shall be in command over the department's patrol
division, being subordinate only to the lawful orders of superior department
authority with the police chief being the ultimate authority throughout the
department. Furthermore, shall assume the duties and responsibilities of
deputy chief whenever so ordered by the police chief.



      (2)    Shall regularly provide an effective and efficient
direct line of management over the department's patrol division, and shall
require nothing less than a satisfactory work performance from each
subordinate division member pursuant to all current department policies,
procedures, rules, regulations, directives and lawful orders from superior
department authority.



      (3)    Shall be responsible for the regular planning, posting
and maintenance of the monthly patrol division duty schedule in an effective,
efficient, timely and lawful manner. Furthermore, shall authorize temporary
shift changes and/or time off whenever necessary to properly conduct the
division's business.



      (4)    Shall utilize all best professional efforts toward
identifying the training needs of the patrol division. Furthermore, shall
file a timely written report to the police lieutenant of support operations
citing those needs, and making recommendations towards meeting those needs.



      (5)    Shall perform personal inspections of all work areas
of, and general equipment utilized by the patrol division at regular
intervals in order to identify all deficiencies that are not conducive to a
proper and safe work environment. Furthermore, shall file a timely written
report to the police lieutenant of administrative operations citing those
deficiencies and recommending corrective measures. In any event, the police
lieutenant of patrol operations shall make immediate corrective measures in
order to properly remedy any deficiency that poses an imminent threat of
death or great bodily harm to human life, or to any deficiency that stands to
violate any person's constitutional rights.



      (6)    Shall strive to create and maintain a high level of
esprit de corps throughout the patrol division by regularly performing
personal inspections of, and hosting group and individual meetings with all
subordinate patrol division members. Furthermore, shall provide a timely
response to deficiencies by initiating or recommending to the deputy chief
the initiation of appropriate corrective measures without any unnecessary
delay. The pertinent facts and responsive corrective measures taken or
recommended will be immediately reported in writing to the deputy chief.



      (7)    Shall perform a proper and timely inquiry into any
subordinate's laxity in the performance of patrol division duties, or minor
infraction to the current department policies, procedures, rules,
regulations, directives and orders from superior department authority.
Furthermore, shall provide a timely response by initiating or recommending
the initiation of proper corrective measures. The pertinent facts and
responsive corrective measures taken or recommended will be immediately
reported in writing to the deputy chief.



      (8)    Shall regularly review all current department policies,
procedures, rules, regulations, directives and orders from superior
department authority that are pertinent to the patrol division in order to
maintain a lawful, sound and contemporary path of command direction within
that division. Furthermore, shall immediately report in writing to the deputy
chief any deficiencies or possible deficiencies that may exist thereof, and
shall include any recommended changes.



      (9)    Shall personally conduct integrity audits at regular
intervals of all department forms, documents and reports compiled by
subordinate patrol division members, and return them to the appropriate
patrol division supervisor for further corrective action if and when there
are any mistakes or omissions found therein.



      (10)    Shall remain aware of all trends of illegal activity
and unusual occurrences within the village, and shall appropriately
coordinate all responsive patrol services that will remedy and/or prevent
those activities or occurrences. Furthermore, shall keep the deputy chief
current with all major crime trends and of the responsive patrol service so
ordered.



      (11)    Shall personally patrol the village at irregular
intervals in order to perform integrity audits of the manner in which each
subordinate patrol division member performs their duties. Furthermore, shall
give direction as to the proper and most effective and efficient methods of
performing supervisory or nonsupervisory patrol duties whenever necessary.



      (12)    Shall personally assist the deputy chief in the
conduct of any lawfully ordered internal investigation into any allegation of
serious misconduct filed against any subordinate member of the patrol
division.



      (13)    Shall personally assist the deputy chief toward
maintaining a friendly and cooperative relationship between the patrol
division and the general public by being the first to personally hear citizen
complaints and/or inquiries pertinent to the operations and obligations of
the patrol division. Furthermore, shall provide a timely response by
initiating patrol services or recommending the initiation of other police
services and/or other corrective measures without any unnecessary delay. The
pertinent facts and the responding actions taken or recommended will be
immediately reported in writing to the deputy chief.



      (14)    Shall personally assist the deputy chief in
professionally recruiting, examining and recommending the employment of
persons qualified for the position of part time patrol officer of and for the
department's patrol division.



      (15)    Shall require that sound judgment is routinely used
toward determining as to whether or not the authorization of overtime is
absolutely necessary in order to maintain the good conduct of the patrol
division's business.



      (16)    Shall personally assist the deputy chief in the timely
preparation of the patrol division's segment of the department's annual
budget proposal. Furthermore, shall strive to keep the operating expenditures
of the patrol division within the parameters of the current budget, and shall
require that all such expenditures are necessary toward maintaining adequate
patrol division services.



      (17)    Shall obey all department policies, procedures, rules,
regulations, directives and orders from superior department authority, and
shall appropriately perform any and all other duties as may from time to time
be lawfully ordered by superior department authority.



   (b)   Police Lieutenant-Administrative Operations:



      (1)    Shall be in command over the department's facilities,
logistics, research and development, supplies and equipment and the
department's routine business with criminal or civil hearings, (henceforth,
collectively referred to as administrative operations). Shall be subordinate
only to the lawful orders of superior department authority with the police
chief being the ultimate authority throughout the department. Furthermore,
shall assume the duties and responsibilities of the deputy chief whenever so
ordered by the police chief.



      (2)    Shall regularly provide an effective and efficient
direct line of management over the department's patrol division, and shall
require nothing less than a satisfactory work performance from each
subordinate division member pursuant to all current department policies,
procedures, rules, regulations, directives and lawful orders from superior
department authority.



      (3)    Shall utilize all best efforts toward identifying the
training needs necessary to ensure the correct performance of the
department's administrative operations. Furthermore, shall file a timely
written report to the police lieutenant of support operations citing those
needs, and making recommendations towards meeting those needs.



      (4)    Shall perform a proper and timely inquiry into any
subordinate's laxity in the performance of patrol division duties, or minor
infraction to the current department policies, procedures, rules,
regulations, directives and orders from superior department authority.
Furthermore, shall provide a timely response by initiating or recommending
the initiation of proper corrective measures. The pertinent facts and
responsive corrective measures taken or recommended will be immediately
reported in writing to the deputy chief.



      (5)    Shall personally assist the deputy chief in the conduct
of any lawfully ordered internal investigation into any allegation of serious
misconduct filed against any subordinate member of the department.



      (6)    Shall be responsible for planning all local court key
and MSI assignments within the department, and shall personally act as the
department's liaison and authority during and at the site of all local court
and MSI hearings. Shall ensure that all preparations, briefings and
debriefings for local court and MSI hearings are properly conducted, and
shall require the professional deportment of all department members in
attendance. Furthermore, shall maintain the integrity and safekeeping of all
pertinent department forms, documents, reports and evidence while on route
to, while at and while on route back from the local court or the MSI hearing.



      (7)    Shall be responsible for the timely posting of all
court subpoena information which will be made in writing upon the
department's court calendar. Shall personally make a timely additional
notification to the department member under subpoena by informing them in
writing of such. Furthermore, shall be responsible for ensuring that the
department remains compliant with any subpoena requiring that any forms,
documents, reports or evidence of the department be brought before the court
or its designated officer(s).



      (8)    Shall ensure that the department is kept current with
the procedures of the local court, the county clerk of the local court and
the county sheriff's offices at the local court facilities.



      (9)    Shall regularly search for and remain familiar with the
availability of all grants for which the department may be eligible, and
shall keep the deputy chief and the police chief current about such.
Furthermore, subsequent to an order from the police chief, shall
appropriately compile and submit grant applications on behalf of the
department.



      (10)    Shall personally conduct regular audits of the
department's logistics for the purpose of researching, developing and
recommending to the deputy chief methods of personnel, training or equipment
development, deployment and/or acquisition that will keep the operations of
the department effective, efficient, sound, contemporary and lawful.



      (11)    Shall be responsible for developing and properly
managing the stockpiling, disbursement, filing, archiving, security and
destruction process of all current department forms, documents and reports.
Furthermore, shall ensure that the current inventory of all such forms,
documents and reports is kept compliant with all applicable laws, and shall
immediately report to the deputy chief in writing whenever that compliant
status is or may be deficient.



      (12)    Shall be responsible for properly procuring,
stockpiling and disbursing all office supplies and all other items of police
related equipment that are necessary for the department to function
adequately. Furthermore, shall personally perform random audits into the use
of those supplies and equipment in order to ensure that their use remains
official and correct at all times.



      (13)    Shall be responsible for developing and maintaining a
scheduled plan of preventive maintenance for all department equipment, and
shall ensure that all defective equipment is properly repaired or replaced in
a timely and cost efficient manner.



      (14)    Shall be responsible for compiling and maintaining an
inventory log for all department property and equipment, and for compiling
and maintaining an assignment log that indicates to whom the property or
equipment was issued and where the property or equipment is to be stored when
not in use.



      (15)    Shall personally assist the deputy chief in the timely
preparation of the administrative operations segment of the department's
annual budget proposal. Furthermore, shall strive to keep the operating
expenditures of those operations within the parameters of the current police
budget, and shall require that all such expenditures are necessary toward
maintaining adequate administrative operations.



      (16)    Shall require that sound judgment is routinely used in
making a determination as to whether or not the authorization of overtime is
absolutely necessary in order to maintain the good conduct of the
administrative operations.



      (17)    Shall obey all department policies, procedures, rules,
regulations, directives and lawful orders from superior department authority,
and shall appropriately perform any and all other duties as may from time to
time be lawfully ordered by superior department authority.



   (c)   Lieutenant-Support Operations:



      (1)    Shall be in command over the department's
telecommunication/911 center, the detective unit, the property/evidence
control unit, the training unit, all special service programs, all
extra/special police details and of all operations with the municipal jail,
(henceforth, collectively referred to as support operations). Shall be
subordinate only to the lawful orders of superior department authority with
the police chief being the ultimate authority throughout the department.
Furthermore, shall assume the duties and responsibilities of the deputy chief
whenever so ordered by the police chief.



      (2)    Shall regularly provide an effective and efficient
direct line of management over all subordinate department members assigned to
support operations duties. Furthermore, shall require nothing less than a
satisfactory work performance from those members pursuant to all current
department policies, procedures, rules, regulations, directives and lawful
orders from superior department authority.



      (3)    Shall be responsible for the regular planning, posting
and maintenance of the monthly duty schedules for the support service
division, the detective unit and the DARE program instructor in an effective,
efficient, timely and lawful manner. Shall be similarly responsible for the
scheduling of all extra/special police details, other special service
programs and all department training activities. Furthermore, shall authorize
temporary changes and/or time off whenever necessary to properly conduct
support operations.



      (4)    Shall utilize all best efforts toward identifying the
training necessary to ensure the proper performance of support operations
duties. Furthermore, shall file a timely written report to the deputy chief
citing those needs and of the measures taken towards meeting them.



      (5)    Shall perform personal inspections of all police and
jail facility work areas and equipment utilized by subordinate department
members assigned to or in performance of support operations duties at regular
intervals in order to identify all deficiencies that are not conducive to a
proper and safe work environment. Furthermore, shall file a timely written
report to the police lieutenant of administrative operations citing those
deficiencies, and making corrective recommendations thereto. In any event,
the lieutenant of support operations shall make immediate corrective measures
in order to properly remedy any deficiency that poses an imminent threat of
death or great bodily harm to human life, or to any deficiency that stands to
violate any person's constitutional rights.



      (6)    Shall strive to create and maintain a high level of
esprit de corps amongst all subordinates either routinely assigned to or
otherwise temporarily in the performance of duties pertinent to support
operations by regularly performing personal inspections of, and hosting group
and individual meetings with those subordinates. Furthermore, shall provide a
timely response to deficiencies by initiating or recommending to the deputy
chief the initiation of appropriate corrective measures without any
unnecessary delay. The pertinent facts and responsive corrective measures
taken or recommended will be immediately reported in writing to the deputy
chief.



      (7)    Shall perform a proper and timely inquiry into any
subordinate's laxity in the performance of support operations duties, or
minor infraction to the current department policies, procedures, rules,
regulations, directives and lawful orders from superior department authority.
Furthermore, shall provide a timely response by initiating or recommending
the initiation of appropriate corrective measures. The pertinent facts and
responsive corrective measures taken or recommendations made will be
immediately reported in writing to the deputy chief.



      (8)    Shall personally assist the deputy chief in the conduct
of any lawfully ordered internal investigation into any allegation of serious
misconduct filed against any subordinate member who was performing support
operations duties at the time of the alleged misconduct.



      (9)    Shall regularly review all current department policies,
procedures, rules, regulations, directives and orders of superior department
authority that are pertinent to support operations in order to maintain a
lawful, sound and contemporary path of command direction throughout those
operations. Furthermore, shall immediately report in writing to the deputy
chief any deficiencies or possible deficiencies that may exist thereof, and
shall include any recommended changes.



      (10)    Shall regularly conduct integrity audits at regular
intervals of all department forms, documents and reports compiled by
subordinates performing support operations duties, and return them to the
appropriate supervisor for further corrective action if and when there are
any mistakes or omissions found therein.



      (11)    Shall personally tour the support operations work
areas existing both inside and outside of the police and jail facility at
irregular intervals in order to perform integrity audits of the manner in
which each subordinate performs their support operations duties. Furthermore,
shall give direction as to the most effective and efficient methods of
properly performing supervisory or nonsupervisory support operations duties
whenever necessary.



      (12)    Shall be the department's liaison with the village's
ESDA unit, the village's E-911 board, the village clerk's office, the
village's building department, the village's department of public works, the
village's special events committee and with all local school districts and
fire departments operating within the village, and shall ensure that all of
their petitions for and inquiries or complaints about department services are
properly addressed without any unnecessary delay. Furthermore, shall keep the
deputy chief current with all such petitions, inquiries and complaints
immediately after they are received.



      (13)    Shall require that sound judgment is regularly used
toward determining as to whether or not the authorization of overtime is
absolutely necessary in order to maintain the good conduct of support
operations business.



      (14)    Shall personally assist the deputy chief toward
maintaining a friendly and cooperative relationship between support
operations and the general public by being the first to personally hear
citizen complaints and/or inquiries pertinent to the operations and
obligations of support operations. Furthermore, shall provide a timely
response by initiating support operations services or recommending the
initiation of other police services and/or corrective measures without any
unnecessary delay. The pertinent facts and the responsive actions taken or
recommended will be immediately reported in writing to the deputy chief.



      (15)    Shall personally assist the deputy chief in the timely
preparation of the support operations segment of the department's annual
budget proposal. Furthermore, shall strive to keep the operating expenditures
of those operations within the parameters of the current police budget, and
shall require that all such expenditures are necessary toward maintaining
adequate support operations.



      (16)    Shall personally assist the deputy chief toward
professionally recruiting, examining and recommending the employment of
persons qualified for telecommunication duties of and for the department.



      (17)    Shall ensure that all of the department's adult
prisoners are properly booked, jailed, cared for, guarded, transported and
released pursuant to all applicable department policies, procedures, rules,
regulations, directives and orders by superior department authority, and the
law.



      (18)    Shall obey all department policies, procedures, rules,
regulations, directives and lawful orders from superior department authority,
and shall appropriately perform any and all other duties as may from time to
time be lawfully ordered by superior department authority.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Secs. 9-44-9-48.  Reserved:



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



DIVISION 4. OTHER OFFICERS, SPECIAL UNITS, ETC.



Sec. 9-49.  Sergeants:



   (a)   Patrol sergeants shall be charged with the enforcement of all
laws, ordinances and orders, the prevention of crime and the arrest of
offenders. They shall constantly patrol posts of the persons under them,
meeting them as often as possible, and enforce their performance of duty.
They shall instruct and assist patrolmen in the performance of their duties.



   (b)   Patrol sergeants shall inspect all persons going on duty,
paying particular attention to their personal appearance, their uniforms,
revolvers and other police equipment. They shall observe the appearance of
all persons reporting off duty.



   (c)   Patrol sergeants shall review all complaints given to
patrolmen on post duty and see that same are given proper attention.



   (d)   Patrol sergeants shall, at the conclusion of their tour of
duty, submit a written report relative to crime in their district. They shall
report all violations or orders, rules and regulations of the department on
the part of patrolmen working under them.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-50.  Detectives:



   (a)   Sworn members of the police department assigned to citizen's
dress or detective duty shall be charged with the enforcement of all the laws
and ordinances, the prevention of crime and the arrest and prosecution of
criminals.



   (b)   Sworn members of the police department in citizen's dress
shall give prompt and diligent attention to all cases assigned to them, and
shall report to the appropriate ranking officer such information as they
secure pertaining to same. They shall keep a memorandum book of all details
of such work.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-51.  License Officers:



   (a)   License officers shall systematically list all businesses and
occupations in the village subject to village licenses, in a book provided
for that purpose, which shall be kept in the police station. Each class of
business shall be listed separately and arranged by streets and grouped in
numerical order.



   (b)   License officers shall see that all license ordinances are
complied with and shall prosecute all persons violating same.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-52.  Department Of Records:



   (a)   The secretary of the department shall keep a register of all
members of the department, with complete information as to the date of their
birth, nativity, former occupation, dates of appointment and promotion,
reprimands, fines, suspension, reinstatement, resignation and death, and such
other data as may be required. Upon the request for a pension, he or she
shall certify such information as is necessary as well as the time of service
to the pension board.



   (b)   The secretary of the department shall cause to be kept an
inventory of all station furniture, equipment and supplies in the department.



   (c)   The secretary of the department shall cause to be kept a card
index system of the number of persons in the department arranged in
alphabetical order showing the division to which they are assigned. Members
of the department shall be listed and arranged according to alphabetical
order.



   (d)   Time allowed and lost by members of the department shall be
placed in a file of members' names arranged in alphabetical order.



   (e)   Efficiency records of members of the department shall be kept
under the supervision of the chief of police.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-53.  First Aid:



   All members of the department shall familiarize themselves with the
department rules of first aid so as to be able to render assistance whenever
it is required.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-54.  Waiver Of Rules:



   No officer or member of the department shall be authorized to waive any
of the provisions of the rules and regulations of this article or any of the
rules and regulations of the board of fire and police commissioners.
Knowledge of or the existence of any failure to observe any of such rules and
regulations by any member of the department of whatever duration shall not
constitute a waiver of any of such rules and regulations.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-55.  Part Time Police Officers:



   (a)   Appointment: The mayor, with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees, may appoint part-time police officers pursuant to the
provisions of this section. Part-time police officers serve at the discretion
of the mayor and board of trustees and shall not have any property rights in
said employment.



   (b)   Duties: Part-time police officers shall have all the
responsibilities of full-time police officers as limited by the general
orders issued by the chief of police and by Illinois law. Part-time police
officers shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full-time police
officers. Part-time officers shall be trained in accordance with the
provisions of the Illinois Police Training Act (50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.) and
the rules and regulations promulgated by the Illinois Law Enforcement
Training and Standards Board. The number of hours a part-time police officer
may work within a calendar year is restricted.



   (c)   Discipline: All part-time police officers are under the
command of the chief of police and are governed by the rules and regulations
of the Justice police department. The chief of police shall have the
authority to discipline, suspend, or terminate a part-time police officer
with or without cause. Part-time police officers may be disciplined,
suspended or terminated without notice, without the filing of charges, and
without a hearing.



   (d)   Requirements: All persons employed as a part-time police
officer must meet the following standards:



      (1)   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of
sound health, and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties;



      (2)   Be not less than twenty-one (21) years of age;



      (3)   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate;



      (4)   Possess a valid Class D Illinois driver’s license;



      (5)   Submit to a fingerprint and criminal background check;



      (6)   Pass a background investigation and any other
investigation the village may require for employment;



      (7)   Have no prior felony convictions;



      (8)   Be honorably discharged from the U.S. military if having
served in the military;



      (9)   Pass medical and other examinations mandated by the
village;



      (10)   Possess a valid FOID card;



      (11)   Be certified by the Illinois Police Training Standards
Board pursuant to 50 ILCS 705/1;



      (12)   Have experience as or be a permanent police officer as
defined in 50 ILCS 705/2;



      (13)   Have at least 20/100 vision, correctable to 20/20; and



      (14)   Possess a sound and professional law enforcement
officer work ethic and be consistently available to provide such as needed.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2012-14, § 1, 5-29-2012)



Secs. 9-56-9-60.  Reserved:



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



DIVISION 5. GENERAL RULES OF CONDUCT



Sec. 9-61.  State Laws:



   If any of the rules and regulations adopted in this article by the
board of fire and police commissioners shall be in conflict with any laws of
the state, the laws of the state shall govern and such rules and regulations
as may be in conflict are to be read and interpreted in accordance with the
state laws.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-62.  General Standard:



   No member of the department shall conduct himself in a manner
unbecoming to a member or employee of the department.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-63.  Obey Orders:



   All police officers shall promptly and speedily obey and execute all
orders of a superior officer which are not in conflict with the laws of the
United States of America, the laws of the state, the ordinances of the
village or department rules.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-64.  Obey Officers:



   All members of the department shall observe and enforce the order of an
acting sergeant and shall also observe orders of the officer in charge.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-65.  Always On Duty:



   Members of the department shall be considered as being on duty at all
times. They shall be subject to special calls and special details upon the
order of a superior officer at any time of the day or night, whether on duty
or off duty; provided, however, that certain hours shall be designated as the
working hours for each member of the department for the performance of police
duty. It shall be the duty of every member of the department to respond and
perform police duty at any hour of the day or night, whether on or off duty,
where he has knowledge that an emergency exists and his services are
required, whether notified by a superior officer or not. Members of the
department shall have no other employment, nor shall they be members of the
fire department.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-66.  Absence From Duty:



   No member of the department shall absent himself from duty except on
special permission from the chief of police.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-67.  Leaving Post:



   No member of the department shall leave his post without being
regularly relieved.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-68.  Attention To Duty:



   All members of the department shall be attentive to their duties.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-69.  Negligence:



   No member of the department shall neglect his duty or duties.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-70.  Inefficiency:



   No member of the department shall perform his duty or duties in an
inefficient manner.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-71.  Sleeping While On Duty:



   No member of the department shall sleep while on duty.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-72.  False Report:



   No member of the department shall make a false report.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-73.  Address; Telephone:



   Members of the department shall immediately notify the chief of any
change in their residence address or telephone number.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-74.  Discipline:



   Members of the department shall not use coarse, profane, obscene or
insolent language in their conversation with citizens or members of the
department; shall at all times be clean and neat in their appearance; shall
be punctual; shall promptly comply with the orders of a superior officer; and
shall comply with all the rules and regulations of the department. Superior
officers shall be responsible for the bad conduct of their subordinates and
shall report all violations of the rules and regulations of the department.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-75.  Insubordination:



   Members of the department shall not be guilty of insubordination or
disrespect towards a superior officer.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-76.  Courtesy:



   Courtesy promotes mutual respect and is indispensable to discipline.
Subordinates shall recognize the authority vested in superior officers and
shall observe such authority on all occasions. Superior officers shall not be
familiar with subordinates. All members of the department when addressing one
another shall use the full title and at no time shall use abbreviations.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-77.  Criticism:



   Members of the department shall not discuss or criticize, publicly or
in private, the personal habits, character or conduct, or the official
actions, of other members of the department.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-78.  Compliance With Rules:



   It shall be the duty of all members of the department to familiarize
themselves with the rules and regulations of the department and of the board
of fire and police commissioners, and to comply strictly with same. Ignorance
of the rules shall be no excuse for infraction of the same.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-79.  Giving Personal Information:



   Members of the department shall give their name, rank and star number
when requested.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-80.  Loitering In Police Station:



   No persons other than those transacting police business shall be
permitted to loiter in or about a police station or any other building of the
department. Police officers shall not lounge or sleep in or about the police
station or squad cars at any time.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-81.  Departmental Information:



   No member of the department shall give out or release any information
concerning the affairs or business of the department without the consent of
the chief of police.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-82.  Defense Witness:



   Members of the department subpoenaed or requested to appear for the
defense in the prosecution of a criminal case or a village ordinance
complaint shall immediately report to their commanding officer, who shall
notify the state's attorney, or prosecuting attorney of the village, as the
case may be.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-83.  Communications To Other Departments:



   No member of the department shall address any official communication to
any official of any other department of the village, except upon receiving
permission from the chief of police.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-84.  Rewards:



   No member of the department shall receive or accept any reward or gift
from any person for service rendered, or to be rendered as a member of the
department, without the consent of the chief of police. It shall be the duty
of all members of the department to notify the chief upon their receipt of
such a reward.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-85.  Gifts:



   No member of the department shall accept any fee, reward or gift of any
kind from persons arrested or from any friend in his behalf while he is in
custody or after his release or discharge. Members of the department shall
not accept gifts from other members of the department, groups, clubs,
associations, societies, citizens, lodges or political parties. Members of
the department shall not solicit contributions for a fund for the purpose of
presenting other members of the department with a gift.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-86.  Bribes:



   No member of the department shall accept bribes of money, gifts or
other articles of apparent or actual value.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-87.  Uniform:



   Police officers not assigned to the detective division or to
plainclothes duty shall dress in full uniform during their tour of duty, and
also when attending to police business, such as court hearings and trial
board cases. They shall keep their uniform, police star, cap device and shoes
cleaned and pressed at all times.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-88.  Purchase Of Uniform From Other Police Officers:



   Police officers shall not purchase or wear police uniforms of other
officers without the approval of the chief of police.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-89.  Equipment-Upon Separation:



   All police officers leaving the department shall return the uniform and
all police equipment not furnished at their own expense.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-90.  Equipment-Death Of Officer:



   Commanding officers in case of the death of members of the department
shall take up all village property held by the deceased officer and forward
same to police headquarters.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-91.  Equipment-Property Of Village:



   All equipment issued to police officers at the time of their
appointment shall remain the property of the village.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-92.  Revolvers-Kind Used:



   All police officers shall provide themselves with revolvers of patterns
as approved from time to time by the chief of police.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-93.  Revolvers-Registered:



   Police officers, before purchasing revolvers, shall procure at police
headquarters a permit as required by law. They shall, after purchasing the
revolver, report to the chief of police and register the revolvers.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-94.  Revolvers-Loss:



   The loss of revolvers by police officers shall without delay be
reported to police headquarters and to the chief of police. The police
officer shall be obliged to replace a lost revolver at his own expense.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-95.  Stars-Wearing:



   Police officers, when in uniform, shall wear their star upon the left
side of the chest on the outer garment of such uniform. No unauthorized
shield or badge shall be worn on the uniform at any time. Officers shall not
trade stars or cap devices with one another either permanently or
temporarily, except with the permission of and by order of the chief of
police.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-96.  Stars-Loss:



   All members of the department shall immediately report to police
headquarters the loss of any star or shield and shall replace same at his own
expense.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-97.  Stars-Requests:



   Any request by a member for a leave of absence or furlough shall be
made in writing stating the period of time for which such leave of absence or
furlough is requested and the reason therefor. One copy of such request shall
be delivered to the chief of police and one copy to the board of fire and
police commissioners for action in accordance with rule 7 of the general
rules and regulations of such board. The chief of police and such board may
accompany any request for leave of absence or for a furlough with their
recommendation in connection therewith.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-98.  Resignation:



   (a)   All members of the department shall give fourteen (14) days'
notice in writing to the chief of police of their intention to resign, and
all such resignations shall be subject to the approval or disapproval of the
board of fire and police commissioners. Any member withdrawing from the
department without leave from the chief and the board of fire and police
commissioners shall be deemed disqualified to become a member of the police
force again.



   (b)   Upon voluntary termination of employment of any police officer
prior to successful completion of at least three (3) years of service, the
officer shall be individually and personally responsible for repayment to the
village the total training and uniform costs incurred by the village in
accordance to the following schedule:



 

Length Of Employment
 

Replacement Percentage



Leave employment at any time within 1 year of date of hire
 

100%



Leave employment at any time between 1 and 2 years from date of hire
 

50%



Leave employment at any time between 2 and 3 years from date of hire
 

25%




 



   This repayment requirement shall not apply to any employee who remains
employed with the village for a period of more than three (3) years.
Additionally, this reimbursement requirement shall not apply if the village
terminates the officer's employment for disciplinary or financial reasons or
if, as the result of an injury in the line of duty, the officer is no longer
able to perform the duties of a police officer for the village of Justice.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2003-11, § 1, 4-14-2003)



Sec. 9-99.  Smoking While In Uniform:



   Members of the department while on their tour of duty may only smoke
within the confines of a police station or a squad car assigned for their use.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-100.  Games Of Chance:



   Police officers shall not engage in any games of chance for stakes or
wagers while on duty.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-101.  Drinking:



   Members of the department shall not drink intoxicating liquor while on
duty.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-102.  Intoxication:



   No member of the department shall become intoxicated while on or off
duty.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-103.  Disorderly Conduct:



   No member of the department shall conduct himself or herself in a
disorderly manner.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-104.  Immoral Conduct:



   No member of the department shall conduct himself or herself in an
immoral manner.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-105.  Civility:



   Members of the department shall treat all persons civilly and refrain
from arguments.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-106.  Altercations:



   Members of the department shall refrain from physical altercations,
except in line of duty, and shall not maltreat any prisoner or other person.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-107.  Debts:



   Members of the department shall pay, discharge or satisfy within a
reasonable time (the board of fire and police commissioners to be consulted
and to fix such time) all just obligations and indebtedness owed by such
members and shall not incur or become liable for obligations which they, in
the reasonable course of events, could not contemplate meeting at their
maturity.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-108.  Assignment:



   No member of the department shall sell or assign any wages to be
received from the department.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-109.  Additional Rules:



   In addition to the rules and regulations of the board of fire and
police commissioners in this article, all laws of the state, the provisions
of this code, federal statutes, and department rules and regulations as
promulgated by the chief of police pertaining to and affecting police
officers, and the general rules of the board of fire and police
commissioners, shall be by this reference rules and regulations of the board
of fire and police commissioners, and all police officers shall be subject
thereto.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-110.  Bonds; Oaths:



   All members of the department shall provide bonds and oaths in
accordance with this code.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-111.  Information Provided:



   Members of the department, prior to acting as such if reinstated or a
new appointee, shall fully complete and truthfully answer all interrogatories
and sign all personnel forms as required by the board of fire and police
commissioners. Any form not so completed or signed shall be found as not
complying with this section.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-112.  Taverns, Public Houses; Election Days:



   (a)   Every member of the department is prohibited, when on duty,
from spending his or her time in taverns or public houses, or playing pool,
cards or any other games in such places.



   (b)   On all general and special election days, it shall be the duty
of the department to preserve order at the polls, but in no case shall it
interfere for or against any candidate at any such election.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-113.  Serving Process:



   No member of the department shall serve any writ, summons or other
process except on command of the chief of police.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-114.  Officer May Stop A Suspect:



   A police officer having identified himself or herself as a police
officer may stop any person in a public place whom the officer reasonably
suspects is committing, has committed or is about to commit a criminal
offense under the laws of the state or a violation of chapter 7, article I,
of this code, and may demand the name and address of such person and an
explanation of his or her actions.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-115.  Search Of Suspect For Deadly Weapons:



   When a police officer having identified himself or herself as a police
officer has stopped a person for temporary questioning and reasonably
suspects that he or she is in danger of attack, he or she may search such
person for dangerous weapons. If the officer discovers such weapons, he or
she may take such property until the completion of the questioning, at which
time he or she shall either return such property if lawfully possessed or
arrest the person.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-116.  Arrests Authorized:



   The members of the department are hereby severally authorized to
arrest, with or without process or on view, any person who shall break the
peace or be found breaking any law of the village or any criminal law of the
state, and to take such person before a competent tribunal or, if necessary,
detail such person in custody overnight or Sunday in the police station,
village jail, or any other safe place until they can be brought before the
proper court for trial.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-117.  Records:



   The department shall keep records of the names of all persons arrested,
all persons committed to the village jail, and of all accidents which occur
within the village limits.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-118.  Gambling Devices:



   Any members of the department may seize any instrument, device or thing
used for the purpose of gambling, or by or on which money or other articles
of value may be lost or won, and all such instruments, devices or things may
be demolished or destroyed. Authorized video gaming terminals allowed and
licensed under section 3-107 shall be exempt from this section.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2012-16, § 4, 6-11-2012)



Sec. 9-119.  Duty To Assist Police:



   It shall be the duty of any person in the village, when called upon by
any member of the department, to promptly aid and assist him in the execution
of his or her police duties.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-120.  Resistance To Officers:



   No person shall resist any member of the police department or any other
person duly authorized to perform police duty in the discharge of his or her
duty as a police officer, nor shall offer or endeavor to do so, nor shall in
any manner assist any person in the custody of the police department to
escape or attempt to rescue any person from custody.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-121.  Impersonating An Officer:



   It shall be unlawful for any person not a member of the police
department to falsely represent himself to be a member of the police
department of the village or to assume to act as a police officer in any
capacity, or for any person other than a police officer to wear a star,
uniform or other official badge like that of a police officer.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Secs. 9-122-9-130.  Reserved:



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



DIVISION 6. POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY



Sec. 9-131.  General Duties:



   It shall be the duty of all police officers to enforce all laws and
ordinances of the state and the village, and to perform all duties imposed
upon them by the laws of the state, the provisions of this code, and the
rules and regulations of the department, and the rules and regulations of the
board of fire and police commissioners.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-132.  Use Of Duty Time; Preservation Of Order:



   All members of the department, when on duty, shall devote their entire
time and attention to discharging the duties of a police officer according to
the laws of the state, the provisions of this code, and the rules and
regulations of the department. Police officers shall preserve the peace,
order and quiet and enforce the laws and ordinances throughout the village.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-133.  Force; Exercise Of Discretion:



   Police officers shall discharge their duties in a discreet and orderly
manner. No more force than is necessary shall be used in making arrests.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-134.  Booking Prisoners:



   Police officers shall without delay book all persons arrested by them,
except where such persons are being held on orders of the chief of police for
investigation.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-135.  Notice Of Arrest:



   Police officers on desk duty shall, when persons are booked and held,
notify their relatives or friends so that they may obtain bail. Under no
circumstances shall police officers or employees of the department make any
charge or accept any fee, money or reward for conveying or sending messages
of this character.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-136.  Females In Care Of Matron Or Policewoman:



   Female prisoners shall, as soon as possible, be placed in the care of a
matron or policewoman and shall, while in custody of a male police officer,
be chaperoned by a matron or policewoman.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-137.  Juveniles:



   (a)   A juvenile, when arrested, who comes within the jurisdiction
of the juvenile laws, shall not be placed in a cell, prison or other place of
confinement, or in a vehicle for transportation with adults charged with or
convicted of crime. Such juvenile shall be brought to the attention of such
police officer as may be designated as juvenile officer by the chief of
police, as quickly as possible, so that he may be disposed of according to
the provisions of the juvenile laws.



   (b)   A juvenile shall be arrested only when clearly necessary in
the interests of peace and justice and the welfare of the individual.
Ordinary pranks should be reported to parents, and a police officer should
endeavor to gain the respect of a juvenile and to encourage him in legitimate
pursuits.



   (c)   A wayward juvenile should be reported to the commanding
officer, to be referred to a policewoman, or the appropriate juvenile
authority.



   (d)   Where a juvenile is arrested, brought to the station, and
later permitted to go home, a report shall be forwarded through official
channels to the chief juvenile officer of the juvenile court, explaining the
delinquency.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-138.  Searching Prisoners:



   Police officers shall, before placing persons in a cell, thoroughly
search and take all personal property from them and turn same over to the
police officer on desk duty, who shall give such prisoner a receipt therefor.
The arresting officer shall inventory the property taken from the prisoner in
the presence of the prisoner. Receipts shall not be given for concealed
weapons or property alleged to have been stolen which may be used as
evidence. It shall be the duty of the police officer making the search to
require the prisoner to sign such receipt.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-139.  Property Recovered Not Held As Evidence:



   All recovered, lost and stolen property shall at once be inventoried on
forms provided for that purpose and filed with the custodian without delay,
except when held as evidence.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-140.  Property Held As Evidence:



   Property held as evidence shall be inventoried as required in section
9-171 of this chapter. Such property shall be held at police headquarters
subject to the orders of the chief of police until the case is disposed of in
the courts.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-141.  Warrants; Assault Upon Officer, Against Officer:



   Police officers shall not apply for warrants for assault upon
themselves without reporting the case to the chief of police. Police officers
detailed as warrant clerks shall not draw up complaints or warrants against
the police officers without first informing the chief of police.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-142.  Additional Authority:



   In addition to the authority granted them by the rules and regulations
of the board of fire and police commissioners, police officers shall have
such authority as may be granted them by the laws of the state, the
provisions of this code and federal statutes.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-143.  Fires-General Duties:



   Police officers in command at fires shall cause streets, alleys and
other places in the vicinity of such fires to be cleared of persons and
obstructions. They shall establish fire lines and allow no one except
firefighters, reporters and officials to pass. A space inside of the fire
lines shall be reserved for the deposit of salvaged property, and police
officers in command shall cause the property to be properly protected.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-144.  Fires-Origin:



   Police officers first arriving at a fire shall, if possible, in all
cases be particular to ascertain the exact location where the fires
originate. If they believe fires to be incendiary they shall at once note in
their memorandum book all information concerning the origin of the fire which
would aid in the investigation thereof and in the prosecution of persons
responsible.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-145.  Reports-Accidents:



   When police officers are at the scene of an accident, or their
attention is called to an accident, they shall, after rendering first aid,
apprehend the person or persons who are criminally responsible for the
accident. Such officers shall obtain the necessary information concerning the
accident and make a full report to headquarters.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-146.  Reports-Stolen Automobiles:



   Police officers, when informed of the theft of an automobile, shall
obtain full information in regard to same and file a written report
containing all of the information.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



DIVISION 7. COMPLAINTS AGAINST OFFICERS



Sec. 9-147.  Complaint By Member:



   Any member of the department having a complaint to make against other
members of the department for the violation of the rules and regulations of
the department, or of the board of fire and police commissioners, shall make
a statement thereof under oath and before witnesses and shall file same with
the chief of police, or his designee, who shall investigate same and make a
written report to the board.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-148.  Complaints Of Citizens:



   All complaints made by citizens against members of the department for
the violation of any of the police rules and regulations or for the violation
of any of the rules and regulations of the board of fire and police
commissioners may be filed with the chief of police, who shall promptly
investigate such charges. The chief of police upon the complaint of a citizen
shall take the necessary steps to bring the complaint to the attention of the
board of fire and police commissioners. The substance of all oral and written
complaints received at the police station shall be promptly filed in the
office of the chief of police who shall investigate same and make a report to
the board of fire and police commissioners.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Secs. 9-149-9-155.  Reserved:



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



ARTICLE III.  AUXILIARY POLICE



Sec. 9-156.  Appointment:



   The president is hereby authorized to appoint as employees such
auxiliary police officers as may be required for the safety and welfare of
the village, subject to the advice and consent of the board of trustees.
Prior to appointment, all proposed auxiliary police officers shall be
fingerprinted and their fingerprints shall be checked with the federal bureau
of identification, Washington, D.C., or Illinois state police for any
possible criminal record. No person shall be appointed as an auxiliary police
officer if he has been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral
turpitude. The appointment of any or all auxiliary police officers may be
terminated by the president, subject to the advice and consent of the board.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-157.  Qualifications:



   Auxiliary police officers shall not be members of the regular police
department. Auxiliary police officers shall be residents of the village.
Identification symbols worn by auxiliary police officers shall be different
and distinct from those used by the regular police department and shall be
selected and chosen by the chief of police. Auxiliary police officers shall
at all times during the performance of their duties be subject to the
direction and control of the chief of police.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-158.  Powers; Duties:



   Auxiliary police officers, when properly assigned and on duty, shall:



      (1)    Aid or direct traffic in the village;



      (2)    Aid in the control of natural or manmade disasters;



      (3)    Aid in case of civil disorder;



      (4)    Perform normal and regular police duties when assigned
by the chief of police on occasions when it is impractical for members of the
regular police department to perform normal and regular police duties, as
follows:



         a.    Arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without
process, all persons who break the peace or are found violating any provision
of this code or any criminal law of the state;



         b.    Commit arrested persons for examination;



         c.    If necessary, detain arrested persons in custody
overnight or Sunday in any safe place, or until they can be brought before
the proper magistrate;



         d.    Exercise all other powers as conservators of the
peace that the board of trustees may prescribe;



         e.    Serve and execute all warrants for violations of
this code, or the state criminal law, within the limits of the village, and
for this purpose they shall have all the common law and statutory powers of
sheriffs.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-159.  Firearms:



   Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms, except with the
permission of the chief of police, and then only when in uniform and in the
performance of their duties.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-160.  Training:



   Auxiliary police officers, prior to entering upon any of their duties,
shall receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other police
procedures by the chief of police. Such course of training shall be not less
than twenty (20) hours in duration. Upon completion of the course of
training, the chief of police shall file a certificate attesting to the
auxiliary police officer’s completion of such course, with the village.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2009-15, § 42, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 9-161.  Compensation:



   Auxiliary police officers shall be paid in accordance with section 2-34
of this code, per hour of service performed, provided such service is
performed at the direction of the chief of police.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Secs. 9-162-9-170.  Reserved:



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



ARTICLE IV.  PROPERTY IN CUSTODY; EVIDENCE1 1



1  See also section 6-41 et seq. of this code.



Sec. 9-171.  Custodian Responsible For Property Seized:



   (a)   The custodian of lost and stolen property, under the direction
of the chief of police, shall act as custodian of all property seized or
taken, which shall be delivered at once to the custodian unless it is wanted
for immediate use as evidence in any case, and, in that event, a report and
inventory of the same shall be forwarded at once to the custodian.



   (b)   Nothing contained in this article, however, shall be held to
require the custodian to take possession of, or to make disposition of, any
lost or stolen property, the disposition or possession of which is otherwise
provided for by this code.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-172.  Disposal Or Sale Of Unclaimed Property2:



   The custodian shall keep a record of all property which may be seized
or otherwise taken possession of by the police department. If such property
shall not be claimed by the rightful owner thereof and possession surrendered
to such owner within six (6) months from the date of the final disposition of
the court proceedings in connection with which the property was seized or
otherwise taken possession of, or in case there are no court proceedings,
then if the property shall not be claimed by the rightful owner thereof, and
possession surrendered to such owner within six (6) months from the date of
such seizure or taking by the police, the custodian shall proceed to dispose
of the property. If such property is deemed salable the custodian shall cause
to be published in a daily newspaper of the village, a notice of sale at
public auction of such property describing in general terms and not by
individual items and shall give notice that if such property is not claimed
by the rightful owner within ten (10) days from the date of such publication
such property will be sold at public auction at such place as the chief of
police may direct and in such manner as to expose to the inspection of
bidders all property so offered for sale. No member of the police department,
directly or indirectly, shall participate in the bidding for, or purchase of
such unclaimed property; provided that any such unclaimed property, if deemed
by the chief of police to be of use to any village department, may be
retained for use of such department. Provided, further, that any such
unclaimed property deemed by the custodian to be unsalable shall be
confiscated and destroyed.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



2  765 ILCS 1030/3.



Sec. 9-173.  Sale Of Perishable Or Bulky Property:



   If any property seized or taken by the police force shall be of a
perishable nature, or so bulky or of such a nature as to make it dangerous or
inadvisable to retain possession thereof for the length of time specified in
section 9-172 of this article, the custodian, upon certifying such fact to
the chief of police and setting forth his reasons why such property should
not be retained for such period before disposing of same, shall, with the
approval of the chief of police, cause such property, if deemed by the
custodian to be salable, to be advertised forthwith in a daily newspaper of
the village, and shall sell such property at public auction at any time after
three (3) days shall have elapsed from the seizure or taking possession
thereof. However, if any such property is deemed to be unsalable or
dangerous, it shall be disposed of as refuse or in such other reasonable
manner as may be deemed by the custodian.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-174.  Proceeds Of Sale:



   The proceeds of any sale made under this article, after deducting the
costs of storage, advertising, selling, and other expenses incident to the
handling or selling of property, shall be paid by the custodian to the board
or the police and fire committee for use in the police equipment and
department fund.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-175.  Deadly Weapons:



   No pistols, revolvers, bowie knives, dirks, slingshots, metallic
knuckles, or other deadly weapons of like character shall be sold under this
article. All such weapons, except those that the chief of police deems to be
of use to the department and retains for that purpose, shall, within six (6)
months after their receipt, be taken by either the custodian or his duly
appointed deputy, and the chief of police or his duly appointed deputy, to a
steel mill where they shall be destroyed by being placed in a furnace and
melted down to form new metal.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Secs. 9-176-9-180.  Reserved:



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



ARTICLE V.  ARREST, TRIAL PROCEDURES



Sec. 9-181.  Arrest:



   The president or any member of the board and the several members of the
police force of the village shall have the powers and duties of arrest as
provided by law.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-182.  Commitment:



   In all cases where judgment shall be rendered in favor of the village,
a person convicted of a violation of any section of this code shall be
committed to the village jail or other place of imprisonment provided or
authorized by the village and be imprisoned therein for failing to pay any
fine, forfeiture, penalty or costs which may be adjudged against such person
where the defendant shall have waived a jury in writing or when such judgment
shall be pursuant to the verdict of a jury. At the expiration of the term of
confinement the keeper of the place of confinement shall endorse the writ of
commitment, "Satisfied in full by imprisonment", and discharge such person
from his custody. Commitment by any person as provided in this article shall
be by process, under the hand of the court which shall have made the order
for such commitment.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-183.  Jail-Designated:



   The place in the village established and used as the jail, or any other
place which may be established by the board for that purpose, is hereby
declared to be the village jail.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-184.  Jail-Keepers Generally:



   The chief of police and his assistants shall be ex officio keepers of
the jail and shall have the custody, charge and keeping of the same, and all
persons committed thereto under the supervision and direction of the
president and the village board.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-185.  Jail-Receiving Prisoners:



   In all cases of arrests on view for a violation of any of the sections
of this code in which detention in custody of the persons so arrested shall
be authorized thereby, it shall be the duty of the keeper of the village jail
or other place of confinement provided for violators thereof to receive and
he is hereby authorized to receive, from any officer of the village legally
empowered to make an arrest, any such persons and to safely keep them until
they can be safely brought before the circuit court of the county and be
tried for such violation in the manner prescribed by the law.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-186.  Appearance; Imprisonment; Bail:



   Whenever any person shall be arrested without process, or on view, for
breaking the peace or violating any provision of this code and shall be taken
before the circuit court of the county, the judge thereof shall note upon his
docket the cause of such arrest, as stated by the officer making such arrest,
and proceed to hear and determine the case in the same manner as if the
defendant had been arrested on a warrant; or may continue the case, for
lawful cause, as provided in other actions before the proper officer, in
which case if the defendant shall give bond payable to the village and
conditioned for his appearance before such court, on the day and at the place
named therein, and his abiding the order of the judge, and not departing the
court without leave, with security in a sum to be approved by such judge, he
shall be discharged from the custody of the officer making the arrest;
otherwise he shall, in the discretion of the judge, be committed to the
village jail or other place provided for the imprisonment of offenders
against the village, or remain in the custody of the officer making the
arrest until the time set for the trial of the case.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-187.  Officers As Witnesses In Court1:



   All officers making arrests shall attend as witnesses before the court
where the trial may be had and shall procure all necessary evidence in their
power, and furnish a list of witnesses to the court. No village officer shall
be entitled to any witness fees to be taxed against the village in any action
for a violation of any section of this code where the village is plaintiff.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



1  725 ILCS 5/114-9.



Sec. 9-188.  Authorization Of Prosecution:



   (a)   No judge shall issue any warrant or summons for the violation
of any provision of this code except on request of the president, a village
trustee, the village attorney or a village police officer.



   (b)   In case a prosecution shall be begun in the name of the
village without the authority of one of such village officials for the
violation of any provision of this code in which the village might be made
liable to pay costs, it shall be the duty of the village attorney to
investigate the facts and if, in his opinion, the suit ought not to be
maintained, he shall appear in behalf of the village and dismiss such
prosecution.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-189.  Recovery Of Fines:



   All fines, forfeitures, penalties and costs imposed against any person
by any of the provisions of this code may be recovered before the circuit
court of the county by action of debt in the name of the "Village of
Justice", and judgment may be rendered thereon and collected by execution or
other process, as other judgments of such court are rendered and collected.
Such fines, forfeitures and penalties when collected shall be paid over to
the treasurer of the village within ten (10) days from the time of the
receipt thereof by such judge, who shall make a report in writing to the
board on the first day of each month, showing a record of all fines,
forfeitures and penalties by him collected during the preceding month. No
judge shall remit any fine, forfeiture or penalty imposed upon any person
wherein the village is party plaintiff or in anywise interested without the
consent in writing of the village president or the board.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-190.  Form Of Citation:



   Whenever a peace officer is authorized to arrest a person without a
warrant because of a violation of:



      (1)    A provision prohibiting the parking of a vehicle in a
designated area;



      (2)    A provision restricting the length of time a vehicle
may be there parked;



      (3)    A provision requiring the purchase and display of a
vehicle sticker;



      (4)    A provision regulating parking in metered zones; or



      (5)    A provision regulating and licensing dogs;



      (6)    Provisions regarding defective vehicles which can be
readily remedied such as defective windshields, mufflers, lights, tires, or
brakes;



      (7)    Provisions regarding registration of vehicles; the
officer may instead issue to such person a citation or notice to appear, in a
form approved by the village board.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-191.  Settlement:



   Pursuant to the citation or notice, the person accused of the code
violation may settle and compromise the claim against him for such violation
by paying to the village the amount specified therein within forty eight (48)
hours of the time the alleged offense was committed. Such payment shall be
made, in accordance with the instruction contained in the citation, to the
village, which shall issue a receipt for the money so received and promptly
remit such amount to the village to be credited to the proper village fund.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2009-15, § 43, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 9-192.  Arrest Warrant:



   If a person to whom a citation or notice to appear is issued fails to
settle and compromise the claim within the prescribed time, the peace officer
may cause an arrest warrant or arrest summons to be issued by and prosecuted
in the circuit court of the county.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-193.  Prima Facie Proof:



   The fact that an automobile which is illegally operated or parked is
registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that
such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such violation.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



Sec. 9-194.  Witness Appearance Fees:



   A sixty dollar ($60.00) witness fee shall be allowed to all village
personnel when their presence is required at a court hearing or special
meeting if they are acting under the official capacity of their office and/or
furthering the welfare and interest of the village. An additional five
dollars ($5.00) shall be allowed for transportation and meal expense if
incurred in connection with their appearance. However, no witness fee or
expense shall be allowed to any person if at the time that his appearance is
required he is on duty in the village earning his regular compensation. This
section does not apply to police personnel.



(Ord. 2001-33, § 1, 9-24-2001)



 


Notes

1 
See also section 6-41 et seq. of this code.



CHAPTER 10
STREETS, SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING LOTS 1,2



   Art. I.   In General, §§ 10-1-10-50



   Art. II.   Driveway Construction Generally, §§ 10-51-10-75



   Art. III.   Sidewalk Construction, §§ 10-76-10-105



   Art. IV.   Commercial Driveways And Parking Areas, §§ 10-106-10-130



   Art. V.   Excavations, §§ 10-131-10-145



   Art. VI.   Public Works Department Job Descriptions, §§
10-146-10-150



   Art. VII.   Public Works Department Regulations, §§ 10-151-10-169



1  Administration, Ch. 2; business regulations, Ch. 3; motor vehicles and
traffic, Ch. 6; planning and development, Ch. 8; utilities, Ch. 11; collector
of special assessments, § 2-201 et seq.; special assessment attorney, §
2-306 et seq.; sanitation and drainage inspector, § 2-356 et seq.; board of
local improvements, § 2-636 et seq.; street shows, § 3-123; maintenance of
streets in mobile home parks, § 3-430; littering, § 5-32; sharp objects on
public ways, § 7-207; use of public ways and property, § 7-251 et seq.;
street openings, § 8-71; signs, billboards and awnings, § 8-166 et seq.;
occupation of streets, § 8-286 et seq.; subdivisions, § 8-306 et seq.



2  65 ILCS 5/9, 5/11-80-1 et seq.; 605 ILCS 5/7, 512-104.



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



Sec. 10-1.  Control And Management By Village Board:



   All streets, public alleys and thoroughfares in the village shall be
the property of the village, under the control and management of the
president and board of trustees. No additional streets or alleys shall be
created, and no existing streets or alleys shall be closed, without the
permission of the village board.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-1)



Sec. 10-2.  Dedication:



   When any plat is submitted to the board for approval or when any
portion of land is to be dedicated to the village for a public thoroughfare,
such dedication or plat shall be accompanied by an instrument conveying full
title to the village, in the portion to become a public thoroughfare.



(Code 1969, Ch. 7, Art. 1; Code 1972, § 8-1-2)



Sec. 10-3.  Width And Other Requirements Of Rights Of Way For Streets:



   (a)   All street rights of way in the village shall be sixty six
feet (66') wide with the following exceptions:



      (1)    Section line street rights of way and street rights of
way designated as state or county highways, shall each be one hundred feet
(100') wide.



      (2)    Half section line street rights of way shall be eighty
feet (80') wide.



      (3)    Street rights of way of different width may be
permitted, provided such width is approved by the zoning board and passed by
the village board.



   (b)   The back of the curb line for street rights of way sixty six
feet (66') wide shall be a distance of fifteen and one-half feet (15 1/2')
from the middle of the street. The curb line for all other streets shall be
set by the village board.



   (c)   All parkways that the village has beautified shall be replaced
as beautified after construction work impacts the parkway. Paving of parkways
by adjoining property owner is prohibited. No area of a right of way between
the street and the adjoining owner's property shall be used for parking of
any vehicle, storage or any other purpose without a license from the village.
Any pavement, whether concrete, asphalt, block or gravel, installed in any
parkway for parking or storage purposes shall be torn out at the property
owner's expense and the property owner subject to a fine of up to seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) a day for each day the parkway remains paved.



   (d)   For the purpose of this section "parkway" shall mean a
landscaped strip of land paralleling or running in the center thoroughfare.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-3; Ord. 85-17, 9-9-1985; Ord. 2001-21, § 1, 5-29-2001)



Sec. 10-4.  Permission To Beautify:



   The village hereby grants a revocable permission for each citizen to
beautify the portion of land owned by the village and located between his
premises and the adjoining curb line; provided, however, that no encumbrance
other than bushes, grass, flowers, trees and decorative rocks be established
thereon. Such revocable permission shall include all other rights of
possession exercisable against all but the duly appointed or elected
representatives of the village acting in an official capacity. Any action for
trespass may be brought by the adjoining owner with regard to such portion of
land, exclusive of the area occupied by the public sidewalk.



   Fences, fence posts, wires and any other type of encumbrance are
strictly prohibited. No person residing on property abutting on the village
streets shall construct or erect any mailbox, gateposts, fences, columns or
any other structure above grade level within the parkway. A mailbox erected
pursuant to U.S. postal service regulations and supported by a hollow steel
post no larger than two inches (2") in diameter or by a wooden post no larger
than four inches by four inches (4" x 4") may be placed on the parkway. The
village shall not be responsible for any damage caused by village snowplows
or other road maintenance equipment to any structure or appurtenance within
the parkway area, except for the replacement of damaged mailboxes, which
shall be replaced only with an authorized mailbox. The penalty provisions of
sections 1-7 and 1-9 of this code shall apply to any violation of this
section.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-4; Ord. 1999-2, § 1, 2-8-1999)



Sec. 10-5.  Maintenance Of Parkway:



   It shall be the duty of each person residing on property abutting on
the village streets to maintain the area between his lot line and the curb
line free from weeds and other noxious herbage or matter. No person residing
on property abutting on the village streets shall construct or erect any
mailbox, gateposts, fences, columns or any other structure above grade level
within the parkway. A mailbox erected pursuant to U.S. postal service
regulations and supported by a hollow steel post no larger than two inches
(2") in diameter or by a wooden post no larger than four inches by four
inches (4" x 4") may be placed on the parkway. The village shall not be
responsible for any damage caused by village snowplows or other road
maintenance equipment to any structure or appurtenance within the parkway
area, except for the replacement of damaged mailboxes, which shall be
replaced only with an authorized mailbox. The penalty provisions of sections
1-7 and 1-9 of this code shall apply to any violation of this section.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-5; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998;
Ord. 1999-2, § 2, 2-8-1999)



Sec. 10-6.  Grade:



   Grade levels prevailing on the effective date of this code shall be the
official grades for all thoroughfares flanked by one or more houses;
provided, however, that in any block where no houses are located, no grade
level will be deemed to exist. Prior to the erection of any edifice in any
block where no grade level is established, the owner or contractor creating
such edifice shall make application to the village board for the
establishment of a grade level. The term "grade level" with regard to
existing levels shall be understood to mean the crown of any thoroughfare
currently maintained by the village, county or state.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-6)



Sec. 10-7.  House Numbering:



   Each house in the village shall be designated by a house number, and
such number shall be visible in the front thereof and be of such size and
clarity as to be easily deciphered from the curb line of the street. A number
shall be assigned to each house by the building commissioner as an extension
of the numbering system in the city of Chicago. The owner of any house or
building in the village who does not ascertain and post his house number in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not to exceed seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00).



(Code 1972, § 8-1-7; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998)



Sec. 10-8.  Supervision:



   All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the
village shall be under the supervision of the public works director, who
shall enforce all provisions of this code relating to such public places,
except traffic regulations.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-8; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 10-9.  Construction-Permit Required; Application:



   It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement or any public
street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or to repair the same, without
first having secured a permit therefor. Application for such permit shall be
made to the village and shall state the location of the intended pavement or
repair, the extent thereof and the person or firm who is to do the actual
construction work. No such permit shall be issued except on order of the
village board. 



Code 1972, § 8-1-9; Ord. 2009-15, § 44, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 10-10.  Construction-Bond:



   Each applicant for a construction permit under this chapter shall file
a bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with surety to be
approved by the village board, conditioned to indemnify the village for any
loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken or the manner of doing the
same.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-10)



Sec. 10-11.  Construction-Specifications:



   All streets and sidewalk pavements shall be made in conformity with
specifications laid down or approved from time to time by the village board.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-11)



Sec. 10-12.  Injury To New Pavement:



   It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon
or injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while the same is
guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft,
newly laid pavement.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-12)



Sec. 10-13.  Repairs:



   All public streets, alley and sidewalk pavement shall be kept in good
repair. Such repair work, whether done by the village or by the abutting
owner, shall be under the supervision of the public works director.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-13; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 10-14.  Defects:



   It shall be the duty of every village officer or employee becoming
cognizant of any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk, or any obstruction
thereof, to report the same to the public works director as soon as possible.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-14; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 10-15.  Obstruction:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any
obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as may
be specifically authorized by ordinance or by the public works director.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-15; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 10-16.  Barricades:



   Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or
other public place, or making an excavation in any such place, shall maintain
suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of
the work. Such barricade shall be protected by lights at nighttime. Any
defects in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent any such injury,
and any person properly maintaining any opening or excavation in any such
place shall guard such opening or excavation while the same remains open by
proper barricades and lights.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-16)



Sec. 10-17.  Display Of Merchandise; Writing On Pavement1:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or
other public place as space for the display or sale of goods or merchandise,
or to write or mark any signs or advertisements on any such pavement.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-17)



1  625 ILCS 5/11-311.



Sec. 10-18.  Encroachment:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, place or
maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or
property.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-18; Ord. 87-25, § 1, 9-14-1987)



Sec. 10-19.  Injuring Surfaces:



   No tractor, traction engine, motor truck or other similar vehicle shall
be operated across, over or along any street in the village, if any such
vehicle has on the periphery of any of the road wheels any block, stud,
flange, cleat, ridge, lug or any projection of metal or wood which projects
radically beyond the tread of traffic surface of the tire; except that, this
prohibition shall not apply to tractors, or traction engines equipped with
what is known as crawler type tractors, when the same does not contain any
projections of any kind likely to injure the surface of the road, nor to
tractors, traction engines and similar vehicles which have upon their road
wheels V-shaped, diagonal or other cleats arranged in such a manner as to be
continuously in contact with the road surface. In no event shall the surface
of any street be used as an area or space for turning any tractor or other
farm machinery in carrying on or performing any farming operations upon the
adjacent land; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall
prohibit the operation of tractors, traction engines or motor trucks across
any street in order to reach adjacent lands if the street is protected by
putting down solid planks or other suitable devices to prevent such vehicle
from injuring the surface of the street.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-19)



Sec. 10-20.  Deposits On Streets:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any material
which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material or any
glass or any articles which may do injury to any person, animal or property.



   (b)   Coal or other materials may be deposited on streets
preparatory to delivery or use, provided such deposit does not reduce the
usable width of the roadway at the point to less than eighteen feet (18').
Such material, equipment or coal, other than material or equipment to be used
in actual building construction, shall not be permitted to remain on such
street for more than three (3) hours.



   (c)   Any such material, equipment or coal shall be guarded by
lights if the same remains upon any street after nighttime.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-20)



Sec. 10-21.  Deposits On Sidewalks:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk any
material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material
or any glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals
or property.



   (b)   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks
preparatory to delivery, provided that the usable width of the walk is not
thereby reduced to less than four feet (4'). No such article shall remain on
such walk for more than one-half (1/2) hour.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-21)



Sec. 10-22.  Obstructing Drains:



   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or
alley.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-22)



Sec. 10-23.  Poles And Wires:



   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any poles or wires on or over
any public street, alley or other public way without having first secured
permission from the board.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-23)



Sec. 10-24.  Gas Pumps:



   It shall be unlawful to maintain or erect any gasoline pump or tank in
any public street, alley or sidewalk, without having first obtained a permit
therefor from the board. No such permit shall be issued until the applicant
furnishes a bond or indemnity policy with corporate surety to indemnify the
village, in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) against loss or
liability, occasioned by such tank or pump.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-24)



Sec. 10-25.  Playing Games:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful to play any games upon any street, alley
or sidewalk where such games cause unnecessary noise or interfere with
traffic or pedestrians.



   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not more than twenty five dollars ($25.00).



(Code 1972, § 8-1-26)



Sec. 10-26.  Openings, Stairways:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or
stairway in any public street or sidewalk or alley without a permit from the
board. All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable
strong cover or a railing, to the approval of the public works director.



   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not more than twenty five dollars ($25.00).



(Code 1972, § 8-1-27; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 10-27.  Barbed Wire Fences1:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence
composed in whole or in part of barbed wire, or with any similar material
designed to cause injury to persons, or any wire charged with electric
current anywhere within three feet (3') of any public street, sidewalk, park
or other public way or place.



   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined a minimum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not to exceed seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).



(Code 1969, Ch. 7, Art. 1; Code 1972, § 8-1-28; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998;
Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998)



1  See § 8-246 et seq., of this code.



Sec. 10-28.  Parking:



   (a)   As used in this section:



      Municipally Owned Property: Includes, but is not limited to, all
public streets located within the corporate limits of the village, all
municipally owned parks within the village and the area owned by the village
wherein the village hall is located.



      Vehicle: Includes all motorized vehicles and all trailers of any
kind but shall not include nonmotorized vehicles such as bicycles, tricycles,
children's wagons or baby carriages.



   (b)   No vehicle shall be parked on any village owned property
except as allowed by regulatory signs to be posted not less than sixty feet
(60') apart on the curb area of the public street.



   (c)   Regardless of such posting, no parking shall be allowed on any
public street or property within twenty four (24) hours after a snowfall of
one inch (1") or more has occurred.



   (d)   Parking in the area surrounding the village hall shall be
according to signs posted thereon.



   (e)   The operator of a vehicle shall not park such vehicle on any
street, highway, alley, public way or parkway between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. except Sundays and holidays.
The public works director is hereby directed to implement the erection of
official signs in accord with the provisions of this subsection.



   (f)   (1)    No second division vehicle, as defined by the
Illinois vehicle code1, registered for an excess of sixteen thousand (16,000)
pounds (class H and higher) may be parked on any street, highway, alley,
public way or parkway in any residential (R-1, R-2, R-2A, or R-3) zoned
district.



      (2)    No second division vehicle, as defined by the Illinois
vehicle code1, registered for an excess of sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds
may be parked within a building front yard setback, nor within any corner or
side yard setback in residential (R-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-3) zoned areas.



      (3)    No second division vehicle registered for an excess of
sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds may be kept, parked or stored from two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. in business or commercial
zoned areas (B-1 and B-2) except where the vehicle is owned by the business
and has signage indicating ownership on the vehicle, or the vehicle,
displaying proper registration, is in the possession of a licensed repair
facility for the purpose of executing a current repair order.



      (4)    The owner or operator of any parked or stopped truck,
van, bus or commercial vehicle shall not run such vehicle's motor while it is
parked or stopped, thereby creating a nuisance to residents of the immediate
area. First offenders for this subsection shall be issued a warning citation.
Second offenders will be issued a citation for twenty five dollars ($25.00)
with each successive offense doubling in fine assessed up to a maximum of
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation.



   (g)   (1)    Off street parking facilities accessory to
residential uses, in any residential district (R-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-3),
including, but not limited to, private parking lots, shall be used for the
parking of passenger automobiles owned by occupants of the dwelling units to
which such facilities are accessory or by guests of the occupants; except,
however, that not more than one truck or van, per residential dwelling unit,
each having a gross weight of sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds or less (class
F and under), and owned or used by an occupant of a residential dwelling
unit, may be parked upon any off street parking facility accessory to a
residential structure.



      (2)    No second division vehicles, in excess of sixteen
thousand (16,000) pounds as defined by the Illinois vehicle code5 may be
parked in multi-family zoned parking areas between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.



      (3)    Under no circumstances shall any parking facility,
including, but not limited to, private parking lots, be used for the parking
of any truck, van, commercial vehicle or bus in excess of sixteen thousand
(16,000) pounds in gross weight (class H or above registration) except in a
municipal parking lot rental space.



      (4)    The parking of second division towing and recovery
vehicles, less than thirty feet (30') in length and less than eight feet (8')
in height, shall be permitted in residentially zoned areas, provided there is
displayed a valid village vehicle sticker or parking permit and only one such
vehicle is  permitted per residential lot.



   (h)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any owner of
a vehicle weighing more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds who owned such
vehicle and parked it within the village prior to the effective date of
ordinance 84-30. If such owner disposes of the vehicle, this exclusion shall
not apply to any new vehicle purchased. This exclusion shall not apply to
nonowners.



   (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the owner or
operator of any vehicle violating any of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a fine of not less than fifteen dollars ($15.00) nor more than
thirty dollars ($30.00).



(Ord. 70-16, 9-10-1970; Code 1972, §§ 8-1-29-8-1-31; Ord. 73-25, 9-20-1973;
Ord. 83-11, 7-7-1983; Ord. 83-38, 12-1-1983; Ord. 84-30, 9-20-1984; Ord.
2000-31, §§ 1, 2, 7-10-2000; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



1  625 ILCS 5/1-217.



Sec. 10-29.  Snow Removal1:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, in any manner, to deposit
snow on any street within the village.



   (b)   If any plowing of driveways or parking lots is undertaken, any
snow plowed from these areas shall be piled on the private property of the
owner of these areas.



   (c)   Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a
fine of not more than twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each violation.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-32; Ord. 78-12, 3-16-1978)



1  See also § 10-114 of this chapter.



Sec. 10-30.  Indemnification-State Rights Of Way:



   (a)   The village shall indemnify, keep and save harmless the state,
its agents, officials and employees, against all injuries, deaths, losses,
damages, patent claims, judgments, costs and expenses, liabilities which may
in anywise accrue against the state in consequence of the granting of the
contract ordinance from which this section derives or which may in anywise
result therefrom, whether or not it shall be alleged or determined that the
act was caused through negligence or omission of the village or its
employees, of the subcontractor or his or her employees, if any, or of the
state or its employees, and the village shall, at its own expense, appear,
defend and pay all charges of attorneys and all costs and other expenses
arising therefrom or incurred in connection therewith and, if any judgment
shall be rendered against the state in any such action, the village shall, at
its own expense, satisfy and discharge the same. The village expressly
understands and agrees that any performance bond or insurance protection
required by such contract ordinance, or otherwise provided by the village,
shall in no way limit the responsibility to indemnify, keep and save harmless
and defend the state as provided in this section.



   (b)   The provisions of this section shall not be changed or
canceled without thirty (30) days' written notice by registered mail to the
director of the state department of highways.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-33; Ord. 80-3, 1-3-1980)



Sec. 10-31.  Indemnification-County Rights Of Way:



   (a)   For and in consideration of waiver by the county of the
insurance and surety bond requirements for projects which may be undertaken
by the village, involving a disturbance of any right of way of the county
within the corporate limits of the village, the village does hereby agree
that it shall indemnify, keep and save harmless the county, its agents,
officials and employees, against all injuries, deaths, losses, damages,
claims, patent claims, suits, liabilities, judgments, costs and expense,
which may in anywise accrue against the county in consequence of the granting
of the agreement from which this section derives or which may in anywise
result therefrom, whether or not it shall be alleged or determined that the
act was caused through negligence or omission of the village or its
employees, or of a subcontractor or his or her employees, if any, and the
village shall, at its own expense, appear, defend and pay all charges of
attorneys and costs and other expenses arising therefrom or incurred in
connection therewith, and if any judgment shall be rendered against the
county in any such action, the village shall, at its own expense, satisfy and
discharge the same. The village expressly understands and agrees that any
performance bond or insurance protection required by such agreement, or
otherwise provided by the village, shall in no way limit the responsibility
to indemnify, keep and save harmless and defend the county as provided in
this section.



   (b)   No amendment or repealer of this section shall become
effective until thirty (30) days next following notice to the county of such
proposed modification or repealer. Such notice shall be served upon the
county at the office of the Superintendent of Highways, 118 North Clark
Street, Chicago, Illinois 60602.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-34; Ord. 83-6, 2-3-1983)



Sec. 10-32.  Reimbursement Of Village Expenditures By Developers:



   (a)   All developers and builders who construct residential units,
both single-family and multiple, on any streets which the village shall
construct, pave and develop in any way, including pavement, curbs, gutters,
sewer lines, water lines and sidewalks, shall reimburse the village for all
expenditures made by the village before any building permit shall issue.



   (b)   Interest on all village expenditures shall be added to the
construction costs, under the following terms:



      (1)    The rate of interest shall be the yearly average as
determined by the weekly prime rate.



      (2)    Interest shall not be compounded annually.



      (3)    Interest shall not accrue beyond five (5) years.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-35; Ord. 83-36, 10-20-1983)



Sec. 10-33.  Prevailing Wage Rate1:



   (a)   To the extent and as required by the Act, the general
prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other
workers engaged in the construction of public works coming under the
jurisdiction of this village is hereby ascertained to be the same as the
prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the Cook County area as
determined by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois as of June
2015, a copy of that determination being attached to Ord. 2015-12 and
incorporated herein by reference. The definition of any terms appearing
herein which are also used in the aforesaid Act shall be the same as in said
Act.



   (b)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to the
ascertained general prevailing rate of wages to any work or employment in the
village, except public works for the village, as required by the Act.



   (c)   The village clerk shall publicly post or keep available for
inspection by any interested party in the main office of the village of
Justice this determination of such prevailing rate of wage.



   (d)   The village clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to
any employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or
association of employees who have filed, or file their names and addresses,
requesting copies of any determination stating the particular rates and the
particular class of workers whose wages will be affected by such rates.



   (e)   The village clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of Ord.
2015-12 with both the village clerk of State Index Division and the
Department of Labor of the State of Illinois.



   (f)   The village clerk shall cause a notice to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the area that the determination of
prevailing wages has been made. Said notice shall conform substantially to
the notice attached to Ord. 2015-12. Such publication shall constitute notice
that this is the determination of the village of Justice and is effective.



(Ord. 87-14, §§ 1-4, 6-22-1987; Ord. 93-14, §§ 1-6, 6-28-1993; Ord. 94-7,
§§ 1-6, 6-14-1994; Ord. 95-12, §§ 1-6, 6-12-1995; Ord. 96-16, §§ 1-6,
6-10-1996; Ord. 2005-15, §§ 1-6, 6-13-2005; Ord. 2009-15, § 44, 6-22-2009;
Ord. 2010-09, §§ 2, 3, 6-28-2010; Ord. 2011-10, §§ 2, 3, 6-27-2011; Ord.
2012-17, §§ 1-6, 6-25-2012; Ord. 2015-12, §§ 1-6, 6-22-2015)



1  820 ILCS 130/1 et seq.



Sec. 10-34.  Cash Contributions In Lieu Of Public Improvements:



   No person shall receive a variance from the provisions of Chapter 8,
Planning and Development, Article VIII, Subdivisions, which mandate the
construction of public improvements as a condition for the approval of a plat
of subdivision, unless the developer agrees to make a cash contribution to
the village in lieu thereof to mitigate the loss of such public improvement,
in an amount deemed necessary by the village engineer.



(Ord. 93-44, § 1, 12-13-1993; Ord. 96-5, § 1, 2-12-1996; Ord. 2014-16, §
1, 10-13-2014)



Secs. 10-35-10-50.  Reserved:



ARTICLE II.  DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY1 1



1  65 ILCS 5/11-30-8.



Sec. 10-51.  Permit-Required; Application:



   (a)   No person shall construct a driveway across any sidewalk,
parkway or street in the village for commercial use or the habitual use of
the public or any use by the owner or occupant of the premises served without
having obtained a permit therefor. Such permit shall be revocable by the
president with the approval of the board of trustees and such permit shall be
issued on that condition, and no driveway over twenty feet (20') in width
shall be constructed or maintained without the approval of the village board.



   (b)   Applications for such permits shall be accompanied by the fee
required in section 10-52 of this article.



(Code 1972, § 8-2-1; Ord. 2006-02, § 5, 1-9-2006)



Sec. 10-52.  Permit Fee:



   The fee for all single family residential driveway construction permits
shall be as set forth in section 13-1 of this code. All such new
installations shall also pay an inspection fee as set forth in section 13-1
of this code.



(Code 1972, § 8-2-2; Ord. 91-28, § 1, 9-9-1991; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998;
Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2006-02, §§ 5, 7, 1-9-2006; Ord. 2014-20,
§ 2, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 10-53.  Grade Surface:



   Where driveways are to be built across the sidewalk space, unless
otherwise expressly authorized, they shall conform to the sidewalk grade, as
established by the village engineer.



(Code 1972, § 8-2-3; Ord. 91-28, § 1, 9-9-1991)



Sec. 10-54.  Construction:



   (a)   No driveway shall be so constructed as to prevent free and
unobstructed passage on, over or across the same or in such manner as to
interfere with the proper drainage and safe grading of the streets. Gradual
approaches to the regular sidewalk grade shall be made from the grade of the
driveway. The slope of any driveway and the approaches thereto shall not
exceed one inch (1") vertical to one foot (1') horizontal in any direction.
When any driveway is to be constructed of brick, stone or similar material
that will not permit a smooth, even surface without numerous joints,
provisions for foot travel shall be made by constructing "crossings" or
strips of concrete parallel to the street (lot) line across such driveways;
the tops of such strips of concrete shall be flush and even with the
adjoining parts of the driveways; they shall not be less than nine inches
(9") in depth, eighteen inches (18") wide and shall be spaced thirty six
inches (36") apart from center to center in line with the sidewalk on the
street. For walks six feet (6') wide, two (2) such crossings shall be
provided and an additional crossing shall be provided for each three feet
(3') additional in the width of the walk.



   (b)   If more than one driveway is to be constructed on one lot,
each driveway shall maintain a minimum distance of seventy feet (70') between
the driveways measuring from the innermost edges of each driveway.



(Code 1972, § 8-2-4; Ord. 2001-15, § 1, 4-23-2001)



Sec. 10-55.  Repair:



   It shall be the duty of every person maintaining a driveway to keep the
same in good repair and free from obstruction and openings.



(Code 1972, § 8-2-5)



Sec. 10-56.  Bond:



   No permit for the construction of a commercial driveway or driveway for
the habitual use of the public or any use other than by the owner or occupant
of the premises served, across any public sidewalk, shall be issued and no
such driveway shall be maintained unless there is first filed with the
village a bond in the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
with surety to be approved by the village board, conditioned to indemnify the
village for any loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken or manner
of doing same and, in addition to such bond, each person shall deposit with
the village the cash sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) to guarantee to
the village and to reimburse the village for water used, inspection fees,
engineer fees, damages incurred to streets or parkways, and permit fees. Such
sum may remain on deposit and be used by such person to guarantee
construction of driveways, under permits issued under this chapter. When such
person certifies to the village that no other construction of driveways in
the village is intended by him for a period of one year from the date of the
last permit, such sum may be returned, subject to any deductions for the
guarantee or reimbursement enumerated above. If such person has deposited the
sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) under the sidewalk provisions of this
chapter, then the sum need not be deposited again, if the person agrees the
deposit shall be applicable to driveways.



(Code 1969, Ch. 7, Art. 2; Code 1972, § 8-2-6; Ord. 2009-15, § 45,
6-22-2009)



Secs. 10-57-10-75.  Reserved:



ARTICLE III.  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION1 2



1  65 ILCS 5/11-80-13, 5/11-84-1 et seq.



Sec. 10-76.  Permit Required:



   No person shall build, rebuild, remove, repair or in any manner disturb
any sidewalk without first having obtained a permit from the village
specifying the work to be done; and violation of the terms of such permit
shall render the same null and void. The permit fee shall be as set forth in
section 13-1 of this code and all permit fees shall be paid and bonds herein
provided filed and approved before any permit shall be issued. All such new
installation shall also pay an inspection fee as set forth in section 13-1 of
this code. 



(Code 1972, § 8-3-1; Ord. 91-28, § 2, 9-9-1991; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998;
Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001; Ord. 2009-15, §
46, 6-22-2009; Ord. 2014-20, § 3, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 10-77.  Compliance With Specifications:



   Except where sidewalks are to be laid in accordance with the provisions
of special assessment or special taxation ordinances, it shall be unlawful
for any person to construct, lay or rebuild any sidewalk on any portion of
the public ways of the village, otherwise than in compliance with the
specifications hereinafter prescribed. Each day that such sidewalk shall
remain so constructed, laid or rebuilt in violation of such specifications
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Code 1972, § 8-3-2)



Sec. 10-78.  Grade Surface:



   The grade for sidewalks shall be established by the village engineer.



(Code 1972, § 8-3-3)



Sec. 10-79.  Materials:



   Specifications for materials used in sidewalk construction are as
follows:



      (1)    The cement shall conform in every detail to the
standard specifications for portland cement adopted by the American society
for testing materials.



      (2)    No short weight packages nor damaged or lumpy cement
shall be used.



      (3)    Each bag shall contain not less than ninety four (94)
pounds net weight of cement, which shall be considered equivalent to one
cubic foot in proportioning the materials.



      (4)    All cement shall be delivered on the work in original
packages and kept dry until used.



      (5)    The sand shall be of the quality known as "torpedo",
and must be clean, dry, free from dust, loam and dirt, and of the sizes
ranging from one-eighth of an inch (1/8") down to the finest, with the
coarser particles predominating, in such proportions that the voids as
determined by saturation shall not exceed thirty three (33) pounds per cubic
foot. No wind drifted sand shall be used.



      (6)    The granite screenings shall be clean, free from dust,
and of sizes ranging from one-quarter of an inch (1/4") down to the finest.



      (7)    The stone shall be of the best quality of broken
limestone or other durable stone equally good for concrete purposes.



      (8)    The gravel shall be of the best quality, and it shall
be thoroughly washed.



      (9)    The slag shall be of the best quality of crushed air
cooled blast furnace slag, and it shall be capable of producing a concrete
that will develop a crushing strength equal to that of concrete made with
similar proportions of broken limestone or washed gravel.



      (10)    When delivered on the street, the materials shall be
deposited on flooring and kept clean until used in the concrete. The water
shall be clean and free from harmful chemicals.



(Code 1972, § 8-3-4)



Sec. 10-80.  Preparation Of Concrete:



   (a)   The concrete used in the construction of sidewalks when mixed
by hand shall be mixed on movable watertight platforms of such size as shall
accommodate the manipulations hereinafter specified. All materials are to be
measured loose by volume.



   (b)   The cement, sand and washed gravel shall be mixed in the
following proportions: one part of cement, two and one-half (2 1/2) parts of
sand, and five (5) parts of broken stone, washed gravel or crushed air cooled
blast furnace slag.



   (c)   The sand and cement shall be thoroughly mixed dry, to which
sufficient water shall be added, and then made into a stiff mortar. The
stone, slag or washed gravel, after having been sprinkled with water, shall
then be immediately incorporated into the mortar and the mass thoroughly
mixed by turning over with shovels, hoes or mechanical mixers at least three
(3) times, or until each particle of stone is thoroughly covered with mortar.



   (d)   When a mechanical concrete mixer is used, the materials must
be proportioned dry and then deposited in the mixer, all at the same time.
The mixer must produce a concrete of uniform consistency and color, with the
stones thoroughly mixed with water, sand and cement.



   (e)   The concrete used in sidewalk construction, when tested in the
form of six inch (6") cubes at the age of one month, shall develop a crushing
strength of not less than one thousand seven hundred fifty (1,750) pounds per
square inch.



   (f)   Retempering mortar or concrete, namely remixing with water
after it has partially set, shall not be permitted.



   (g)   Ready mix concrete conforming to the above specifications may
be used.



(Code 1972, § 8-3-5)



Sec. 10-81.  Subgrade:



   (a)   In the construction of sidewalks, a subgrade shall be first
prepared by cutting down or filling up the surface of the ground to a grade
which shall be ten inches (10") below final sidewalk grade.



   (b)   Wherever filling is necessary to bring the foundation to
subgrade, such filling shall be composed of earth or other material equally
good for filling purposes, free from animal or vegetable matter, placed in
such a manner as to leave a berm of one foot (1') on each side of and flush
with the top of the completed walk (except where the walks are laid full
width of the sidewalk space), and shall slope to the natural surface of the
ground at the rate of one and one-half feet (1 1/2') horizontal to one foot
(1') of vertical.



   (c)   Where necessary, the foundation shall be compacted by wetting,
rolling or ramming until solid and unyielding.



   (d)   Soft and spongy places not affording a firm foundation shall
be dug out and filled with earth, or other material equally good for filling
purposes, free from animal or vegetable matter and thoroughly compacted.



   (e)   Upon the subgrade thus prepared shall be placed a layer of
cinders (or other porous material equally good for the purposes of a
foundation), which shall be five inches (5") in depth after being thoroughly
compacted.



(Code 1972, § 8-3-6)



Sec. 10-82.  Depth And Specification Of Concrete:



   (a)   Upon the sidewalk foundation shall be placed a layer of
Portland cement concrete four and one-half inches (4 1/2") in thickness; such
concrete shall consist of one part of cement, equal in quality to the best
Portland cement, two and one-half (2 1/2) parts of clean "torpedo" sand, of
sizes ranging from one-eighth of an inch (1/8") down to the finest, and five
(5) parts crushed limestone or other stone equally as good for concrete
purposes, washed gravel or clean, crushed, air-cooled blast furnace slag of
the best quality, all of which shall be free from dust, dirt or other foreign
substances, and of sizes measuring not less than one-quarter of an inch
(1/4") in any dimension; such cement and sand shall be thoroughly mixed dry,
into which shall be incorporated the five (5) parts of stone, gravel or slag
as specified above, after which the mixture shall be moistened with water and
the whole mass thoroughly mixed and placed on the foundation and rammed until
solid.



   (b)   Before the layer last described has set, a finishing layer of
Portland cement concrete one-half of an inch (1/2") in thickness shall be
placed thereon; such layer shall consist of two (2) parts of cement equal in
quality to the best Portland cement, and three (3) parts of torpedo sand or
crushed granite screenings thoroughly mixed dry, then moistened with water
and mixed again to form a mortar, which shall be spread in such a manner as
to ensure a smooth and even surface after being thoroughly troweled.



   (c)   All work on five foot (5'), six foot (6'), ten foot (10'),
twelve foot (12'), fifteen foot (15'), eighteen foot (18'), twenty foot
(20'), twenty four foot (24'), and twenty five foot (25') walks shall be laid
out in blocks five feet (5') in size; on all other widths of walks, the
stones shall be of uniform size and have a surface of not less than twenty
four (24) square feet nor more than thirty six (36) square feet.



(Code 1972, § 8-3-7)



Sec. 10-83.  Expansion Joints:



   Expansion joints shall be provided for by leaving a space one-half inch
(1/2") wide between the walks and the curbs at street and alley returns and
spaces one-half inch (1/2") wide at intervals of forty feet (40') in the
sidewalk proper.



(Code 1972, § 8-3-8)



Sec. 10-84.  Markings On Sidewalks:



   (a)   Before the top or finishing of concrete walks has set, the
contractor or person building the walk shall place in such walk in front of
each lot or parcel of property a stamp or plat giving the name and address of
the contractor or person building the walk and the year in which the work was
done. The top of the plate or stamp which must not cover more than fifty four
(54) square inches of surface, shall be flush and even with the top of the
finished walk, and must be of a permanent character plainly stamped or firmly
bedded in the concrete in such manner that it cannot become loose or be
easily removed or defaced.



   (b)   Wherever a contractor or person has laid walks in front of
three (3) or more adjoining lots or parcels of property in one continuous
stretch, one of the name stamps placed in the walk at each end of the stretch
of walk will be sufficient.



(Code 1972, § 8-3-9)



Sec. 10-85.  Construction:



   It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement or any public
street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or to repair the same, without
first having secured a permit therefor. Application for such permit shall be
made to the village and shall state the location of the intended pavement or
repair, the extent thereof, and the person or firm who is to do the actual
construction work.



(Code 1972, § 8-3-10; Ord. 2009- 15, § 46, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 10-86.  Bond:



   Each applicant under this article, other than an owner or occupant,
shall file a bond with the village in the amount as set forth in section 13-1
of this code, with surety to be approved by the village board, conditioned to
indemnify the village for any loss or damage resulting from the work
undertaken or the manner of doing the same. In addition to the bond, each
person, other than an owner or occupant, shall deposit with the village the
cash sum as set forth in section 13-1 of this code, to guarantee to the
village and to reimburse the village for water used, inspection fees,
engineer fees, damage incurred to streets or parkways and permit fees; such
sum may remain on deposit and be used by the person to guarantee construction
of sidewalks under permits issued under this article. When such person
certifies to the village that no other construction of sidewalks in the
village is intended by him, for a period of one year from date of last
permit, such sum may be returned subject to any deductions for the guarantee
or reimbursement enumerated above. Provided, further, if such person had
deposited the sum as set forth in section 13-1 of this code under the
driveway provisions of this chapter, then such sum need not be deposited
again, if the person agrees said deposit shall be applicable to sidewalks.



(Code 1969, Ch. 7, Art. 5; Code 1972, § 8-3-11; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998;
Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2009-15, § 46, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 10-87.  Repairs To Sidewalks:



   At any time after November 9, 1987, when any sidewalk shall require
repair, the owner may reconstruct the same of cement in accordance with the
specifications mentioned in this Article and in accordance with the grade or
levels established therefor by the village engineer. A building permit shall
be required and the building commissioner shall review and approve plans
before a permit is issued.



(Ord. 87-31, § 1, 11-9-1987)



Sec. 10-88.  Order To Reconstruct:



   The president and board of trustees may at any time condemn and declare
as unsafe a sidewalk upon or along any public street or easement of the
village when the same is out of repair and needs reconstruction, by declaring
such condemnation by resolution spread upon the minutes of the proceedings of
their meetings. It shall then be the duty of the owner in front of whose
property such condemned sidewalk is located to immediately repair or
construct a cement sidewalk in front thereof in compliance with the
provisions of this article, and upon plans being approved by the village
engineer.



(Ord. 87-31, § 2, 11-9-1987)



Sec. 10-89.  Failure To Reconstruct:



   If the owner of the property fails to repair or reconstruct the
sidewalk within ninety (90) days after board action under section 10-88 of
this article, the village shall have the right to repair or reconstruct such
sidewalk. The village shall keep a record of all expenses incurred by the
village, and the owner shall be charged for such expense.



(Ord. 87-31, § 3, 11-9-1987; Ord. 2009-15, § 46, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 10-90.  Lien:



   (a)   Charges for sidewalk repair and reconstruction shall be a lien
upon the premises as provided by statute 1. Whenever a bill for such expenses
remains unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered, the village may
file with the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This
statement shall contain legal description of the premises served, the amount
of the unpaid bill and a notice that the village claims a lien for this
amount.



   (b)   A notice of the bill for repair or reconstruction shall be
mailed to the owner of the premises whenever such bill remains unpaid for a
period of sixty (60) days after it has been rendered.



   (c)   The failure of the village to record such lien claim or to
mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall
not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills for sidewalk
repair or reconstruction as provided for in section 10-91 of this article.



(Ord. 87-31, § 4, 11-9-1987; Ord. 2009-15, §46, 6-22-2009)



1  65 ILCS 5/11-84-4, 5/11-84-5.



Sec. 10-91.  Foreclosure Of Lien:



   (a)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid repair or reconstruction
costs shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale
shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity
in the name of the village.



   (b)   The village attorney is hereby authorized and directed to
institute such proceedings, in the name of the village, in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which such bill has
remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered.



(Ord. 87-31, § 5, 11-9-1987)



Secs. 10-92-10-105.  Reserved:



ARTICLE IV.  COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS



Sec. 10-106.  Exemptions:



   All owners of commercial and multiple-dwelling property in existence on
the effective date of Ordinance 76-8, and the holders of business licenses on
that date, shall not have to conform to the pavement restrictions in this
Article. However, if any such parcels of property or business licenses change
hands, such restrictions shall apply thereto.



(Code 1972, § 8-9-1)



Sec. 10-107.  Paving Required:



   (a)   All driveways and parking areas in multiple-dwelling or
commercial areas must be paved with a blacktop of a grade to be approved by
the village engineer, which when compacted shall have a minimum depth of two
and one-half inches (2 ½"). Curbs and gutters shall be constructed and made
of cement, upon each side of the driveway and parking areas excepting at
entrance or exit thereto.



   (b)   This section and sections 10-108 through 10-113 of this
article shall apply to every business established after the effective date of
Ordinance 76-8 and the persons described in section 10-106 of this article.



(Code 1972, § 8-9-2)



Sec. 10-108.  Depth Of Cement:



   Commercial driveways and parking areas may be paved with cement not
less than four inches (4") in depth.



(Code 1972, § 8-9-3)



Sec. 10-109.  Industrial Areas:



   In all industrial areas all driveways and parking areas shall be paved
with blacktop of a grade to be approved by the village engineer, which when
compacted shall have a minimum depth of three and one-half inches (3 ½").
Curbs and gutters shall be installed made of cement on each side of the
driveways and parking areas excepting at entrance or exit thereto.



(Code 1972, § 8-9-4)



Sec. 10-110.  Commercial Districts:



   Driveways and parking areas in commercial districts may also be paved
with concrete having a minimum depth of four inches (4").



(Code 1972, § 8-9-5)



Sec. 10-111.  Application, Sketch Required:



   Before installing any pavements, an application for a permit shall be
made to the building commissioner together with a sketch showing the areas to
be paved and the nature of the pavement to be used.



(Code 1972, § 8-9-6)



Sec. 10-112.  Permit; Fee:



   (a)   If an application under this article is satisfactory, the
building commissioner shall issue a permit for all driveways and parking
areas in multi-family dwellings or commercial areas for which there shall be
a fee charged, covering the paving of such areas. However, in new
construction the cost of the permit shall be included with the cost of the
permit for the erection of the building.



   (b)   The fee for such permit shall be as set forth in section 13-1
of this code for driveway and parking areas to be constructed plus a pre-
pour inspection fee as set forth in section 13-1 of this code.



(Code 1972, § 8-9-7; Ord. 91-28, § 3, 9-9-1991; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998;
Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2014-20, § 4, 10-13-2014)



Sec. 10-113.  Violation:



   Anyone violating any of the terms of the provisions of this article
shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for such violations and each
day shall be considered a separate violation.



(Code 1972, § 8-9-10; Ord. 76-8, 5-6-1976)



Sec. 10-114.  Snow Removal From Parking Lots1:



   (a)   All owners of commercial and multi-family residential property
shall clear their parking lots of all snow and ice following any snowfall of
two inches (2") or more within twenty four (24) hours of such snowfall.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow
to remain in or upon any public right-of-way including, but not limited to,
sidewalks, aprons and other paved areas, any material or substance injurious
to persons or property.



   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or
for any agent thereof to plow or otherwise remove accumulated snow from a
private parking lot or drive and deposit same on a public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, sidewalks, aprons, and other paved areas.



   (d)   For purposes of this section, “deposit” shall include any
action to remove snow from a private lot or drive which results in the
leaving of more than a negligible amount of snow upon the public right-of-way
including, but not limited to, sidewalks, aprons and other paved areas.



   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or
for any agent thereof to plow snow from a private driveway or parking lot and
deposit same on any village street or right-of-way including, but not limited
to, sidewalks, aprons and other paved areas, in such a manner so as to
decrease the drivable width of any such street.



   (f)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or
for any agent thereof to plow snow from a private driveway or parking lot and
deposit same on any village street or right-of-way including, but not limited
to, sidewalks, aprons and other paved areas, in such a manner so as to
decrease the visibility of motorists within twenty feet (20') of any
intersection of any street.



   (g)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or
for any agent thereof to plow snow from a private driveway or parking lot and
deposit same on any village street or right-of-way including, but not limited
to, sidewalks, aprons and other paved areas and deposit same on the property
of another without written permission of the other property owner.



   (h)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or
for any agent thereof to obstruct, harass, prevent or otherwise interfere
with any employee of the city engaged in snow removal service or to obstruct,
cause damage to or otherwise interfere with any city-owned or leased vehicle
used in conjunction with snow removal services.



   (i)   Any violator of this provision shall be subject to fines as
set forth in section 1-7 of this code in that each violation of this section
may be fined in a sum not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
any one offense.



(Ord. 99-7, § 1, 3-22-1999)



1 See also § 10-29 of this chapter.



Secs. 10-115-10-130.  Reserved:



ARTICLE V.  EXCAVATIONS1 3



1  65 ILCS 5/11-80-7, 5/11-80-13.



Sec. 10-131.  Permit; Required:



   Any person who for any reason shall tunnel under a public street within
the corporate limits of the village, including the parkway and sidewalk, or
an easement granted for public purposes, shall first obtain a permit therefor
from the village.



(Code 1972, § 8-10-1; Ord. 94-9, § 1, 6-14-1994)



Sec. 10-132.  Permit; Application:



   Applications for permits to tunnel under a public street, or parkway,
sidewalk or easement shall be made to the public works director. Such
application shall specify the intended location and purpose of the tunneling
and the anticipated length of time required to complete the work. The fee for
such permit shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). All such new installations
shall also pay an inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). An engineering
fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged for an application which
requires a crosscut in the street.



(Code 1972, § 8-10-2; Ord. 91-28, § 4, 9-9-1991; Ord. 94-9, § 2,
6-14-1994; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 10-133.  Bond:



   All persons who for any reason shall tunnel under a public street
within the corporate limits of the village, including a parkway, sidewalk or
easement shall deposit with the village a cash street bond in the amount of
five hundred dollars ($500.00). The contractor shall be required to prove to
the public works director the need to excavate. Excavation shall only be done
as a last resort and with the express consent of the public works director.



(Code 1972, § 8-10-3; Ord. 94-9, § 3, 6-14-1994; Ord. 2001-05, § 2,
2-26-2001; Ord. 2009-15, § 47, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 10-134.  Backfilling:



   (a)   In the event tunneling cannot be accomplished, all excavations
or openings under existing or proposed streets shall be backfilled to the
subgrade of the roadway with trench backfill, as defined by the standard
specifications for road and bridge construction of the state. Surfacing shall
be placed over the backfilled area in such a manner that the existing grade
is preserved. Any depression or ridges in the new surface shall be removed
and replaced to the proper grade. Surfacing to be placed over the backfilled
area shall be of the same type as the existing roadway or of a higher grade.
Six inches (6") of concrete and four inches (4") of asphalt shall be
installed as per village ordinance.



   (b)   In the case of openings which may pose special problems of
backfill and surfacing, the contractor shall file with the village engineer a
written report as to why the project should be specially considered and how
these special considerations should be solved.



   (c)   In no event shall excavations or openings be allowed, without
the express written consent (in the form of a permit) of the public works
director, after consultation with the village engineer.



   (d)   In the event the backfilling or surfacing is defective, the
contractor shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day
that the defective condition exists. The director of public works shall issue
an inspection report as to the condition of the repair work.



   (e)   In addition to the aforesaid fines, the street must be
restored to its original condition.



(Code 1972, § 8-10-4; Ord. 94-9, § 4, 6-14-1994; Ord. 94-24, § 1,
10-24-1994; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 10-135.  Surface Deterioration:



   The cash street opening bond shall be posted in order to ensure
compliance with the provisions of section 10-134 of this article. Such bond
shall remain on deposit with the village for a period of twelve (12) months
after the completion of the work. Except for the provisions of section 10-136
of this article, if after twelve (12) months the surface shall remain in the
condition as before the excavation was made, the bond shall be returned. If
the surface shall deteriorate within the twelve (12) month period, the person
posting the bond shall be notified immediately of this fact and shall, within
eight (8) hours, post barriers and warning lights. If the surface is not so
restored within forty eight (48) hours, the department of public works shall
undertake the repair work under the direction and supervision of the chairman
of the streets and roads committee who shall submit to the village clerk a
bill for such work. The village shall subtract the amount of such bill from
the cash street opening bond and shall then return any sum remaining to the
person posting the bond in the same manner as a bond from which no sum is
subtracted. If the amount of such bond shall be insufficient to cover the
cost of such repairs, the person posting such bond shall be liable for the
difference. 



(Code 1972, § 8-10-5; Ord. 2009-15, § 47, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 10-136.  Multiple Permits:



   Any person who shall desire to post a single cash bond for multiple
permits may do so by depositing with the village a cash bond of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). In the case of a bond for multiple permits, the same
procedure shall be followed as in relation to bonds as specified in section
10-135 of this article. If, however, the sum of such bond shall be reduced
below one hundred dollars ($100.00) due to repairs made by the department of
public works, the person posting such bond shall be required to deposit an
additional cash sum with the village.



(Ord. 72-13, 4-6-1972; Code 1972, § 8-10-6; Ord. 94-9, § 5, 6-14-1994; Ord.
2009-15, § 47, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 10-137.  Conditions For Permit Issuance:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful to make any opening, excavation in or
tunnel any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the
village without having first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such
permits shall be made to the village, and shall specify the intended location
and purpose of the excavation.



   (b)   In each case the applicant shall agree to pay all of the cost
of restoring such street, alley, sidewalk or other public place and the
surface thereof to the condition that existed before the opening, excavation
or tunnel was made. No such permit shall be issued until the applicant has
deposited with the village the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Now
each such opening, excavation or tunnel which such deposit shall be deposited
by the applicant and used by the village for the purpose of paying the cost
of restoring such street, alley, sidewalk or other public place and the
surface thereof to the condition that existed before the opening, excavation
or tunnel was made, provided that the applicant shall, in each case, do all
necessary backfilling or cause the same to be done. In restoring such street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place, the village may use its own employees
and equipment and make reasonable charges therefor, or it may engage the
services of other persons and equipment and charge the cost thereof to the
applicant. Any balance of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant, and
any charges over the deposit, collected from the applicant. In case the
applicant shall restore the street to its original condition the applicant
shall be entitled to the return of his deposit after one year from the date
of application or restoration, whichever is later; otherwise, the deposit may
be used as specified herein.



   (c)   No such permit shall be issued unless the applicant has on
file with the village and in full force and effect a bond in the amount of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with surety to be approved by the village,
conditioned to indemnify the village against any and all loss or liability
resulting from the making of such opening, excavation or tunnel.



   (d)   All such openings, excavations, tunnels, refills and
resurfacing shall be made subject to the supervision of the public works
director.



(Code 1972, § 8-1-25; Ord. 94-9, 6-14-1994; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001;
Ord. 2009-15, § 47, 6-22-2009)



Secs. 10-138-10-145.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VI.  PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT JOB DESCRIPTIONS



Sec. 10-146.  Job Descriptions:



   Administration/Grounds Custodian: The following duties and
responsibilities have been assigned to the administration/grounds custodian:



      (1)    Mowing of the grounds around the administration
building and pavilion area.



      (2)    Maintaining of hedges in front of the administration
building.



      (3)    Maintaining clean waste receptacles around the
administration building.



      (4)    Maintaining sump pumps in the basement.



      (5)    Maintaining filters for the air conditioners.



      (6)    Periodical washing of the outside of the windows on the
administration building.



      (7)    Maintaining the administration sidewalks during a
measurable snowfall.



      (8)    Performance of duties that pertain to the
administration building that may be assigned at a later date.



      (9)    Maintaining village sign in front of the administration
building.



      (10)    Delivering hot lunches to shut ins.



      The above duties will be performed on a regular basis.



      The custodian will report daily to the public works director to
coordinate his or her daily activities. The public works director will have
jurisdiction over the custodian’s daily activities.



      Work to be done on Saturdays or Sundays must be cleared and
scheduled in advance with the public works director.



      The custodian is to limit his or her time to twenty five (25)
hours per week, unless permission is given by the mayor, trustee or public
works director to exceed those guidelines. In case of an emergency, the
custodian when unable to contact any of the above, may work the necessary
hours to complete a priority task.



   Laborer: Laborers shall be classified at three (3) different levels:



   Laborer I: Will be the starting position for laborers. This position
will be maintained until the director feels that the employee is sufficiently
trained to be classified to the next class.



   Laborer II: Will be fully trained employees who are well versed on the
normal day to day operations of the department and can be called upon to
perform functions of the department without specific instructions.



   Laborer III: Will be for advanced laborers who are fully capable of
operating heavy equipment and repairing equipment and vehicles. Laborer III
employees will fill in for the public works director and mechanic during
their absences.



   Mechanic: The department mechanic will have direct responsibility for
any mechanical repairs to all vehicles in the department and any equipment
that may be assigned to him/ her by the public works director for repairs.
He/she shall see that all equipment is kept in good mechanical condition. The
mechanic shall also be required to work on the street when equipment is not
being repaired.



   Office Clerk: There shall be one office clerk for the public works
department. The office clerk shall be responsible for answering the phone,
taking messages, securing information requested by the public works director
and relaying the information obtained directly to the public works director.
The office clerk shall also perform office duties as assigned by the public
works director.



   Public Works Director: The village president with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees shall appoint a public works director. The
director shall be in charge of all personnel and all functions of the public
works department.



   Temporary Or Part Time Help: A temporary or part time worker will
perform duties as assigned by the public works director. The employee will be
required to assist laborers in their duties.



(Ord. 90-19, 10-8-1990; Ord. 2001-05, §§ 1, 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 10-147.  Issue Citations:



   The public works director is hereby empowered and authorized to issue
appropriate citations for violations of ordinances regarding:



      (1)    Drainage;



      (2)    Sewer maintenance;



      (3)    Street maintenance;



      (4)    Grass and weed cutting.



   He is also authorized to stop work on projects within the village for
obvious building code violations.



(Ord. 96-30, § 2, 9-9-1996; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Secs. 10-148-10-150.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VII.  PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS



Sec. 10-151.  Hiring Practices:



   (a)   The public works director shall interview prospective
employees and submit his recommendation to the public utilities committee.
The public utilities committee shall have the authority to hire employees at
any time it deems necessary upon village board approval.



   (b)   A physical examination, including blood and urine tests, shall
be required before a prospective employee is hired.



   (c)   Each new employee shall serve a thirty (30) day probationary
period.



(Ord. 90-19, 10-8-1990; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 10-152.  Drug And/Or Alcohol Testing:



   (a)   The village hereby establishes and adopts a drug and alcohol
policy as mandated by state and federal regulations. United States code of
federal regulations, 49 CFR part 40 and part 382 are hereby adopted and made
a part of this section. Said policy is on file with the village and effective
as of January 1, 1997.



   (b)   Each village employee shall receive such policy and certify
for such receipt.



   (c)   Each employee shall submit to drug and/or alcohol testing if
the employee is suspected of taking drugs and/or alcohol while on duty, as a
requirement for employment and continued employment.



   (d)   If an employee is found positive for drugs and/or alcohol
after such testing, the department head or his authorized representative
shall document such fact. The employee shall be subject to discipline up to
and including termination of employment. The employee may be required to
participate in a rehabilitation program.



   (e)   If an employee is suspended, upon returning to work the
employee must be retested. If retesting is found to be positive, the employee
shall be subject to discipline up to and including termination of employment.
The employee may be required to participate in a rehabilitation program.



   (f)   If an employee refuses to participate in such rehabilitation
program, the employee shall be subject to discipline up to and including
termination. An employee entering rehabilitation may use time due, vacation,
sick, personal or extended sick days. This offense shall be considered as the
second offense.



   (g)   All disciplinary action will be documented in the employee's
personnel file for eighteen (18) months. During this period, if an employee
has no other violation his/her record will be expunged from the file.



   (h)   An employee requesting voluntary rehabilitation for a drug or
alcohol problem will enter into a qualified substance abuse program and no
action will be taken against said employee.



   (i)   If an employee refuses to submit to such testing, it shall
result in termination of employment.



   (j)   If an employee does not complete rehabilitation, the employee
shall be terminated.



(Ord. 90-19, 10-8-1990; Ord. 97-1, § 1, 1-13-1997; Ord. 98-36, § 1,
8-10-1998; Ord. 2009-15, § 48, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 10-153.  Work Hours:



   (a)   Forty (40) hours per week are required of all full time
employees of the public works department.



   (b)   Work hours shall be from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. until four
o'clock (4:00) P.M. unless otherwise scheduled by the public works director.



   (c)   Emergency work shall be at the discretion of the director. If
an employee refuses emergency work, he shall be written up.



   (d)   A thirty (30) minute lunch shall be allotted to each employee.



   (e)   Each employee shall be granted a fifteen (15) minute morning
and afternoon break. The employee is not to leave the job site while on break
unless authorization is given by the public works director or an emergency
situation arises.



(Code 1972, § 8-12-5; Ord. 90-19, 10-8-1990; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 10-154.  Overtime Pay:



   (a)   All hours over the normal eight (8) hour shift by public works
department employees are to be compensated with pay at the rate of one and
one-half (1 1/2) hours for each hour worked.



   (b)   All hours worked in excess of forty (40) (not counting
overtime hours) shall be compensated with pay at the rate of one and one-half
(1 1/2) hours pay for each hour worked.



(Code 1972, § 8-12-9; Ord. 90-19, 10-8-1990)



Sec. 10-155.  Salary Increases:



   (a)   Increases in salaries of public works department employees
shall be considered by the village board on a yearly basis.



   (b)   A ten cent ($0.10) per hour increase shall be granted each
employee on his service anniversary date. The anniversary increase is not
allotted to salaried or part time employees.



   (c)   A yearly evaluation on each employee shall be submitted by the
department head to the finance committee by April 1 to help determine the
amount of the salary increase. (One factor for yearly evaluation shall be
personal appearance.)



(Code 1972, § 8-12-6; Ord. 90-19, 10-8-1990)



Sec. 10-156.  Scheduled Paid Holidays:



   Scheduled paid holidays for the public works department shall be as
follows:



      (1)    There shall be nine (9) in number as follows:



         a.    Four (4) hours (1/2 day) New Year's Eve day.



         b.    New Year's Day.



         c.    Good Friday.



         d.    Memorial Day.



         e.    Independence Day.



         f.    Labor Day.



         g.    Thanksgiving Day and the day after.



         h.    Four (4) hours (1/2 day) Christmas Eve day.



         i.    Christmas Day.



      (2)    Any paid holidays falling on a Saturday, shall be taken
Friday prior, if the holiday falls on a Sunday, the Monday after shall be
taken as the holiday.



      (3)    Vacations that include a holiday will entitle the
employee to one extra day, either the Friday prior to his vacation, or the
Monday after his vacation.



      (4)    If an employee misses the day just before or just after
a paid holiday, he forfeits pay for that holiday.



(Code 1972, § 8-12-8; Ord. 90-19, 10-8-1990)



Sec. 10-157.  Sick Days:



   Five (5) days per calendar year will be granted each full time employee
of the public works department. These days shall not be accumulated.



(Code 1972, § 8-12-11; Ord. 85-16, 9-9-1985; Ord. 90-19, 10-8-1990)



Sec. 10-158.  Personal Leave:



   One (1) personal day shall be granted to public works department
employees per each calendar year. This single day off with pay can be used
whenever it is so desired, and only if it does not conflict with current
business or work schedules.



(Code 1972, § 8-12-3; Ord. 90-19, 10-8-1990)



Sec. 10-159.  Funeral Leave:



   (a)   Personal days shall be granted and used when there is a death
in the immediate family of a public works department employee.



   (b)   This leave shall be limited to three (3) days for each
occurrence.



   (c)   Immediate family shall be defined as follows: mother, father,
spouse, siblings, children, grandchildren, grandparents, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, only.



(Code 1972, § 8-12-4; Ord. 90-19, 10-8-1990)



Sec. 10-160.  Vacation:



   (a)   By March 1, requests for vacations shall be submitted to the
public works director, scheduling shall be determined by seniority. The
public works director is to set the schedule. One (1) week shall be granted
day by day with a one week notice to the public works director. No two (2)
people are to take vacations at the same time.



   (b)   Vacation time for public works department employees shall be
as follows:



 

      (1)    One through four (4) years
 
10 days


      (2)    Five (5) through nineteen (19) years
 
15 days


      (3)    Twenty (20) or more years
 
20 days


      (4)    All vacations must be taken during the calendar year.
 



 



(Code 1972, § 8-12-1; Ord. 90-19, 10-8-1990; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 10-161.  Leaves Of Absence:



   (a)   All leaves of absence for employees of the public works
department shall be unpaid and granted solely at the discretion of the
village board.



   (b)   During the period of such leave of absence, the individual
will forfeit all benefits pertaining to such employment by the village.



   (c)   The individual shall pay their insurance if they desire
coverage during the leave of absence.



(Code 1972, § 8-12-2; Ord. 90-19, 10-8-1990)



Sec. 10-162.  Disciplinary Action:



   All disciplinary action shall be handled by the public works director
for any violation of this article.



      (1)    The employee shall be notified of offenses for which
he/she is charged, by the public works director and a witness.



      (2)    Each offense will require appropriate disciplinary
action.



      (3)    Wilful misuse or damage to village equipment or
property shall be cause for immediate termination.



      (4)    The employee shall have the right to appeal
disciplinary action to the public utilities committee within three (3)
working days, the appeal shall be presented in writing.



      (5)    Suspension of an employee shall not entitle him to any
compensation while on suspension.



      (6)    Disciplinary scheduled hours off shall not entitle
employee to compensation of any kind.



(Code 1972, § 8-12-7; Ord. 90-19, 10-8-1990; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 10-163.  Part Time Personnel:



   (a)   Part time employees of the public works department are
entitled only to compensation for hours worked.



   (b)   No paid holidays, personal days of any type, vacation days,
sick time days or overtime pay will be granted.



(Code 1972, § 8-12-10; Ord. 90-19, 10-8-1990)



Secs. 10-164-10-169.  Reserved:



 


Notes

1 
65 ILCS 5/11-30-8.

2 
65 ILCS 5/11-80-13, 5/11-84-1 et seq.

3 
65 ILCS 5/11-80-7, 5/11-80-13.



CHAPTER 11
UTILITIES 1,2



   Art. I.   In  General, §§ 11-1-11-11.1



   Art. II.   Water, §§  11-12-11-30



   Art. III.   Wastewater Generally, §§ 11-31-11-119



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 11-31-11-50



      Div. 2.   Service Charges; Collection, §§ 11-51-11-75



      Div. 3.   Building Sewers And Connections, §§ 11-76-11-105



      Div. 4.   Use Of Public Sewers, §§ 11-106-11-119



   Art. IV.   Emergency Telephone System, §§ 11-120-11-139



   Art. V.   Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee,
11-140-11-159  (Rep. by Ord. 2005-01, 13, 1-10.2005)



   Art. VI.   Construction Of Utility Facilities In The Public Rights
Of Way, §§ 11-160-11-189



1  See also chapter 2, "Administration"; chapter 3, "Business Regulations";
chapter 4, "Fire Prevention And Protection"; chapter 5, "Health And
Sanitation"; chapter 8, "Planning And Development"; chapter 10, "Streets,
Sidewalks, Driveways And Parking Lots"; chapter 13, "Fees And Rates"; §
2-356 et seq., sanitation and drainage inspector; § 7-312, preventing injury
from gas pipes; § 8-66 et seq., plumbing; § 8-211 et seq., swimming pools;
§ 8-341 et seq., water supply and sanitary sewer systems in floodplains, of
this code.



2  65 ILCS 6/9, 5/11-117 et seq., 5/11-124 et seq.; 220 ILCS.



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



Sec. 11-1.  Deposit Of Objectionable Waste:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-13)



Sec. 11-2.  Right Of Entry For Inspection:



   The plumbing inspector, public works director, and other duly
authorized employees of the village, the Illinois environmental protection
agency and the United States environmental protection agency, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties
for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and
testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The plumbing
inspector or public works director or his representative shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical,
oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway
or facilities for waste treatment.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-42; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 11-3.  Conduct Of Inspections, Testing; Liability:



   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in section 11-2 of this article, the plumbing inspector or public works
director or duly authorized employees of the village, the Illinois
environmental protection agency and the United States environmental
protection agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury
or death to village employees and the village shall indemnify the company
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operating, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
company to maintain conditions as required in section 11-86 of this chapter.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-43; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 11-4.  Village Easements:



   The plumbing inspector and public works director or other duly
authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but
not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within such easement.
All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement, shall be done in
full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to
the private property involved.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-44; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 11-5.  Violations; Notice To Correct:



   Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter except
section 11-35 of this chapter, shall be served by the village with written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within a
period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The
village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any
violation of any provision of this chapter.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-45)



Sec. 11-6.  Penalties:



   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in the notice of violation provided for in the preceding section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined a
minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00), for each violation. Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-46; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998)



Sec. 11-7.  Owner, Occupant Liability:



   The services of the water and sewer system are furnished to the
respective premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of
the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service are jointly
and severally liable therefor to the village.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-47)



Sec. 11-8.  Billing For Services:



   It shall be the duty of the village president’s duly authorized
designee to cause statements for charges to be delivered to each customer of
the water and sewer system at such intervals as will be determined by the
president and board of trustees but in no event at any greater interval than
three (3) months.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-48; Ord. 2009-15, § 49, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 11-9.  Payments In Arrears:



   No person owing waterworks and sewerage charges and removing to other
premises where there are such connections or where connections shall
afterwards be made shall be served until such charges in arrears are paid in
full.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-49)



Sec. 11-10.  Lowlands:



   (a)   All low, swampy, boggy or undrained lands within the village
limits are hereby declared to be unsanitary and unfit for residential
purposes, and the erection of residential buildings thereon is hereby
prohibited, except as hereinafter provided.



   (b)   No residential building shall be erected or permit issued for
the erection thereof by the village upon any land within the village limits
which the health officer shall reasonably find to be of the character
described in subsection (a) of this section, and so certify by a written
certificate filed with the village, unless upon application by the owner of
such land to the board of trustees which shall, by resolution, determine that
the finding of the health officer is incorrect, or unless or until an
ordinance providing adequate drainage for the proposed building site by
special assessment has been duly enacted by the board of trustees and
confirmed by the judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction or a plan for
the private drainage of the proposed building site has been filed with the
building commissioner, and certified by him and the health officer to be
adequate, and the carrying out and maintenance of such plan by the person or
persons holding legal title to the proposed building site, his personal
representative or assigns, assured by the execution by such owner of a
contract to that effect with the village, with reasonable guarantee and
securities for the performance thereof.



(Code 1972, §§ 8-8-56, 8-8-58; Ord. 2009-15, § 49, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 11-11.  Storm Water Detention:



   In order to provide detention storage to eliminate the excessive water
runoff during heavy storm periods the following requirements shall apply:



      (1)    A combination of storage and controlled release of
storm water runoff is required for all commercial, industrial and residential
developments exceeding ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area. Every
development must have an adequate outlet as signified on the metropolitan
sanitary district permit application by the village engineer, and will be
required to store that portion of the runoff exceeding the outlet capacity.



      (2)    The release rate of storm water from all developments
requiring detention shall not exceed the storm water runoff rate from the
area in its natural undeveloped state.



      (3)    Drainage systems shall have adequate capacity to bypass
through the development the flow from all upstream areas for a storm of
design frequency assuming that the land is in a fully developed state under
present zoning or zoning proposed under a comprehensive plan. The bypass flow
rate shall be computed utilizing a runoff coefficient of not less than thirty
five hundredths. An allowance will be made for upstream detention when such
upstream detention and release rate has previously been approved by the
metropolitan sanitary district of greater Chicago and that evidence of its
construction can be shown.



      (4)    The live detention storage to be provided will be
calculated on the basis of the 100-year frequency rainfall as published by
the United States weather bureau for this area. The detention volume required
will be that necessary to handle the runoff of a 100-year rainfall, for any
and all durations, from the fully developed drainage tributary to the
reservoir, less that volume discharged during the same duration at the
approved release rate.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-59; Ord. 84-24, 8-16-1984)



Sec. 11-11.1.  Privately Built Utility Lines:



   All privately installed utility lines shall be installed and fully
tested by the village for final approval to transfer said utility line to the
village of Justice. The contractor and/or developer owning the utility lines
shall guarantee the materials and labor in the installation of the utility
line to be transferred to the village of Justice for a period of one year
upon the date of initial occupancy of the building by posting a surety
subdivision bond or other financial guarantee in the amount equal to ten
percent (10%) of the cost of the construction of said utility lines. A bill
of sale in a form that meets the approval of the village of Justice building
commissioner shall be issued the village of Justice by the
contractor/developer owning the system prior to final occupancy or the
release of any occupancy permit funds if final occupancy has already occurred.



(Ord. 2004-17, § 2, 8-9-2004)



ARTICLE II.  WATER



Sec. 11-12.  Charges By Water Department:



   All water supplied by the village water department shall be charged at
the following rates:



      (1)    Water Rates; Residential: The customer shall be billed
every two (2) months as follows:



         a.    The first eight thousand (8,000) gallons at a
minimum rate of twenty four dollars twenty four cents ($24.24).



         b.    All water over eight thousand (8,000) gallons at
three dollars thirteen cents ($3.13) per one thousand (1,000) gallons.



      (2)    Water Rates; Commercial: Commercial rates shall apply
to all users other than single-family residential or municipal. The customer
shall be billed every two (2) months as follows:



         a.    The first eight thousand (8,000) gallons at a
minimum rate of twenty four dollars twenty eight cents ($24.28).



         b.    All water over eight thousand (8,000) gallons at
three dollars twenty four cents ($3.24) per one thousand (1,000) gallons.



         c.    Minimum rates of twenty four dollars twenty eight
cents ($24.28) per unit to be charged to commercial accounts that do not
provide a meter reading.



      (3)    Minimum Charge Described: Any person taking water
service by meter from the village shall pay a minimum charge equal to the
charge for eight thousand (8,000) gallons for each period of two (2) months.



      (4)    Charge For No Reading: There will be a charge of three
dollars ($3.00) bimonthly if a meter reading is not obtained by the village.



      (5)    Mandatory Meter Reading: It shall be mandatory that
before June 15 of each and every fiscal year a meter reading shall be
obtained by the village water department for any user that has had no meter
reading during the fiscal year ending June 30.



      (6)    Water Bills; When Due And Payable; Penalty: All water
bills to consumers within the village water department taking water service
by meter from the village shall be due and payable within fifteen (15) days
after receipt of bill for the previous two (2) month period. A penalty of ten
percent (10%) shall be charged to all consumers who pay after the fifteenth
day of the billing month. If a bill remains unpaid more than thirty (30) days
after issuance, the water shall be turned off without further notice, and
shall not be turned on again until the arrears are paid to the village.



      (7)    Shutoff And Reconnection Charges For Nonpayment: Where
water service has been cut off for failure to pay water bills as provided in
subsection (6) of this section, there shall be a charge of five dollars
($5.00) for the shutoff service, which charge shall be added to the unpaid
balance then due. A charge of five dollars ($5.00) will be paid for restoring
of water service after all bills have been paid, such charge to be paid to
the village prior to the restoration of water service.



      (8)    Liability For Payment: The owner of the premises, the
occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally
liable to pay for the service on such premises, and the service furnished to
the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the
premises, occupant and user of the service are jointly and severally liable
therefor to the village.



      (9)    Water Permits: All construction shall require a permit
before using water supplied by the village water department, as follows:



         a.    Water supplied in connection with construction
work may be furnished without a meter, the rate to be twenty five dollars
($25.00) per month payable in advance. Water permit to be issued by the
village at no charge for the permit.



         b.   A water permit is to be obtained before connecting
to the village water department main. The fee for a single-family residence
shall be two hundred thirty one dollars ($231.00) which includes a twenty
five dollar ($25.00) security deposit which is refundable after two (2) years
of constructive payments, and a ten dollar ($10.00) inspection fee. Multiple
and business buildings will be charged by the Justice-Willow Springs water
commission. The village is to issue water permit prior to tap in.



         c.    All taps done on the village water mains are to be
done by a licensed plumber and inspected by the village.



         d.    All procedures for installation of water lines,
mains, meters and tap-ins are to follow the revised rules and regulations of
the Justice-Willow Springs water commission, the county building ordinance
and this code.



      (10)    Tampering With System: It shall be unlawful for any
person to interfere in any manner with any water main, service pipe, water
pipe, fire hydrant, or any other fixture connected with the water department,
or comprising a part of such system. Such interference includes, but is not
limited to, cutting, damaging, tampering with, destroying, or defacing any
fire hydrant or other fixture. It shall be unlawful for any person to
intentionally open any fire hydrant without proper authorization. Any person
who violates any of the provisions of this subsection shall be fined not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).



(Code 1972, § 8-8-60; Ord. 81-15, 6-4-1981; Ord. 85-12, 7-22-1985; Ord.
88-23, 9-12-1988; Ord. 89-10, 6-12-1989; Ord. 91-20, 7-22-1991; Ord. 92-8,
3-2-1992; Ord. 96-4, 2-12-1996; Ord. 2000-08, 2-14-2000; Ord. 2001-01,
1-8-2001; Ord. 2009-14, § 6, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 11-13.  Water Usage Ordinance Of Justice-Willow Springs Water
Commission:



   The Justice-Willow Springs water commission is hereby granted the
right, permission and authority to construct, operate and maintain in and
through the village of Justice for a new term of fifty (50) years, beginning
with the effective date hereof and continuing until the year 2055, a system
for the supply, storage, distribution and sale of water under the same terms
and conditions specified in the ordinance which was passed on June 3, 1963.



(Ord. 89-15, §§ 1-3, 7-24-1989; Ord. 2005-25, § 2, 11-28-2005)



Sec. 11-14.  Potable Water:



   (a)   Definitions:



      Person: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm,
company, limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or
their legal representatives, agents or assigns.



      Potable Water: Any water used for human or domestic consumption,
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes, or preparing foods.



   (b)   Prohibition: The use of ground water as a potable water supply
is prohibited, except for such uses or methods in existence before the
effective date hereof. The use of, or attempted use of, ground water from
within the corporate limits of the village of Justice, as a potable water
supply, by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method, is
hereby prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes the village of Justice.



   (c)   Effective Date: The president of the board of trustees of the
village of Justice has hereby authorized this express prohibition in
subsection (b) of this section nunc pro tunc to March 8, 2004, the date of
the original MOU which has been lost.



   (d)   Penalty: Any person violating the terms and conditions of this
section shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), with each and every day that the violation of this section
is allowed to remain in effect being deemed a complete and separate offense.
In addition, the appropriate authorities of the village may take such other
actions they deem proper to enforce the terms and conditions of this section,
including, without limitation, an action in equity to compel compliance with
its terms. Any person violating the terms of this section shall be subject,
in addition to the foregoing penalties, to the payment of court costs and
reasonable attorney fees of the village.



(Ord. 2004-04, §§ 2, 3, 4, 3-8-2004; Ord. 2006-19, §§ 2, 3, 4, 5,
10-23-2006)



Secs. 11-15-11-30.  Reserved:



ARTICLE III.  WASTEWATER GENERALLY



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 11-31.  Definitions:



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   MSDGC: The metropolitan sanitary district of greater Chicago.



   OM&R: Operation and maintenance plus replacement.



   Sanitary Sewer: A sewer or drain for the drainage of water closets,
sinks, laundry tubs, bathtubs and similar fixtures.



   Storm Water Sewer: A sewer or drain for the drainage of roofs, lands,
foundations and surface water.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-54)



Sec. 11-32.  Treatment Required:



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-14)



Sec. 11-33.  Privies, Cesspools, Etc.:



   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-15)



Sec. 11-34.  Mandatory Connection To Facilities:



   The owner of all the houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the
village is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety
(90) days after date of official notice to do so.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-16)



Sec. 11-35.  Destruction Of Equipment:



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the sewerage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-41)



Sec. 11-36.  Manual Of Procedures, Studies And Maps Adopted:



   (a)   “The Manual of Procedures for the Administration of the
Sewer Permit Ordinance of the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater
Chicago”, adopted September 3, 1970, is hereby adopted by reference as the
manual of procedures of the Village for sewer permits and sewerage systems,
and three (3) copies of such regulations on file with the village shall be
kept available for public use, inspection and examination.



   (b)   The following studies and maps that establish high-water
elevations and limits of flood plain based on the 100-year flood are adopted.
The data which will be used by the village is listed below in descending
order of overall accuracy, completeness and currentness. When data of higher
order becomes available, data of the lower order will not be used.



      (1)   HUD flood insurance studies (FIS), if certified by
Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources (IDOT-DWR).



      (2)   (IDOT-DWR) regulatory flood plain maps and profiles.



      (3)   Soil Conservation Service-Metropolitan Sanitary District
of Greater Chicago (SCS-MSDGC) flood water management plans, using the
“without project” data shown therein.



      (4)   Other detailed 100-year flood studies, if certified by
IDOT-DWR.



      (5)   HUD flood hazard boundary maps (FHBM) and approximate
FIS data.



      (6)   USGS maps of flood-prone areas.



      (7)   USGS-NIPC hydrologic investigation atlases (floods of
record).



   (c)   The following requirements are adopted and made a part of the
building code ordinance1 by reference:



      (1)   Building Openings: A doorsill, windowsill, top of
foundation or the bottom of any other opening in the outer walls of a
building or structure shall be constructed at an elevation not lower than
twelve inches (12") above the established high-water elevation of the
100-year flood and not lower than twelve inches (12") above the high-water
elevation of the flood of record, if the 100-year flood information is not
available.



      (2)   Sanitary Manholes: All sanitary sewer manholes
constructed in the flood plain must be provided with watertight, lock-type
covers, or the rims must be raised to an elevation not lower than twelve
inches (12") above the high-water elevation.



   (d)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each violation and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day on which any such violation occurs or continues.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-52; Ord. 2009-15, § 50, 6-22-2009)



1  See also § 8-31 et seq., of thiscode.



Secs. 11-37-11-50.  Reserved:



DIVISION 2. SERVICE CHARGES; COLLECTION



Sec. 11-51.  Basis For Charges:



   (a)   The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service
supplied by the sewerage system of the village shall consist of a user charge
for operation and maintenance plus replacement and a debt service charge.



   (b)   The debt service charge is computed by dividing the annual
debt service of all outstanding loans and bonds, etc., by the number of users
to the sewer system, exclusive of those on sewers built by special
assessment. Through further divisions, the monthly debt service charge can be
computed.



   (c)   The user charge shall be computed separately for residential
and nonresidential users, so that each user class pays in proportion to its
water usage. The user charge shall be computed as follows:



      (1)   Annual Water Usage: Obtain annual water usage for the
residential and nonresidential user classes from the Justice-Willow Springs
water commission for the most recent one year period.



      (2)   Estimate: Estimate the projected annual revenue required
to operate and maintain the sewerage system including a replacement fund for
the year.



      (3)   Proportion: Proportion the estimated OM&R cost to each
user class by volume.



         Residential Users: Divide OM&R cost by the number of
residential users; or



         Nonresidential Users: Proportion the OM&R cost to each user
according to volume.



   (d)   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be
reviewed, not less often than annually, by certified public accountants for
the village in their annual audit report. The wastewater service charge shall
be revised periodically to reflect a change in debt service costs or a change
in operation and maintenance costs including replacement costs.



   (e)   The users of wastewater treatment services will be notified
annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of
the user charges which are attributable to the sewerage system operation,
maintenance and replacement.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-1)



Sec. 11-52.  Debt Service Charge:



(Rep. by Ord. 93-40, § 2, 10-25-1993)



Sec. 11-53.  User Charge:



   The following user charges shall be and are hereby established for the
use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the village:



      (1)   Residential User Class: Residential users are those
residential buildings containing one (1) or two (2) residential units. The
rate for sewer usage for residential users shall be charged as set forth in
section 13-1 of this code. The monthly flat rate for senior citizens who are
residential users and who qualify for the senior citizen discount for garbage
collection pursuant to subsection 5-260(b) of this code shall be discounted
by twenty-five percent (25%).



      (2)   Commercial, Institutional/Governmental And Industrial
User Class: The class of commercial users shall include multi-family
residential buildings containing three (3) or more residential units, as well
as institutional/governmental and industrial users of the sewerage system.
The rate for sewer usage for this class shall be charged as set forth in
section 13-1 of this code.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-3; Ord. 93-37, § 1, 9-27-1993; Ord. 93-40, § 1,
10-25-1993; Ord. 98-5, § 4, 2-9-1998; Ord. 2012-25, § 3, 9-24-2012)



Sec. 11-54.  Computation Of Wastewater Service Charge:



   The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following
formula:



   Residential:



      CW = DS + UC



      Where:    CW = Amount of waste service charge ($) per billing
period



            DS = Debt service charge (section 11-52)



            UC = User charge for operation, maintenance and
replacement (section 11-53(1))



   Commercial, institutional, industrial:



      CW = DW + US x Vol.



      Where:    CW = Amount of waste service charge ($) per billing
period



            DS = Debt service charge (section 11-52)



            US = User charge for operation, maintenance and
replacement (section 11-53(3),(4))



            Vol. = Volume of water used for billing period.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-4)



Sec. 11-55.  Billing:



   (a)   The rates or charges for service set forth in this division
shall be payable bimonthly. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof
and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for
the service to such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by
the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant
and user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the
village.



   (b)   Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the village on
the first day of the month succeeding the period for which the service is
billed.



   (c)   All sewer bills are due and payable upon receipt. A penalty of
ten percent (10%) shall be charged all consumers who pay after the fifteenth
day of the billing month.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-5; Ord. 93-15, § 1, 7-12-93; Ord. 2009-14, § 7,
6-22-2009)



Sec. 11-56.  Delinquent Bills-Creation Of Lien; Notice.



   (a)   Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for thirty
(30) days after it has been rendered, the village attorney shall file with
the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the
unpaid bill, and a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount as
well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill and all
fees and costs incurred as a result of filing such lien.



   (b)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises and the village attorney has notice of this, notice shall be mailed
to the owner of the premise, if his address be known to the village, whenever
such bill remains unpaid for the period of thirty (30) days after it has been
rendered.



   (c)   The failure of the village to record such lien or to mail such
notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect
the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in subsection
(a) of this section.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-6; Ord. 2009-14, § 7, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 11-57.  Same-Foreclosure Of Lien:



   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges under this division shall
be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity
in the name of the village. The village attorney is hereby authorized and
directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the village in any
court having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which
the bill has remained unpaid six (6) months after it has been rendered.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-7)



Sec. 11-58.  Disposition Of Revenues:



   (a)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the
sewerage system shall be deposited in the sewer account. All such revenues
and moneys shall be held by the sewer and water treasurer separate and apart
from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the
village and all of such sum, without any deductions whatsoever, shall be
delivered to the sewer and water treasurer not more than ten (10) days after
receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may, from time to
time, be directed by the president and board of trustees.



   (b)   The sewer and water treasurer shall receive all such revenues
from the sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incident to the
operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the
same in the account of the fund designated as the sewer account of the
village. The treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the
manner provided in the Illinois Municipal Code, as amended1.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-8)



1  S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/11-17-13.



Sec. 11-59.  System Of Accounts:



   (a)   The sewer and water treasurer shall establish a proper system
of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which
complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to
the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be
made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the
receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system.



   (b)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual
audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the
sewerage system, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the sewer user charge system do in fact meet these regulations.
In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report
shall include the following:



      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons of water consumption by
user class for the current fiscal year;



      (2)   Billing data to show total amount billed by user class
under the user charge for the current fiscal year;



      (3)   Numbers of users in each user class (each dwelling unit
shall be counted in the residential class);



      (4)   Debt service for the current fiscal year;



      (5)   Number of users to the sewerage system, excluding those
on sewers provided by special assessment;



      (6)   A list of commercial, institutional and industrial users
and volume of water used in the current fiscal year.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-9)



Sec. 11-60.  Notice Of Rates:



   Each user will be notified by the village in conjunction with a regular
bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable
to sewerage system services, including the financial information of section
11-55 of this division.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-10)



Sec. 11-61.  Village Records Available For Federal Inspection:



   The United States Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized
representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records
of the village which are applicable to the village system of user charges for
the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpt and transcriptions thereof
to ensure compliance with the terms of the federal regulations and conditions
of the federal grant.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-11)



Sec. 11-62.  Computation Appeals:



   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for
user charges in this division shall be made available to a user within five
(5) days of receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the
method used or in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the president
and board of trustees within thirty (30) days after notification of a formal
written appeal outlining the discrepancies.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-12)



Sec. 11-63.  Special Fees:



   (a)   The rate to be charged the tollway commission plaza no. 38
under this division shall be five dollars fifty cents ($5.50) per connection
plus forty cents ($0.40) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used per
month.



   (b)   All other commercial and industrial (manufacturing,
warehousing, assembling or treating plants) shall be classified as special
users, and shall file application to the village for a special fee to be set
by the president and board of trustees.



   (c)   The rate to be charged to the village of Willow Springs for
sanitary sewers to be constructed and maintained by the village of Willow
Springs on Kean Avenue and extending along the south side of Eighty First
Street, from Kean Avenue to Cork Avenue on the east shall be one dollar
seventy five cents ($1.75) per month for each user and located in the village
of Willow Springs, Illinois. Such amount shall be paid in total on the first
day of each month by the village of Willow Springs. No user shall be granted
permission to hook up to the sanitary sewer line unless approval has been
received from the village.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-50; Ord. 93-40, § 3, 10-25-1993; Ord. 2009-15, § 51,
6-22-2009)



Sec. 11-64.  Sewer Permit Fees:



   (a)   For single-family residences and townhouses, the sewer permit
fee shall be two hundred seventy three dollars ($273.00) per unit plus a ten
dollar ($10.00) inspection fee per unit. If the sewer permit fee is waived,
an inspection fee will still be charged.



   (b)   For condominiums, apartment buildings and business
establishments, the sewer permit fee shall be two hundred seventy three
dollars ($273.00) plus twenty five dollars ($25.00) additional per unit for
sewer permit plus a ten dollar ($10.00) additional inspection charge per
building.



   (c)   The twenty five dollar ($25.00) deposit shall be refundable
after twelve (12) consecutive nondelinquent billings.



   (d)   Permits are good for a period of one year only.



   (e)   The following inspection fees will be charged for all main
sewers constructed in private property and village property:



 

6 inch VCP
 
$0.20 per foot


8 inch VCP
 
0.30 per foot


10 inch VCP
 
0.35 per foot


12 inch VCP
 
0.40 per foot


14 inch VCP
 
0.45 per foot


16 inch VCP
 
0.50 per f0.55 per footoot


18 inch VCP
 



 



   Sewer appurtenances:



 

Manholes
 
$10.00 each


Catch basins
 
10.00 each



 



(Code 1972, § 8-8-51)



Sec. 11-65.  Surcharge:



   (a)   A surcharge of ten dollars ($10.00) per month for each home,
condominium unit or individual apartment in violation according to the
listing of Sewer Systems Evaluations Inc., shall be imposed in addition to
all other charges heretofore authorized and imposed, beginning in June 1988.



   (b)   A sewer user may avoid further liability for payment of the
surcharge by requesting an inspection by the village plumbing inspector to
show that such user is in compliance with the ordinances and regulations
enumerated in ordinance 88-10.



   (c)   The surcharge shall be deemed to run with the land and shall
be binding on the heirs, successors, grantees, agents, lessees,
administrators, assigns or anyone else claiming, asserting or maintaining an
interest in the property of the sewer user and shall not be deemed to be
personal in nature.



   (d)   If a person is found to be in compliance as set forth in this
section and, upon subsequent inspection is found not to be in compliance,
such person shall be liable for payment of an amount equal to the sum of the
months since June 1988, multiplied by the monthly surcharge in effect during
such periods as the case may be; provided that, such liability shall be
reduced to fifty percent (50%) of such amount if such person complies within
a period of ten (10) days after notice by the village of his noncompliance.
If a person is found to be in a state of noncompliance a second or subsequent
time, then such person shall be liable for a sum equal to one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), plus an amount equal to the sum of the months since June
1988, multiplied by the monthly surcharge in effect during such periods, as
the case may be.



(Ord. 88-10, §§ 2-5, 5-23-1988)



Secs. 11-66-11-75.  Reserved:



DIVISION 3. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



Sec. 11-76.  Permit Required:



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-17; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 11-77.  Compliance With Federal Discharge Standards:



   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the federal act and more stringent state and local standards.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-18)



Sec. 11-78.  Application:



   (a)   Application for a building sewer permit shall be made by the
owner or his agent on a special form furnished by the village (reference
appendix 2 of the ordinance from which this section derives).



   (b)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the building commissioner.



   (c)   Permit and inspection fees in the following amounts shall be
paid to the village at the time the application is filed:



      (1)    Fees Generally: As of January 9, 2006, the sewer permit
shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00); plus an inspection fee of forty
dollars ($40.00).



         The fee charged will be set from time to time by the
president and board of trustees.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-19; Ord. 94-22, § 2, 10-24-1994; Ord. 95-7, § 2,
4-24-1995; Ord. 2006-02, § 6, 1-9-2006)



Sec. 11-79.  Sufficient Capacity:



   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, and pump stations have sufficient capacity to
adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-20)



Sec. 11-80.  Costs And Expenses:



   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-21)



Sec. 11-81.  Separate Sewer For Each Building:



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-22)



Sec. 11-82.  Inspection Of Old Sewers Prior To Use With New Buildings:



   Old building sewers may not be used in connection with new buildings.



   A twenty five dollar ($25.00) inspection fee will be charged for any
new lateral or replacement to be installed. The fee charged will be set from
time to time by the president and board of trustees.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-23; Ord. 95-7, § 1, 4-24-1995)



Sec. 11-83.  Construction Requirements:



   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the village. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American society of testing materials, water pollution
control federation manual of practice no. 9, and standard specifications for
water and sewer main construction in Illinois shall apply.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-24)



Sec. 11-84.  Elevations:



   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means
which is approved by the plumbing inspector in accordance with section 11-57
of this article, and discharged to the building sewer.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-25)



Sec. 11-85.  Surface Runoff, Groundwater Drains Not To Be Connected To
Building Sewers:



   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-26)



Sec. 11-86.  Connections To Conform To Applicable Codes, Procedures:



   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the village, or the procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials,
Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction of Illinois. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the building
commissioner and plumbing inspector before installation.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-27)



Sec. 11-87.  Inspections.



   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the plumbing
inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to
the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
plumbing inspector or his representative.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-28)



Sec. 11-88.  Use Of Barricades, Lights At Excavations; Restoration Of
Property:



   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-29)



Sec. 11-89.  Standards For Connection To Sewer System:



   (a)   All connections shall conform to the following specifications:



      (1)    The house connection shall be at least six (6) inches
in internal diameter, excepting that when cast-iron soil pipe is used, the
house connection shall be at least four (4) inches in internal diameter. The
slope or grade shall be at least one-eighth inch to one (1) foot and not more
than one-quarter inch to one (1) foot.



      (2)    The vitrified pipe in this improvement shall be made of
clay or shale, or a combination of these materials, to be hard-burned,
salt-glazed and free from cracks, flaws and laminations. Pipe shall be of
bell and spigot type and is recommended not less than three (3) feet in
length and shall have a shell thickness of not less than five-eighths inch.



      (3)    The necessary excavation and shoring shall be shaped to
fit the bottom one-half of the pipe.



      (4)    Where vitreous tile is used for the sewer line and
shall pass within ten (10) feet of any well, then the tile shall be laid in
the following manner: Thirty-pound weight building felt material shall be
laid in the trench long enough to extend twenty-five (25) feet in either
direction of the well. The tile pipe shall be laid thereon with an added seal
of the required asphalt material being applied onto the joints and then
wrapping the pipe with the aforementioned felt to envelope the pipe for this
distance.



      (5)    All trenches for house drains where construction has
taken place in roadway and driveway areas shall be backfilled with natural
sand containing not more than four (4) percent clay or with limestone
screenings. Trenches in other areas may be backfilled with the excavated
materials.



      (6)    All materials of every kind and character to be used in
the construction of this improvement shall be of first class quality,
suitable for the purposes for which they are provided and used, and subject
to the inspection of the village sewer inspector.



   (b)   All work in connection of the house service connection shall
be under the control and subject to inspection and approval by the village.
The trench excavation for the house service connection shall not be
backfilled until it has been inspected and approved by a duly authorized
representative of the village.



   (c)   Any connection between rainwater downspouts, surface water or
groundwater drains shall not be permitted with the sanitary sewerage system.



   (d)   Each house, dwelling or commercial establishment shall have a
separate and complete sanitary sewerage service which shall be independent
from that of any other adjacent building or structure, except in the case of
multiple-family dwellings or commercial establishments so arranged as to
cause independent services to be impractical.



   (e)   Each sanitary sewerage connection shall be made at the Y
branch provided for that property. The location of the Y branch shall be
designated by the village.



   (f)   Portions of existing residential sanitary sewerage systems may
be used in connection with the installation of the new sanitary sewerage
service provided such existing piping is approved for reuse by the village
sewer inspector. The sewer inspector may require that portions or all of the
existing pipe to be reused shall be uncovered for inspection purposes. No
cesspool or septic tank shall be connected to any portion of the sanitary
sewerage service connections upon its completion.



   (g)   With respect to commercial establishments, grease
traps/interceptors shall be installed in accordance with section 11-92 of
this code.



   (h)   All sewer taps that are made in the village shall be made by
the village tapper. The village tapper shall be appointed by the village
board. No private contractor shall tap any sewer in the village unless
approved by the building commissioner or appointed inspector.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-53; Ord. 2009-02, § 2, 2-9-2009)



Sec. 11-90.  Manholes.



   (a)   Where it is necessary to make a change in direction of the
house sewer between the building and public sewer, such change of direction
shall be made by means of a manhole to be constructed as the building
commissioner shall direct.



   (b)   All manholes and gravel basins shall be constructed of
concrete, either monolithic or block, composed by volume of one (1) part
portland cement, two (2) parts sand and four (4) parts gravel or crushed
stone, mixed with sufficient water. They shall be circular in section, with
an interior diameter of three (3) feet except that the top shall be drawn in
to two (2) feet beginning at a point three (3) feet below the top, so as to
fit and support the cover. The walls of such manhole or gravel basin shall be
four (4) inches in thickness if built monolithic, or five (5) inches if built
of blocks with full joints of mortar composed of one (1) part portland cement
to two (2) parts of sharp clean sand, mixed with sufficient water. Each
manhole or gravel basin shall be provided with a six-inch concrete floor with
the invert, if any, moulded smoothly in the concrete or formed of section of
vitrified pipe imbedded in the concrete. Each manhole or gravel basin shall
be provided with a cast-iron cover and cast-iron or concrete frame. The floor
of all gravel basins shall be three (3) feet below the flow line of the
outlet.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-55)



Sec. 11-91.  Garage drainage.



   Floor drains of garages shall be connected with the sanitary sewer
system. Such drains shall have intercepting grease traps approved by the
building commissioner.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-57)



Sec. 11-92.  Grease Trap/Interceptor Requirements:



   (1)   Grease trap/interceptor requirements: Grease, oil, and sand
interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the village they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes, containing grease in
excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the village, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.



   (2)   Definitions: For the purposes of this article, the following
words and terms shall have the meanings prescribed:



      a.   Approved Grease Handler means a vehicle operated by a
licensee that is validly permitted by and is inscribed with such permit
numbers issued by the Illinois Department of Agriculture pursuant to the
Illinois Dead Animal Disposal Act (225 ILCS 610/1.1 et seq.).



      b.   Facility means a place, business or establishment within
the village which may cause the discharge of wastewater.



      c.   Grease Trap/Interceptor means a constructed device,
whether installed inside or outside, and its appurtenant surfaces and working
parts, with the function of removing fats, oils, and grease from wastewaters
before such wastewaters are discharged into village sewers.



      d.   Prohibited Concentration means discharges of wastewaters
from a grease trap/interceptor in the village shall not exceed two hundred
fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) total of fats, oils and grease in any
sample, whether obtained as a composite or grab sample.



   (3)   Required Installations And Use Of Grease Trap/Interceptors:



      a.   Each person or operating facility within the village,
other than a private residence, which is or will be used for the manufacture,
processing or preparation of food or food products must install and use, at
its own expense, an appropriately sized grease trap/interceptor utilizing
industry standards, and calculating the level of wastewater that the facility
is anticipated to generate.



      b.   Exterior grease trap/interceptors and interior grease
trap/interceptors shall not be constructed, repaired, or maintained without a
permit issued by the building department.



   (4)   Required Cleaning, Maintenance, And Inspection of Grease
Trap/Interceptors:



      a.   Each person who owns or operates a grease
trap/interceptor shall cause collected or trapped fats, oils, and grease to
be cleaned and removed from such device on a periodic basis by an approved
and State of Illinois licensed grease hauler, and delivered to a facility
authorized to use, treat, or dispose of such material. Clean out and removal
shall be done on not less than a monthly basis unless the village determines
that a less or more frequent maintenance schedule is required to achieve the
purposes of this article and to minimize the discharge of a prohibited
concentration of fats, oils, or grease. The owner may request a revised
schedule upon written application to the building department.



      b.   The structural integrity of the grease trap/interceptor
shall be considered to ensure that safety and function are maintained.
Inspections performed at the time of the cleaning should note the structural
condition of the grease trap/interceptor, and provide notice of any required
service to the owner. A decaying structure, as determined by the village,
must either be replaced or repaired.



      c.   The village may make, without notice to the owner or
facility, periodic inspections of the grease trap/interceptor to verify
current operating conditions. If the operating condition of the grease
trap/interceptor is found to not be in compliance with village standards, the
owner shall be required to take immediate action to correct such deficiencies
with the grease trap/interceptor.



      d.   If the owner does not correct the deficiencies noted by
the village, the village may cause the grease trap/interceptor and private
sewer lines to be properly cleaned and maintained, either through village
staff or through private parties hired by the village.



      e.   The owner of the grease trap/interceptor will be held
liable for all costs incurred by the village, including labor, materials,
administrative costs, and outside contractors, as a result of the cleaning or
maintenance operation.



      f.   The business license or other annual business related
license may be suspended, revoked, or not renewed if the owner fails to
reimburse the village for incurred expense. In addition to revocation of
business license under this section, the village shall have the right to
record a lien against the premises where the business is located according to
section 11-92(10) of this code.



      g.   No fats, oils, or grease removed from a grease
trap/interceptor may be offered to a person for transportation nor
transported off the site except by an approved grease hauler licensed by the
village.



   (5)   Prohibition Of Discharge Of Fats, Oils And Grease:



      a.   No person shall discharge a prohibited concentration of
fats, oils, or grease into village sewers, from a facility required to
install, use, and maintain a grease trap/interceptor.



      b.   No person shall reintroduce or deposit into a grease
trap/interceptor or village sewer system any water, liquids, fats, oils, or
grease or any other content which have been blocked and removed from entering
into the sewer system by a grease trap/interceptor anywhere in or outside of
the village.



      c.   No person shall recycle, filter, clean or otherwise
process and then deposit any liquids, fats, oils, or grease or any other
content from a grease trap/interceptor back into a grease trap/interceptor or
the sewer system. The use of any on site mobile filtering system which
results in the deposit of any content taken from a grease trap/interceptor or
sewer system is strictly prohibited.



      d.   As a result of a prohibited discharge, the village may
cause the sewer main lines to be cleaned. The owner of the grease
trap/interceptor or person causing the prohibited discharge shall be held
liable for all costs incurred by the village, including labor, materials,
administrative costs, and outside contractors, as a result of the cleaning
operations.



      e.   The business license or other annual business related
license may be suspended, revoked, or not renewed if the owner fails to
reimburse the village for incurred expenses.



   (6)   Prohibitions Of Introduction Of Enzymes And Emulsifiers: No
person shall introduce, nor allow the introduction of physical, chemical or
biological agents into, grease trap/interceptors for the purpose of
suspending, dissolving, emulsifying or rendering soluble any fats, oils or
grease removed from wastewater by such grease trap/interceptors and
reintroducing them into the village sewer system.



   (7)   Licensing Of Grease Haulers: Each business, person, or owner
of any vehicle permitted by the state of Illinois doing business in the
village of Justice shall secure and maintain a village grease transporter
license. Applications for a village grease transporter license shall be filed
with the building department and shall require the payment of a one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) annual license fee. No person shall operate a vehicle
used to transport fats, oils, or grease collected from a grease
trap/interceptor within the village except in compliance with the Illinois
Dead Animal Disposal Act and regulations issued thereunder by the Department
of Agriculture. No person shall operate a vehicle used to transport fats,
oils, or grease collected from a grease trap/interceptor within the village
except if licensed as a village grease transporter.



   (8)   Record Keeping Requirements For Grease Trap/Interceptor Owners
And Grease Haulers;



      a.   No person may cause or allow the transportation of fats,
oils, or grease away from the grease trap/interceptor at which such materials
were collected unless such materials are accompanied by a shipping paper
containing the information required by the Illinois Department of Agriculture.



      b.   The grease trap/interceptor owner or operator and
transporter shall each retain a copy of the shipping document for a minimum
of two (2) years, and shall produce the documents upon request of the village.



      c.   Applications for a village grease trap/interceptor
transporter license shall be made upon the usual village license forms.



      d.   Each shipping paper shall, at a minimum, provide the
information required under the Dead Animal Disposal Act and regulations
issued thereunder by the Illinois Department of Agriculture.



      e.   A copy of the shipping paper shall be delivered or faxed
to the building department within five (5) days after each collection.



   (9)   Penalties: Except where otherwise provided in this code, any
person convicted of a violation of any provision of this code shall be fined
in a sum not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any one
offense. Each day that the owner or operator of a grease trap/interceptor or
grease hauler is in non-compliance, shall be construed as a separate offense
and subject to the fine described above.



   (10)   Creation Of Lien; Notice; Foreclosure Of Lien:



      a.   If the owner fails to reimburse the village for incurred
expenses for the installation or repair of a grease trap/interceptor as noted
in section 11-92(4)e. of this code, within thirty (30) days after notice of
such expense has been rendered, the village attorney shall file with the
county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the
unpaid bill, and a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount as
well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill and all
fees and costs incurred as a result of filing such lien.



      b.   If the  business owner whose bill is unpaid is not the
owner of the premises and the village attorney has notice of this, notice
shall be mailed to the owner of the premise, if his address be known to the
collector, whenever such bill remains unpaid for the period of thirty (30)
days after it has been rendered.



      c.   The failure of the village to record such lien or to mail
such notice of the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not
affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in
subsection a. of this section.



      d.   Property subject to alien for unpaid charges under this
division shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the
sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the
case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill
in equity in the name of the village. The village attorney is hereby
authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the
village in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any
property for which the bill has remained unpaid six (6) months after it has
been rendered.



(Ord. 2009-02, § 3, 2-9-2009)



Secs. 11-93-11-105.  Reserved:



DIVISION 4. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS



Sec. 11-106.  Discharges Generally:



   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-30)



Sec. 11-107.  Storm Sewers:



   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the plumbing inspector. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of
the plumbing inspector to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-31)



Sec. 11-108.  Prohibited Discharges-Generally:



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



      (1)    Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;



      (2)    Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant;



      (3)    Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;



      (4)    Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such
size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operating of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-32)



Sec. 11-109.  Prohibited Discharges-Dangerous Substances Enumerated:



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the public works director that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, or
constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of
these wastes, the public works director will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, the materials of construction of the sewers, the
nature of the sewage treatment process, the capacity of the sewage treatment
plant and the maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited are:



      (1)    Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C);



      (2)    Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
materials or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred
milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify
or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two (32) and one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0° and 65°C);



      (3)    Any garbage that has not been properly shredded; the
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the plumbing inspector;



      (4)    Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron
pickling wastes or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not;



      (5)    Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper,
zinc or similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the
limits established by the MSDGC for such materials;



      (6)    Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste
or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the MSDGC as necessary after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public
agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;



      (7)    Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the MSDGC in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (8)    Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5;



      (9)    Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.005
milligrams per liter as Hg at the time except as permitted by the MSDGC in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;



      (10)    Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 milligrams per liter at
any time as permitted by the MSDGC in compliance with applicable state and
federal regulations;



      (11)    Materials which exert or cause:



         a.    Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime
residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate);



         b.    Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



         c.    Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works;



         d.    Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting slugs.



      (12)    Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-33; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 11-110.  Remedies For Improper Discharge:



   (a)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in section 11-109 of this division
and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in
40 CFR 403, June 26, 1978, and any amendments thereto, and which in the
judgment of the public works director may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the public works
director may:



      (1)    Reject the wastes;



      (2)    Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;



      (3)    Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or



      (4)    Require payment to cover the added costs of handling
and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under
the provisions of section 11-60 of this article.



   (b)   If the public works director permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the president and
village board, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-34; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 11-111.  Interceptors:



   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the
opinion of the building commissioner they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except, that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
building commissioner, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-35)



Sec. 11-112.  Maintenance Of Preliminary Treatment Facilities:



   Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at his expense.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-36)



Sec. 11-113.  Control Manholes; Meters, Other Appurtenances:



   Each industry may be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the public works director, the owner of any property serviced by
a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the building
commissioner. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and
shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-37; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 11-114.  Tests:



   (a)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and
analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and
any special conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.



   (b)   The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be
performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village. The owner shall
report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at
such times and in such a manner as prescribed by the village. The owner shall
bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the
village. At such times as deemed necessary the village reserves the right to
take measurements and samples for analyses by an outside laboratory service.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-38)



Sec. 11-115.  Additional Test Requirements:



   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA division of laboratories' manual
of laboratory methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. If no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which
the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab
sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites
of all outfalls, whereas pH is determined from periodic grab samples.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-39)



Sec. 11-116.  Special Agreements:



   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the village or MSDGC and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the village and MSDGC for conveyance and
treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern, in
accordance with division 2 of this article, and applicable MSDGC ordinances,
provided such payments are in accordance with federal and state guidelines
for user charge system.



(Code 1972, § 8-8-40)



Sec. 11-117.  Discharges Into Storm Sewer Or Drainage Facility:



   No person shall discharge any sanitary waste or industrial wastewater
into any storm sewer or drainage facility.



(Ord. 87-27, § 1, 9-14-1987)



Sec. 11-118.  Footing Drain Discharge; Surface And Subsurface Water Drainage:



   It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or other person in control or
possession of any premises jointly or severally to permit any eaves trough,
footing drain, drain downspout, piping, sump pump or other device or
appliance, permanent or temporary, above or below grade, for collecting and
discharging surface water, rainwater or any other source of surface runoff
water, ground water or subsurface water to be so designed, located or
constructed over or across any street, alley, public way, or any rights of
way thereof, or public property other than by means of a village approved
storm sewer, drainage swale or other drainage system structure. No such water
shall be collected and discharged on any adjoining property. All such waters
must be discharged on the owner's property, and no such waters shall be
collected and discharged closer than six feet (6') from the side or rear lot
line of the premises unless it is enclosed in a subsurface drainage system
approved by the village which discharges such water at or near the front
property line or at a point no closer than ten feet (10') from the rear
property line; provided, however, if there is a public sidewalk on or
adjacent to the subject property, no such waters shall be collected and
discharged closer than six feet (6') from any such sidewalk. At no point will
the village allow any piping in public right of way, nor any discharging at
the back of curb unless by written approval from the village. During winter
months (November through March) all pipes that are now located in public
rights of way will be disconnected and discharged onto the ground.



(Ord. 91-21, § 1, 7-22-1991)



Sec. 11-119.  Reserved:



ARTICLE IV. EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM1 1



1  50 ILCS 750/1.



Sec. 11-120.  System Surcharge; Conditions Of Imposition:



   A surcharge is hereby imposed, subject to the provisions of section
11-121 of this article, upon the monthly billed subscribers of
telecommunication carriers residing within the village for funding of a 9-1-1
emergency telephone system.



(Ord. 91-3, § 1, 1-14-1991)



Sec. 11-121.  Surcharge Referendum:



   A referendum shall be placed by the village clerk on the April 2, 1991,
ballot for all legal voters residing in the village to vote upon the
following question:



   Shall the village of Justice impose a surcharge of up to one dollar
twenty-five cents ($1.25) per month per network connection, which surcharge
will be added to the monthly bill you receive for telephone or
telecommunication charges for the purpose of installing a 9-1-1 emergency
telephone system?



          Yes           No



(Ord. 91-3, § 2, 1-14-1991)



Sec. 11-122.  Majority Vote Imposes Surcharge:



   If a majority of the votes cast upon the question are in favor thereof,
a surcharge is hereby imposed on monthly billed subscribers of
telecommunication carriers residing within the village at a rate of up to one
dollar twenty five cents ($1.25) per month per "network connection", as
hereinafter defined.



(Ord. 91-3, § 3, 1-14-1991)



Sec. 11-123.  System Subscribers Identified:



   A monthly billed subscriber shall be deemed to reside within the
village if the "service address", as hereinafter defined, is located within
the village.



(Ord. 91-3, § 4, 1-14-1991)



Sec. 11-124.  Definitions:



   For purposes of this article the following definitions shall apply:



   Network Connection: The number of voice grade communication channels
directly between a subscriber and a telecommunication carrier's switched
network which would be required to carry the subscriber's interpremises
traffic.



   Service Address: The location of the subscriber's telecommunication
facilities accessing the network connection or connection(s) that are subject
to the surcharge. If this is not a defined location, "service address" shall
mean the location of a subscriber's primary use of the network connection as
defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois
where bills are sent.



   Telecommunication Carrier: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court
engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity.



(Ord. 91-3, § 5, 1-14-1991)



Sec. 11-125.  Exemptions To Surcharge:



   The village shall provide any telecommunication carrier collecting the
surcharge with a certified list of those network connections assigned to the
village to be exempt from imposition of the surcharge. The certified list may
be revised by the village after sixty (60) days’ prior written notice
provided to the telecommunication carriers.



(Ord. 91-3, § 6, 1-14-1991; Ord. 2009-15, § 52, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 11-126.  Surcharge Billing And Collection:



   The surcharge shall be imposed on the first day of the month following
the expiration of ninety (90) days from the date the village certifies to any
of the telecommunication carriers who are required to collect the surcharge
that the referendum referred to in section 11-121 of this article has passed.



(Ord. 91-3, § 7, 1-14-1991; Ord. 2009-15, § 52, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 11-127.  Surcharge Deductions:



   Each telecommunication carrier is hereby authorized and instructed to
deduct three percent (3%) from the gross amount of surcharge collected prior
to remittance under section 11-128 of this article in reimbursement for the
expense of accounting and collecting the surcharge.



(Ord. 91-3, § 8, 1-14-1991)



Sec. 11-128.  Remittance Of Surcharge To Village:



   Every telecommunication carrier shall remit to the village the amount
of surcharge collected for each calendar month within thirty (30) days
following expiration of each month to which the surcharge applies, net of any
network or other 9-1-1 or sophisticated 9-1-1 system charge then due to the
particular telecommunication carrier as shown on an itemized bill and the
three percent (3%) accounting and collection charge described in section
11-127 of this article.



(Ord. 91-3, § 9, 1-14-1991; Ord. 2009-15, § 52, 6-22-2009)



Sec. 11-129.  Telecommunication Carrier Statement:



   Simultaneously with the remittance described in section 11-128 of this
article each telecommunication carrier shall make a return to the village
treasurer for the period to which the remittance applies stating as follows:



      (1)    The name of the telecommunication carrier.



      (2)    The telecommunication carrier's principal place of
business.



      (3)    The number of network connections to which the
surcharge applies.



      (4)    The amount of surcharge collected.



      (5)    Such other reasonable and related information as the
corporate authorities may require.



(Ord. 91-3, § 10, 1-14-1991)



Sec. 11-130.  Surcharge Overpayment, Credit:



   If it shall appear that an amount of surcharge has been paid which was
not due under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any surcharge due, or to become due, under this article; provided
that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the
filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. Ninety (90) days' prior
notice shall be given to the emergency telephone system board1 on any credit
against a surcharge due.



(Ord. 91-3, § 11, 1-14-1991)



1  See § 2-660 et seq., of this code.



Sec. 11-131.  Surcharge Recovery Limitation:



   No action to recover any amount of surcharge due under the provisions
of this article shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due
date of such amount.



(Ord. 91-3, § 12, 1-14-1991)



Secs. 11-132-11-139.  Reserved:



ARTICLE V.  TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE



(Rep. by Ord. 2005-01, § 13, 1-10-2005)



Secs. 11-140-11-159.  Reserved:



ARTICLE VI.  CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY



Sec. 11-160.  Purpose And Scope:



   (a)   Purpose: The purpose of this article is to establish policies
and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the
village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the
village rights of way and the village as a whole.



   (b)   Facilities Subject To This Article: This article applies to
all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the
public rights of way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this article may continue
to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any
applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.



   (c)   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The village, in
its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village
rights of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such
an agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent
with this article.



   (d)   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:



      (1)    Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In
the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a
franchise, license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



      (2)    Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any
conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and
the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the
village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the
term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



   (e)   Conflicts With Other Articles: This article supersedes all
articles or parts of articles adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



   (f)   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that
applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this article, the utility shall comply with the requirements
of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or
state laws or regulations.



   (g)   Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound
engineering judgment when administering this article and may vary the
standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this article when the
village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability
of the village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-161.  Definitions:



   As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30,
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



   AASHTO: American association of state highway and transportation
officials.



   ANSI: American national standards institute.



   ASTM: American society for testing and materials.



   Applicant: A person applying for a permit under this article.



   Backfill: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in
a trench or pit.



   Bore Or Boring: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.



   Carrier Pipe: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.



   Casing: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such
as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.



   Clear Zone: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of
a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear runout
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO roadside
design guide.



   Coating: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.



   Code: The municipal code of the village of Justice.



   Conductor: Wire carrying electrical current.



   Conduit: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.



   Construction Or Construct: The installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.



   Cover: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.



   Crossing Facility: A facility that crosses one or more right of way
lines of a right of way.



   Disrupt The Right Of Way: For the purposes of this article, any work
that obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the
use of the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures;
damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not
include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not
materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.



   Emergency: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the
safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.



   Encasement: Provision of a protective casing.



   Engineer: The village engineer or his or her designee.



   Equipment: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items
used to facilitate construction of facilities.



   Excavation: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or
laying bare by digging.



   Extra Heavy Pipe: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.



   Facility: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including
track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications and video
cables and wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and
appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across,
or within rights of way under this article, except those owned by the village.



   Freestanding Facility: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.



   Frontage Road: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land
adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.



   Hazardous Materials: Any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is
determined by the village engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk
to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives,
radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons,
etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute
or regulation.



   Highway: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway
land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.



   Highway Code: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.



   IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.



   ILCC: Illinois commerce commission.



   Jacking: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means with or without boring.



   Jetting: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.



   Joint Use: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two
(2) or more utilities.



   Major Intersection: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.



   Occupancy: The presence of facilities on, over or under rights of way.



   Parallel Facility: A facility that is generally parallel or
longitudinal to the center line of a right of way.



   Parkway: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or
sidewalk.



   Pavement Cut: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility
or for the construction of a facility.



   Permittee: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
sections 11-163 and 11-164 of this article.



   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane, or coal slurry.



   Practicable: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.



   Pressure: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a
carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).



   Prompt: That which is done within a period of time specified by the
village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.



   Public Entity: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.



   Public Works Director: The village public works director or his or her
designee.



   Restoration: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other
area disrupted by the construction of a facility.



   Right Of Way: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or
commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements in which the
village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the
location of facilities other than those of the village. "Right-of-way" shall
not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically
described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not include village
buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the right of way.



   Roadway: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.



   Sale Of Telecommunications At Retail: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   Security Fund: That amount of security required pursuant to section
11-169 of this article.



   Shoulder: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.



   Sound Engineering Judgment: A decision(s) consistent with generally
accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.



   Telecommunications: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages
or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter
service, computer exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile
radio services, or any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the
context clearly requires otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include
wireless telecommunications as defined in the Illinois telecommunications
infrastructure maintenance fee act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 635/1 et
seq. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code,
and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
"Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates
or terminates the end to end communications. Retailer access charges, right
of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component
of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications service shall not be
included in gross charges as sales for resale. "Telecommunications" shall not
include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in
the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following) as
now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an
open video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as
defined in the rules of the federal communications commission (47 CDF 76.1550
and following) as now or hereafter amended.



   Telecommunications Provider: Any person that installs, owns, operates
or controls facilities in the public right of way used or designed to be used
to transmit telecommunications in any form.



   Telecommunications Retailer: Means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.



   Trench: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.



   Utility: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as
defined in this section.



   Vent: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or
vapors from an underground casing.



   Village: The village of Justice.



   Water Lines: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.



   Wet Boring: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to
soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 11-162.  Annual Registration Required:



   Every utility that occupies a right of way within the village shall
register on January 1 of each year with the engineer (public works director),
providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and
telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on
behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's
facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number
for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in section 11-167
of this article, in the form of a certificate of insurance. A
telecommunications provider that has registered under this section, shall be
deemed to have satisfied the registration requirement in this code.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 11-163.  Permit Required; Applications And Fees:



   (a)   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this
article) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
any village right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2)
adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the "right-of-way" (as defined in this
article), or 4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by
the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of
way, without first filing an application with the village engineer (public
works director) and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as
otherwise provided in this article. No permit shall be required for
installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises
where there will be no disruption of the right of way.



   (b)   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to
this article shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be
filed in such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The
applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
"proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such
materials accordingly.



   (c)   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application
shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)    The utility's name and address and telephone and
telecopy numbers;



      (2)    The applicant's name and address, if different than the
utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in
the work;



      (3)    The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers
and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the
applicant with respect to the application;



      (4)    A general description of the proposed work and the
purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will
be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the
nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on
those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;



      (5)    Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the
village:



         a.    A written traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
Illinois manual on uniform traffic control devices, to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and



         b.    An emergency contingency plan which shall specify
the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response
by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the
village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the
public. Compliance with ILCC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this section unless the village finds that
additional information or assurances are needed;



      (6)    Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work
proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings,
plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and
regulations;



      (7)    Evidence of insurance as required in section 11-167 of
this article;



      (8)    Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in
section 11-169 of this article;



      (9)    Any request for a variance from one or more provisions
of this article (see section 11-180 of this article); and



      (10)    Such additional information as may be reasonably
required by the village.



   (d)   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of
Utilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection (c) of this section,
the permit application shall include the following items as applicable to the
specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:



      (1)    In the case of new electric power, communications or
natural gas distribution system installation, evidence that any "certificate
of public convenience and necessity" has been issued by the ILCC that the
applicant is required by law, or has elected, to obtain;



      (2)    In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed
pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;



      (3)    In the case of water lines, indicate that all
requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of
public water supplies, have been satisfied;



      (4)    In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that
the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental
protection agency, division of water pollution control and the metropolitan
water reclamation district have been satisfied; or



      (5)    In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the
type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and
the design standard to be followed.



   (e)   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire
permit application review period and the construction period authorized by
the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application
shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village within thirty
(30) days after the change necessitating the amendment.



   (f)   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this
article shall be accompanied by a fee that may be set from time to time by
ordinance or resolution. No application fee is required to be paid by any
telecommunications retailer that is paying the municipal telecommunications
infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to article V of this chapter or the
optional state telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to
the telecommunications municipal infrastructure maintenance fee act, or by
any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity
infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee act.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 11-164.  Action On Permit Applications:



   (a)   Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit
applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
village engineer (public works director) within a reasonable time after
filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of all
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the village
engineer (public works director) shall reject such application in writing,
stating the reasons therefor. If the village engineer (public works director)
is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this
article and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
the village engineer (public works director) shall issue a permit therefor as
soon as practicable.



   (b)   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of
Telecommunications Retailers:



      (1)    Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify
the village that it intends to commence work governed by this article for
facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice
shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to
demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided
by the telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten (10) days
prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The
village engineer (public works director) shall specify the portion of the
right of way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.



      (2)    In the event that the village engineer (public works
director) fails to provide such specification of location to the
telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten (10) days after service of
notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work
not involving excavation for new construction, or b) twenty five (25) days
after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of
work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications
retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this article.



      (3)    Upon the provision of such specification by the
village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 11-163 of
this article the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (a) of this
section.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



Sec. 11-165.  Effect Of Permit:



   (a)   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest
Created: A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this article on village rights of way,
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public
rights of way.



   (b)   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by
the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances,
rules, and regulations.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-166.  Revised Permit Drawings:



   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within ninety (90)
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or
plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual
facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any
deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this
article, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with
section 11-180 of this article. If the village denies the request for a
variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right
of way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit
revised drawings or plans therefor.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-167.  Insurance:



   (a)   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by
franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying rights of
way or constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and
maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as
named insured and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers,
officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies
listed in subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section:



      (1)    Commercial general liability insurance, including
premises operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products completed operations
coverage with limits not less than:



         a.    Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily
injury or death to each person;



         b.    Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property
damage resulting from any one accident; and



         c.    Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other
types of liability;



      (2)    Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired
vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
for personal injury and property damage for each accident;



      (3)    Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and



      (4)    Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.



   (b)   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this
section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies.
Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying
insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by the
primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or
umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.



   (c)   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of
the policies required by this section to the village within ten (10) days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the village.



   (d)   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance
policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:



      It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days
after receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return
receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the President of the
Village of such intent to cancel or not to renew.



      Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice,
and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the
utility shall obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.



   (e)   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (a) of
this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of
such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of
additional insureds under subsection (a) of this section, or the requirements
of subsections (b) through (d) of this section. A utility that elects to
self-insure shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate
its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit
requirements required under subsection (a) of this section, such as evidence
that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation
act.



   (f)   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability:
The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of
the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec 11-168.  Indemnification:



   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility
shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or
alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or by a
franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the
utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by the
village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-169.  Security:



   (a)   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a
form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall
be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's
sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the
permit. The security fund shall serve as security for:



      (1)    The faithful performance by the permittee of all the
requirements of this Article;



      (2)    Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the
Village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes,
rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the Village
issued pursuant to this Article; and



      (3)    The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages,
claims, costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this Article including,
without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the
permittee is required by this Article to perform that the Village must
perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's
failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the Village from
the permittee pursuant to this Article or any other applicable law.



   (b)   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the
Village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a
form acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a
form acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:



      (1)    Provide that it will not be canceled without prior
notice to the Village and the permittee;



      (2)    Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the
collection by the Village of any amounts covered by it; and



      (3)    Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and
within the State at which it can be drawn.



   (c)   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the
right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Engineer, and may
also include reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates
are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration.
Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be
performed in phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each phase
consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group
of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken
prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or
phases, the Village Engineer may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow
the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable
to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the
security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount
that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any
single phase.



   (d)   Withdrawals: The Village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance
written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise
withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the
security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for
such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be
made if the permittee:



      (1)    Fails to make any payment required to be made by the
permittee hereunder;



      (2)    Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that
are due and unpaid;



      (3)    Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims,
costs or expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by
reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or



      (4)    Fails to comply with any provision of this Article that
the Village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
security fund.



   (e)   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of
written notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the
security fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount
specified in subsection (c) of this Section.



   (f)   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest
accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by
the Village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village,
provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the
minimum balance required in subsection (c) of this Section.



   (g)   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the
work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the
return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit,
within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any
provisions of this Article or other applicable law. In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest
therein, shall become the property of the Village to the extent necessary to
cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the Village as a
result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs,
loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.



   (h)   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the Village with
respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the
Village, whether reserved by this Article or otherwise authorized by law, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund
shall affect any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery
with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise
violated.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-170.  Permit Suspension And Revocation:



   (a)   Village Right To Revoke Permit: The Village may revoke or
suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Article for one or more of the
following reasons:



      (1)    Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially
incomplete statements in the permit application;



      (2)    Noncompliance with this Article;



      (3)    Permittee's physical presence or presence of
permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
the public rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public
health, safety, or welfare; or



      (4)    Permittee's failure to construct the facilities
substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.



   (b)   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The Village shall send
written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this Article stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension
and the alternatives available to the permittee under this Section.



   (c)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the Village, the permittee shall have the following options:



      (1)    Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no
cause exists for the revocation or suspension;



      (2)    Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the
Village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written
proof of such correction to the Village within five (5) working days after
receipt of the written notice of revocation; or



      (3)    Immediately remove the facilities located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way and
restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Village providing
written proof of such removal to the Village within ten (10) days after
receipt of the written notice of revocation.



         The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown,
extend the time periods provided in this subsection.



   (d)   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within
subsection (a) of this Section.



   (e)   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the
permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (c) of this
Section, the Village or its designee may, at the option of the Village: 1)
correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to
the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not
less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the
noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the Village. The permittee
shall be liable in all events to the Village for all costs of removal.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-171.  Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status:



   (a)   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the Village no
less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility
in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of
the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges
enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this Article, with respect
to the work and facilities in the right-of-way.



   (b)   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current
permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a
new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to
have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the
Village's right-of-way.



   (c)   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or
bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-172.  General Construction Standards:



   (a)   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right-of-way
shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic-control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable,
the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications:



      (1)    Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction;



      (2)    Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions;



      (3)    Highway Design Manual;



      (4)    Highway Standards Manual;



      (5)    Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;



      (6)    Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92
Illinois Administrative Code section 545);



      (7)    Flagger's Handbook; and



      (8)    Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance
Operations.



   (b)   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a
discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards
required by this Article, the Village Engineer shall determine, in the
exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such
decision shall be final. If requested, the Village Engineer shall state which
standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or
operation of a facility in the future.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-173.  Traffic Control:



   (a)   Minimum Requirements: The Village's minimum requirements for
traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and this Code.



   (b)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility
is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices
and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable Federal, State, and
local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers
when performing any work on the public rights-of-way.



   (c)   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that
there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



   (d)   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours
prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of
such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs
pursuant to Section 11-179 of this Article, the utility shall provide such
notice as is practicable under the circumstances.



   (e)   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct
any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the Village.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-174.  Location Of Facilities:



   (a)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:



      (1)    Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         a.    Lines are located as near as practicable to the
right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as
reasonable pole alignment will permit;



         b.    Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as
practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m)
behind the face of the curb, where available;



         c.    Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote
from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4')
(1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the
clear zone;



         d.    No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway;
and



         e.    Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within
one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the
right-of-way line.



      (2)    Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground
parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway
only if:



         a.    The facility is located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and
parallel to the right-of-way line;



         b.    A new facility may be located under the paved
portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and



         c.    In the case of an underground power or
communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the
right-of-way line and any aboveground appurtenance shall be located within
one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.



   (b)   Facilities Crossing Highways:



      (1)    No Future Disruption: The construction and design of
crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of
Village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections
(such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future
repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing
facilities.



      (2)    Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities:
Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or
drainage facilities.



      (3)    Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities
shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the center line
as practicable.



      (4)    Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead
power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         a.    It has a minimum vertical line clearance as
required by ILCC's rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines" (83 Illinois Administrative Code 305);



         b.    Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of
the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and



         c.    Overhead crossings at major intersections are
avoided.



      (5)    Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An
underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         a.    The design materials and construction methods will
provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and



         b.    Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future
expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.



      (6)    Markers: The Village may require the utility to provide
a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a
power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify
the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations (49 CFR 192.707
(1989)).



   (c)   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights-Of-Way: The
Village may require that facilities be located within particular
rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.



   (d)   Freestanding Facilities:



      (1)    The Village may restrict the location and size of any
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way.



      (2)    The Village may require any freestanding facility
located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.



   (e)   Appearance Standards:



      (1)    The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities
in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.



      (2)    A facility may be constructed only if its construction
does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands
being traversed.



   (f)   Aboveground Installation: Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:



      (1)    No other existing facilities in the area are located
underground;



      (2)    New underground installation is not technically
feasible; and



      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location,
and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest
protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without
adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to,
self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration
of conductors and cable.



   (g)   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:



      (1)    Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges
or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other
means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall
include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles,
cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from
the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.



      (2)    A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a
facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:



         a.    The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the
commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to
persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;



         b.    The type, length, value, and relative importance
of the highway structure in the transportation system;



         c.    The alternative routings available to the utility
and their comparative practicability;



         d.    The proposed method of attachment;



         e.    The ability of the structure to bear the increased
load of the proposed facility;



         f.    The degree of interference with bridge maintenance
and painting;



         g.    The effect on the visual quality of the structure;
and



         h.    The public benefit expected from the utility
service as compared to the risk involved.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-175.  Construction Methods And Materials:



   (a)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of
Construction Methods:



      (1)    Boring Or Jacking:



         a.    Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights
of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance
specified by the village engineer (public works director) from the edge of
the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than
forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and
backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations
are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and
protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported,
braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and
lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.



         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall
not be permitted under the roadway.



         c.    Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches:
Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with
an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed
the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).



         d.    Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings
of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking,
guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.



         e.    Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the
drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved shall be
bored under or around the root system.



      (2)    Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair,
or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction".



         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to
the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing.
Only one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time
unless special permission is obtained from the village engineer.



         b.    Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench
and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6
of the Illinois manual on uniform traffic control devices. Where practicable,
the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench
as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the
paved portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for
windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated
material shall be hauled to an off road location.



         c.    Tree Preservation: The utility shall not trench
within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.



      (3)    Backfilling:



         a.    Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the
installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and
length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction". When excavated material is
hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall
be used.



         b.    For a period of three (3) years from the date
construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction
of the facility. If so ordered by the engineer (public works director), the
utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to
the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill
material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the
proper grades, as determined by the engineer (public works director).



      (4)    Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation
or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway
is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this
subsection is permitted under section 11-180 of this article, the following
requirements shall apply:



         a.    Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the engineer.



         b.    Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be
accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous
mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the
temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
village.



         c.    All saw cuts shall be full depth.



         d.    For all rights of way which have been
reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or
resurfaced in the last three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless
such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered
necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a
pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.



      (5)    Encasement:



         a.    Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the
load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be
continuous either by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed
installation approved by the village.



         b.    The venting, if any, of any encasement shall
extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground
vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that
particular section of the highway.



         c.    In the case of water main or service crossing,
encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or
village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be
omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier
pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the
village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of
installation method.



         d.    In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or
less, encasement may be eliminated.



         e.    In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products
pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future
maintenance or repair, and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;



         f.    If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum
products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that
construction does not disrupt the right-of-way.



      (6)    Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be
provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following
table for minimum cover for the type of facility:



 

Type Of Facility
 

Minimum Cover



Power or communication line (in general)
 

30 inches (0.8 m)



Communication line installed by the plowed method
 

24 inches (0.6 m)



Gas or petroleum products
 

30 inches (0.8 m)



Water line
 

Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection



Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line
 

Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection




 



   (b)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:



      (1)    Electric Power Or Communication Lines:



         a.    Code Compliance: Electric power or communications
facilities within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and
maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative
Code 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission)
entitled "Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines",
and the National Electrical Safety Code.



         b.    Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or
communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where
practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be
needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.



         c.    Underground Facilities:



            1.    Cable may be installed by trenching or
plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to
minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.



            2.    If a crossing is installed by boring or
jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.
Encasement may be eliminated only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use
of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth
to make the opening for cable installation, or b) the installation is by the
open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.



            3.    Cable shall be grounded in accordance with
the National Electrical Safety Code.



      (2)    Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or
Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:



         a.    The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other
approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;



         b.    Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided
between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;



         c.    Open trench with vented encasement between
ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or



         d.    Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if
installation is not possible by other means.



      (3)    Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas
pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated
in a Village-approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the
Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part 192
- Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.



      (4)    Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products
pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of
ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation
Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).



      (5)    Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer
Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer
lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the
recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois".



      (6)    Ground-Mounted Appurtenances: Ground-mounted
appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a
right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one
foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The
vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or
by heavy-duty plastic or similar material approved by the Engineer. With the
approval of the Engineer, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used
in place of a vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.



   (c)   Materials:



      (1)    General Standards: The materials used in constructing
facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards
of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.



      (2)    Material Storage On Right-Of-Way: All pipe, conduit,
wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the
right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards
to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the
right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way,
prior approval must be obtained from the Village.



      (3)    Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility
to the Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in
the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.



   (d)   Operational Restrictions:



      (1)    Construction operations on rights of way may, at the
discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such
operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and
welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or
restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in
extensive damage to the right of way or other property.



      (2)    These restrictions may be waived by the engineer when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.



      (3)    Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of
construction are those set forth in chapter 5, article I of this code.



   (e)   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to
construct facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the
presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities
within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The
village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose
of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when
requested by the village or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically
mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding
weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois underground facilities
damage prevention act1.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999; Ord. 2001-05, § 2, 2-26-2001)



1  220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.



Sec. 11-176.  Vegetation Control:



   (a)   Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming shall not be
considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application
for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required
under this article.



      (1)    Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for
tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be
accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in
accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an
expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be
expeditiously accomplished.



      (2)   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in
damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The
village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees
removed without authorization. The formula developed by the international
society of arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the
compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village
may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical
pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.



   (b)   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village
may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or
trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher
poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.



   (c)   Chemical Use: Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals
will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the engineer that such spraying is the only practicable
method of vegetation control.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-177.  Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities:



   (a)   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from
the village, a utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities
within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have determined
that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary
for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any village
improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon, the
rights of way.



   (b)   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days
following written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls,
or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the
public rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of
such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights of way. A facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:



      (1)    Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's
license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;



      (2)    If the facility was constructed or installed without
the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;



      (3)    If the facility was constructed or installed without
prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this article; or



      (4)    If the facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.



   (c)   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village
retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within
the rights of way of the village, as the village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify
the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall
notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.



   (d)   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility
within the public rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the
village within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the village
may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the
village engineer determines that such removal will be in the best interest of
the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not
direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice
of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to
consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by
another utility or person.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-178.  Cleanup And Restoration:



   Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the
utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain in
a timely manner and to the satisfaction of the village. This includes
restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces
shall be made using materials and methods approved by the village engineer.
Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to
a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-179.  Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance:



   (a)   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in
a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.



   (b)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:



      (1)    If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled
portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to
provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on
the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers.
If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the
emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment
required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided.
Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no
other means of access to the facility is available.



      (2)    In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as
possible, notify the Village Engineer or his or her duly authorized agent of
the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for
protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere
with the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified
immediately.



      (3)    In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at
hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.



   (c)   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the
Village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within
forty eight (48) hours after an emergency repair.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-180.  Variances:



   (a)   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one
or more of the provisions of this Article must do so in writing to the
Village Engineer as a part of the permit application. The request shall
identify each provision of this Article from which a variance is requested
and the reasons why a variance should be granted.



   (b)   Authority To Grant Variances: The Village Engineer shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this Article
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.



   (c)   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The Village Engineer may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:



      (1)    One or more conditions not under the control of the
utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and



      (2)    All other designs, methods, materials, locations or
facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.



   (d)   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a
condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Engineer may require the
utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this Article but which
carry out the purposes of this Article.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-181.  Penalties:



   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when
the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit
and this Article. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the
cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall
bear the Village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining,
modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the
permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a
permit related cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed
upon a utility who does not pay the costs apportioned to it.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Sec. 11-182.  Enforcement:



   Nothing in this Article shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Article.



(Ord. 1999-19, § 2, 6-28-1999)



Secs. 11-183-11-189.  Reserved:



 


Notes

1 
50 ILCS 750/1.



CHAPTER 12
ZONING 1,2



   Art. I.   In General, §§ 12-1-12-20



   Art. II.   Districts; Map, §§ 12-21-12-180



      Div. 1.   Generally, §§ 12-21-12-35



      Div. 2.   Residence Districts, §§ 12-36-12-55



      Div. 3.   R-2A Condominium District, §§ 12-56-12-85



      Div. 4.   Business Districts, §§ 12-86-12-105



      Div. 5.   C-1 Planned Commercial And Office Development
District, §§ 12-106-12-130



      Div. 6.   I-1 Light Industry District, §§ 12-131-12-145



      Div. 7.   I-1-R Restricted Industrial District, §§
12-146-12-165



      Div. 8.   1-2 Heavy Industry District, §§ 12-166-12-168



      Div. 9.   Planned Urban Development Classification By Special
Use For All Zoning Districts, §§ 12-169-42-180



   Art. III.   Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, Uses, §§
12-181-12-200



   Art. IV.   Applications And Permits, §§ 12-201-12.210



 



1  See administration, chapter 2 of this code; business regulations, chapter
3 of this code; planning and development, chapter 8 of this code; streets,
sidewalks, driveways and parking lots, chapter 10 of this code; utilities,
chapter 11 of this code; zoning and planning board, § 2-526 et seq. of this
code; home occupations, § 3-36 et seq. of this code; location of retail
alcoholic liquor establishments, § 3-97 of this code; location of shooting
galleries and rifle ranges, § 7-212 of this code; flood control, § 8-341 et
seq. of this code.



2 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1 et seq.



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



Sec. 12-1.  Rules of construction; definitions.



   The following rules and definitions shall apply in this chapter except
when the context clearly indicates otherwise:



   Accessory Building Or Use means a subordinate building or portion of
the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main
building.



   Alley means the same as the word "easement" and shall have no other
meaning.



   Alteration means any change in size, shape, character, occupancy or use
of a building or structure.



   Apartment House means a building used or intended to be used as a home
or residence for two (2) or more families living in separate apartments.



   Auto Laundry means any land, building or a portion thereof used to
wash, clean or detail motor vehicles by hand and/or through mechanized means,
whether or not that use constitutes a principal or accessory use.



   Block means the property abutting on one (1) side of a street and lying
between the two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or nearest
intersecting or intercepting street and a railroad right-of-way or other
natural boundary.



   Building means any structure built for the support, shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and
which is permanently affixed to the land.



(Ord. of 9-21-61)



   Condominium means all the land, property and space comprising the
parcel, all improvements and structures erected, constructed or contained
therein or thereon, including the building and all easements, rights and
appurtenances belonging thereto, and all fixtures and equipment intended for
the mutual use, benefit or enjoyment of the unit owners.



(Ord. No. 72-32, 11-2-72)



   District means a section or sections of the village for which the
regulations governing the use of the land are uniform.



   Drive-In Establishment means an establishment which accommodates the
patron's automobiles, from which occupants may be served.



   Dwelling means a building or portion thereof, but not an automobile
house trailer designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-family
dwellings, but not including hotels or lodging houses.



   Easement means a portion of a lot or tract of land designated for the
use and convenience of public utilities, for the installations, maintenance
and care of service equipment therein.



   Eleemosynary Institution means a building or group of buildings devoted
to and supported by charity.



   Family means one (1) or more persons each related to the other by blood
or adoption, together with such blood relatives’ respective spouses, who
are living together in a single dwelling and maintaining a common household.
A family includes any domestic servants and not more than one (1) gratuitous
guest.



   Frontage means all the property of a lot fronting on a street and
measured between side lines.



   Grade means the average of the finished surface of the ground adjacent
to the exterior walls of the building or structure.



(Ord. of 9-21-61)



   Grade Level (Building). The height of the top of the foundation wall
shall be set at a maximum of eighteen (18) inches over the crown of the
street at the front of the property. Where there are existing buildings in
the block, foundation grades shall be set to equalize the height of all
buildings in the block where practicable, unless the existing buildings in
the block are set too low in relation to the existing or proposed curb
elevations where it then becomes necessary to place a new building foundation
grade higher than the existing buildings in the block. Provisions shall then
be made to protect the lower elevation buildings from the water runoff of the
new buildings. Parts of the foundation which are placed at a higher elevation
for architectural effect shall not extend for more than forty (40) percent of
the perimeter of the building.



(Ord. No. 79-25, 10-4-79)



   Hereafter means after the effective date of the ordinance containing
such term.



   Hotel means an establishment which provides customary hotel services,
such as maid service, furnishing and laundering of linen, and secretarial or
desk service, the use and upkeep of furniture and/or bell boy service.



   Junkyard means an open area where waste or scrap materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including
but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, papers, rags, rubber tires
and bottles. A junkyard includes an auto wrecking yard, but does not include
uses established entirely within closed buildings.



   Kennel means any premises on which dogs and cats, or each separately,
are maintained, bred or cared for, in return for remuneration, or are kept
for the purpose of sale or resale.



(Ord. of 9-21-61)



   Lot means a subdivided parcel of land so recorded in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of the County, intended for occupancy by one (1) main
building and its accessory buildings. The word "lot" shall include the words
"piece" and "parcel"; the word "building" includes all structures of every
kind and the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for" and
"occupied for" shall have the same meaning as the phrase "used for".



(Ord. No. 62-13, 8-2-62)



   Lot Depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the rear lot line of a lot measured between the boundaries.



   Lot Line, Front means that boundary of a lot which is along an existing
or dedicated public street or, where no public street exists, is along a
public way; where such public way is not a dedicated street, the right-of-way
of such public way shall be deemed to be sixty-six (66) feet, unless
otherwise provided. The owner of a corner lot may select either street lot
line as the front lot line.



   Lot Line, Rear means that boundary of a lot which is most distant from,
and is or is most nearly parallel to, the front lot line.



   Lot Line, Side means any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot
line or rear lot line.



   Lot Width means the mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines
of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.



   Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center means a facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to perform necessary activities to provide only registered
medical cannabis dispensing organizations with usable medical cannabis per
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, enacted by the
State of Illinois, as may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 2014-01, § 1, 1-27-2014)



   Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization means a facility operated by
an organization or business that is registered by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a
registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis,
paraphernalia, or related supplies and educational materials to registered
qualifying patients, per the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act, enacted by the State of Illinois, as may be amended from time to
time.



(Ord. 2014-01, § 1, 1-27-2014)



   Medical Cannabis Facilities means both medical cannabis cultivation
centers and medical cannabis dispensing organizations. 



(Ord. 2014-01, § 1, 1-27-2014)



   Nonconforming Building, Structure Or Use means any building or
structure or any use of buildings, structures or land which does not comply
with all the regulations of this chapter or of any amendment hereto governing
use for the zoning district where such building or use is located.



(Ord. of 9-21-61)



   Number Of Buildings On A Lot. Every building hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined, and in no
case shall there be more than one (1) main building on one (1) lot unless
otherwise specified and provided in this code.



(Ord. No. 79-34, 12-6-79)



   Professional Offices, when incidental to the residential use of the
premises, shall include only the office of doctor, practitioner, clergyman,
dentist, architect, lawyer, author, artist, musician or other professional
occupations customarily conducted within a residence.



   Rest Home Or Nursing Home means a private home for the care of children
or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily
disorders, and contains no equipment for surgical care or for the treatment
of disease or injury.



   Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between the front line of
the building or structure and the front property line.



   Street means a public or private right-of-way which affords a primary
means of access to abutting property, but, excepting driveways to buildings.



   Street Level, for any building, means the level of the established
street in front of such buildings measured at the center of such front. Where
no street level has been established, the mean elevation of the finished lot
grade immediately adjacent to a building shall be considered the street level.



(Ord. of 9-21-61)



   Tract Of Land means a parcel of land used for or suitable for occupancy
by one (1) main building or use with its accessory buildings.



(Ord. No. 62-13, 8-2-62)



   Trailer means any vehicle, house car or mobile vehicle on wheels,
skids, rollers or blocks, either self-propelled or propelled by any other
means, which is used or designed to be used for residential living, sleeping
or commercial purposes and herein referred to as a trailer.



   Trailer House Park means any area or premises on which space for
trailers is rented or on which free occupancy is permitted to trailer owners
or users for the purpose of securing their trade, but not including
automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for
purposes of inspection and sale.



   Truck Terminal means a building or area in which freight brought by
motor truck is assembled or stored for routing in intrastate or interstate
shipment by motor truck.



   Use Of Property means the purpose or activity for which the land or
buildings thereon is designed, arranged or intended for, or for which it is
occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of
activity with respect to the use permitted by this chapter.



   Use Permitted means a use which may be lawfully established in a
particular district or districts, provided it conforms with the requirements
and regulations if any, of such district.



   Yard, Corner Side means a side yard which faces a public street.



   Yard, Front means a yard extending along the full length of the front
lot line between the side lot lines.



   Yard, Interior Side means a side yard which is located immediately
adjacent to another zoning lot or to an easement separating such side yard
from another zoning lot.



   Yard, Rear means a yard extending along the full length of the rear lot
line between the side lot lines.



   Yard, Side means a yard extending along the side lot line from the
front yard to the rear yard.



   Zoning District means a section or sections of the village for which
the regulations and requirements governing use, lot and bulk of buildings and
premises are uniform.



(Ord. of 9-21-61; Code 1972, § 10-1-2; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-16)



Sec. 12-2.  Intent And Purpose:



   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:



   (1)   To promote and protect public health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience and the general welfare of people;



   (2)   To zone all properties in such a manner as to reflect their
best use and conserve and enhance their values;



   (3)   To ensure maximum living and working conditions and prevent
blight and slums;



   (4)   To protect residential, business and manufacturing areas alike
from encroachment by incompatible uses;



   (5)   To affix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures
shall conform;



   (6)   To prevent such additions to, and alterations or remodeling
of, existing buildings or structures as would not comply with the
restrictions and limitations imposed hereinafter;



   (7)   To ensure high standards of light, air and open spaces in
areas where people live and work;



   (8)   To relieve street congestion through adequate requirements for
off street parking and loading facilities;



   (9)   To isolate or control the location of unavoidable uses;



   (10)   To define the powers and duties of the administrative
officers;



   (11)   To prescribe penalties for the violations of the provisions
of this chapter or any amendment thereto.



(Code 1972, § 10-1-1; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-16)



Sec. 12-3.  Interpretations



   (a)   No building, structure or use which was not lawfully existing
at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives
shall become or be made to be lawful solely by reason of such adoption, to
the extent that in any manner such building, structure or use is in conflict
with the requirements of this chapter, such building, structure or use
remains unlawful under this chapter.



   (b)   The following rules shall apply with respect to the boundaries
of the districts as shown on the zoning district map: District boundary lines
are centerlines of highways, streets or easements or right-of-way lines of
railroads and expressways or section, division of section, tract and lot
lines, or such lines extended unless otherwise indicated.



   (c)   Subdivision shall be completed pursuant to the requirements of
chapter 8, article VIII, of this code.



(Code 1972, § 10-2-1; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-16)



Sec. 12-4.  Scope:



   (a)   All buildings erected under this chapter, all uses of lands or
buildings established hereafter, all structural alteration or relocation of
existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements or additions to
existing uses occurring hereafter, shall be subject to all regulations of
this chapter which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such
buildings, uses or land shall be located.



   (b)   All fences constructed on any nonresidentially zoned property
adjacent to residentially zoned property shall be constructed pursuant to the
requirements of section 8-251(b) of this code.



   (c)   For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land
established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this xhapter
derives, accessory parking and loading facilities shall be provided as
required by the regulations of the districts in which such buildings or uses
are located.



   (d)   Except as provided by this chapter and except after obtaining
written permission from the building commissioner, it shall be unlawful
within the limits of the village:



      (1)   To establish any use of a building, structure or land,
either by itself or in addition to another use;



      (2)   To expand, change or reestablish any nonconforming use;



      (3)   To erect a new building or structure or part thereof;



      (4)   To rebuild, structurally alter, add to or relocate any
building or structure or part thereof;



      (5)   To reduce the open space or plot area required for a
building or structure, or to include any part of such open space or plot area
as that required for an adjoining building or structure;



      (6)   To provide or connect onto water supply or sewerage
disposal facilities.



(Ord. of 9-21-61)



   (e)   The number of buildings on a lot and accessory buildings shall
be restricted as follows:



      (1)   Number Of Buildings On A Lot: Every building hereafter
erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined,
and in no case shall there be more than one (1) main building on one (1) lot
unless otherwise specified and provided in this code.



      (2)   Accessory Buildings: No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced. 



(Code 1972, § 10-2-2; Ord. No. 79-35, 12-6-79; Ord. No. 85-20, 10-1-85; Ord.
2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-5.  Water, Sewage And Garbage:



   Every residence, business, trade or industry hereafter established and
requiring water supply, sewerage disposal facilities or garbage disposal
shall provide such facilities as shall conform to standards and requirements
of the village building and sanitation codes. Plot plans accompanying
building permit applications shall show clearly the proposed sewerage
disposal system and well locations if any. Where village sewerage and water
facilities are available, connections must be made thereto.



(Ord. of 9-21-61; Code 1972, § 10-15-1; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



   Cross reference–Utilities, Ch. 11.



Sec. 12-6.  Authority And Jurisdiction:



   The zoning board of appeals is hereby vested with the following
authority and jurisdiction:



   (1)   To hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official
charged with the enforcement of any planning or zoning ordinance.



   (2)   To hear and pass upon all applications for variations in
respect to the classification, regulation, prohibition or restriction of the
location of trades and industries and the



      location of buildings designed for public, industrial, business
and residential and other uses. Variations shall be permitted by the zoning
board of appeals only when they are in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of the zoning chapter and only in cases where there are particular
difficulties or hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any
of these recommendations. In its consideration of the standards of particular
difficulties or hardships, such board shall require evidence that:



      (a)   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable
return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the
regulations in that zone;



      (b)   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances;
and



      (c)   The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.



   (3)   To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it
is required to pass under the zoning chapter as prescribed by statute.



(Code 1972, § 2-2-5; Ord. 2012-24, § 28, 9-24-2012; Ord. 2016-15, § 1,
4-25-2016)



   State law references–Zoning enforcement officers, board of appeals,
65 ILCS 5/11-13-3; variations, 65 ILCS 5/11-13- 4, 11-13-5.



Sec. 12-7.  Appeal Or Application For Variation; Hearing:



   Any person seeking to appeal or apply for a variation shall file a
notice of appeal or petition for a variation with the zoning board of
appeals, in writing, identifying the grounds for the requested relief. In the
case of an appeal, the notice of appeal shall be filed with the officer whose
decision is to be reviewed. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the officer
shall prepare and forward to the zoning board of appeals a record of the
underlying proceedings. The zoning board of appeals shall consider the appeal
or application at a public hearing, which shall take place no sooner than
fifteen (15) days and no later than thirty (30) days after the notice of the
hearing has been published and/or delivered by such other means as required
by law. The notice to be published shall identify the location of the
property, the nature of the request, and such other information as may be
deemed pertinent to adequately apprise the public of the proceeding.



(Code 1972, § 2-2-6; Ord. 2012-24, § 28, 9-24-2012; Ord. 2014-17, § 1,
10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



   State law references–Variations authorized, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-5; notice
and hearing, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-6; appeals, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-12.



Sec. 12-8.  Notice To Record Owner:



   An applicant for variation or special use shall, not more than thirty
(30) days before filing an application for variation with the zoning board of
appeals, serve written notice, either in person or by registered mail, return
receipt requested, on the owners, as recorded in the office of the recorder
of deeds or the registrar of titles of the county in which the property is
located and as appears from the authentic tax records of such county, of all
property within two hundred fifty (250) feet in each direction of the
location for which the variation is requested; provided, the number of feet
occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall be
excluded in computing the two hundred fifty (250) foot requirement. The
notice herein required shall contain the address of the location for which
the variation is requested, a brief statement of the nature of the requested
variation, the name and address of the legal and beneficial owner of the
property for which the variation is requested, a statement that the applicant
intends to file an application for variation and the approximate date on
which the application will be filed. If, after a bona fide effort to
determine such address by the applicant for variation, the owner of the
property on which the notice is served cannot be found at his or her last
known address, or the mailed notice is returned because the owner cannot be
found at the last known address, the notice requirements of this section
shall be deemed satisfied. In addition to serving the notice herein required,
at the time of filing application for variation, the applicant shall furnish
to the zoning board of appeals a complete list containing the names and last
known addresses of the owners of the property required to be served, the
method of service and the names and addresses of the persons so served. The
applicant shall also furnish a written statement certifying that he or she
has complied with the requirements of this section. The zoning board of
appeals



shall hear no application for variation or special use unless the applicant
for variation or special use furnishes the list and certificate herein
required. The zoning board of appeals shall, not more than thirty (30) days
nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing at which the application
for variation is to be considered, send written notice to the persons
appearing on the list furnished by the applicant, which notice shall contain
the time and place of the hearing, the address of the location for which the
variation is requested and the name and address of the applicant for
variation and a brief statement of the nature of the variation requested.



(Ord. 2012-24, § 28, 9-24-2012; Ord. 2014-17, § 2, 10-13-2014; Ord.
2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



   State law references–Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-7;
administrative review, 735 ILCS 110/3-101 et seq.



Sec. 12-9.  Expenses Of Hearings:



   (a)   Any and all expenses associated with the publication of a
notice of public hearing shall be the responsibility of the applicant. No
hearing shall commence until such time as the village is reimbursed, in full,
for the costs associated therewith.



   (b)   Any and all additional expenses incurred by the village as a
result of any delay or rescheduling caused or requested by the applicant
shall be the applicant's responsibility, including:



      (1)   Salaries of board members;



      (2)   Publication costs;



      (3)   Attorney and engineering fees;



      (4)   Incidental expenses.



(Ord. 2012-24, § 28, 9-24-2012; Ord. 2014-17, § 3, 10-13-2014; Ord.
2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-10.  Report Of Hearing; Action Taken:



   The chairman of the zoning board of appeals shall submit to the board
of trustees a report of the hearing, together with its findings and
recommendation. The board of trustees, no later than thirty (30) days after
receipt of the zoning board of appeals’ findings and recommendation, shall:



   (1)   Approve the requested relief by ordinance as is, or as
modified;



   (2)   Deny the requested relief; or



   (3)   Refer the matter back to the zoning board of appeals for
further consideration



(Code 1972, § 2-2-7; Ord. 2012-24, § 28, 9-24-2012; Ord. 2014-17, § 4,
10-13-2014; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



   State law reference–Variations by corporate authorities, 65 ILCS
5/11-13-5, 11-13-10.



Sec. 12-11.  Duties Of Board:



   The zoning board of appeals and economic development planning board are
hereby vested to:



   (1)   Prepare and recommend to the president and board of trustees a
comprehensive plan of public improvements looking to the present and future
development of the village. This plan may include reasonable requirements
with reference to streets, alleys and public grounds in un-subdivided land
situated within the corporate limits or in contiguous territory not more than
one and one-half (1/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in
any municipality.



   (2)   Prepare and recommend to the president and board of trustees,
from time to time, plans for specific improvements in pursuance of the plan.



   (3)   Give aid to the municipal officials charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the plan, to further the making
of these projects and generally to promote the realization of the plan.



   (4)   Review and recommend to the president and board of trustees
all requests for a subdivision of any lot or parcel, including a variation of
lot size.



   (5)   Exercise such powers germane to the powers granted herein and
by statute 1as may be conferred from time to time hereafter by the president
and board of trustees.



(Code 1972, § 2-2-8; Ord. 2012-24, § 28, 9-24-2012; Ord. 2016-15, § 1,
4-25-2016)



1.   65 ILCS 6/11-12-6.



Sec. 12-12.  Appeals To Court 2:



2.   65 ILCS 5/11-13-13 and 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.



   (a)   Within thirty-five (35) days after the filing of any order,
decision or variation of the board of trustees, any person or persons,
jointly or severally aggrieved by such order, decision or variation, or any
officer, department, board or bureau of the village, may appeal to a court of
record in the manner prescribed by law.



   (b)   Wherein a parcel of property has been rezoned by order of the
village board of trustees, that particular rezoned property shall be used for
the type of business specified in such order, and if no building permit is
applied for and issued for the rezoned parcel within a period of one (1) year
from the date of the rezoning, the rezoning shall automatically revert back
to the original zoning existing prior to the application for rezoning, except
in cases where property has been upgraded to R-l residence (single-family).



(Code 1972, § 2-2-9; Ord. 2012-24, § 28, 9-24-2012; Ord. 2016-15, § 1,
4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-13.  Zoning Amendments:



   The provisions of the zoning chapter 3 and the districts created
therein and as shown on the zoning map may from time to time be amended by
ordinance after a duly advertised public hearing in the manner as prescribed
by statute4. The zoning board of appeals shall serve as the committee or
commission prescribed by statute to hold public hearings on all proposed
amendments.



(Code 1972, § 2-2-10; Ord. 83-10, 7-7-1983; Ord. 2012-24, § 28, 9-24-2012;
Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



3.   See Ch. 12 of this code.



4.   65 ILCS 5/11/13-14.



Sec. 12-14.  Application Fees:



   No application for an amendment, variance or subdivision shall be
processed until such time as a non-refundable application fee in the amount
of two thousand two hundred dollars ($2,200.00) is tendered to the village.



(Ord. 2012-24, § 28, 9-24-2012; Ord. 2014-17, § 5, 10-13-2014; Ord.
2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-15  Special Uses:



   (a)   Special uses are those uses having some special impact or
uniqueness that require a careful review of their location, design,
configuration, and special impact to determine, against fixed standards, the
desirability of permitting their establishment on any given site. They are
uses that may or may not be appropriate in a particular location depending on
a weighing, in each case, of the public need and benefit against the local
impact and effect.



   (b)   The following procedure shall govern the submission, review
and approval of any use identified as a special use in a zoning district:



      (1)   Application: Applications for special use permits shall
be filed with the zoning board of appeals.



      (2)   Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be set, noticed,
and conducted by the zoning board of appeals.



      (3)   Action By Zoning Board Of Appeals: Within sixty (60)
days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the zoning board of appeals
shall transmit to the board of trustees its recommendation either granting
the application for a special use permit; granting the application subject to
conditions, or denying the application. The failure of the zoning board of
appeals to act within such sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the
applicant may agree, shall be deemed a recommendation for the denial of the
proposed special use permit.



      (4)   Action By Board Of Trustees: Within forty-five (45) days
after the receipt of the recommendation of the zoning board of appeals, or
its failure to act as above provided, the board of trustees shall either deny
the application or, by ordinance duly passed, shall grant the special use
permit, with or without modifications or conditions. The failure of the board
of trustees to act within such forty-five (45) days, or such further time to
which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a decision denying the special
use permit.



   (c)   No special use permit shall be granted unless the applicant
shall establish that:



      (1)   Code And Plan Purposes: The proposed use and development
will be in harmony with the general and specific purposes for which this
chapter was enacted and for which the regulations of the district in question
were established.



      (2)   No Undue Adverse Impact: The proposed use and
development will not have a substantial or undue adverse effect upon adjacent
property, the character of the area, or the public health, safety, and
general welfare.



      (3)   No Interference With Surrounding Development: The
proposed use and development will be constructed, arranged, and operated so
as not to dominate the immediate vicinity or to interfere with the use and
development of neighboring property in accordance with the applicable
district regulations.



      (4)   Adequate Public Facilities: The proposed use and
development will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services such as streets, public utilities, drainage structures, police and
fire protection, refuse disposal, parks, libraries, and schools, or the
applicant will provide adequately for such services.



      (5)   No Traffic Congestion: The proposed use and development
will not cause undue traffic congestion nor draw significant amounts of
traffic through streets.



      (6)   No Destruction Of Significant Features: The proposed use
and development will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of any
natural, scenic, or historic feature of significant importance.



      (7)   Compliance With Standards: The proposed use and
development complies with all standards imposed on that use and any district
where it is a permitted use.



   (d)   In determining whether the applicant's evidence establishes
that the foregoing standards have been met, the zoning board of appeals shall
consider:



      (1)   Public Benefit: Whether, and to what extent, the
proposed use and development at the particular location requested is
necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility that is in the
interest of the public convenience or that will contribute to the general
welfare of the neighborhood or community.



      (2)   Alternative Locations: Whether, and to what extent, such
public goals can be met by the location of the proposed use and development
at some other site or in some other area that may be more appropriate than
the proposed site.



      (3)   Mitigation Of Adverse Impacts: Whether and to what
extent, all steps possible have been taken to minimize any adverse effects of
the proposed use and development on the immediate vicinity through building
design, site design, landscaping, and screening.



   (e)   The zoning board of appeals may recommend and the board of
trustees may impose such conditions and limitations concerning use,
construction, character, location, landscaping, screening, and other matters
relating to the purposes and objectives of this chapter upon the premises
benefited by a special use permit as may be necessary or appropriate to
prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements in
the vicinity of the subject property or upon public facilities and services;
provided, however, that such conditions shall not be used as a device to
grant a permit for a special use that is intended to be temporary in nature.
Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the ordinance granting the
special use. Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a
violation of this chapter and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the
special use permit.



   (f)   Whenever any special use permit granted pursuant to this
section is made subject to conditions or limitations to be met by the
applicant, the applicant shall, upon meeting such conditions, file an
affidavit with the building commissioner so stating. Such affidavit shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, to be fixed in each case by the building
commissioner, to recover the village's actual direct cost of an inspection to
verify that such conditions and limitations have been met.



   (g)   The grant of a special use permit shall not authorize the
establishment or extension of any use, nor, the development, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or structure, but shall
merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for
any permits or approvals that may be required by the codes and ordinances of
the village.



   (h)   Subject to an extension of time granted by the building
commissioner, no special use permit shall be valid for a period longer than
one year unless a building permit is issued and construction has actually
begun within that period, and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion
or unless a certificate of occupancy is issued and a use commenced within
that period.



   (i)   A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only the
particular use for which it was issued, and such permit shall automatically
expire and cease to be of any force or effect if such use shall, for any
reason, be discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months or more.



   (j)   Except when otherwise provided in the ordinance granting a
special use permit, a special use permit shall be deemed to relate to, and be
for the benefit of, the use and property in question rather than the owner or
operator of such use or property.



   (k)   A special use permit may be amended, varied, or altered only
pursuant to the procedures and subject to the standards and limitations
provided in this section for its original approval. 



(Ord. 2014-01, § 2, 1-27-2014; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Secs. 12-16–12-20.  Reserved:



ARTICLE II. DISTRICTS; MAP



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



Sec. 12-21.  Districts Designated:



   For the purpose of this chapter all lands lying within the village are
hereby divided and classified into the following districts, listed from the
highest class to the lowest class and designated as follows:



   R-1 residence



   R-2 residence



   R-3 residence



   B-1 business



   C-1 planned commercial and office development



   I-1 light industry



   I-1-R restricted industrial



   I-2 heavy industry



(Ord. 62-13, 8-2-1962; Ord. 72-32, 11-2-1972; Code 1972, § 10-3-1; Ord.
75-10, 4-3-1975; Ord. 98-43, § 1, 1-9-1998; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-22.  Boundaries; Map:



   The boundaries of districts as established in this chapter are shown on
a zoning plan map, which is hereby made a part of this chapter by reference.
All notations, dimensions and references pertaining to such district
boundaries as are shown there shall be as much a part of this chapter as if
the full legal description were incorporated herein.



(Code 1972, § 10-3-2; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-23.  Annexations:



   All areas hereafter annexed to the village shall be classified as in
the district permitting the lawful use allowed by the county zoning ordinance
at the time of application for annexation.



(Ord. 62-13, 8-2-1962; Code 1972, § 10-3-3; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-24.  Adoption Of Comprehensive Plan In Phases:



   (a)   Phase One: The review of all village zoning regulations and an
official comprehensive plan for the village of Justice and the unincorporated
territory within one and one-half (1-1/2) miles of the boundaries of the
village of Justice, as compiled and subsequently recommended by the village
of Justice zoning board of appeals beginning on July 27, 2004, shall be
adopted, and amended from time to time, by the zoning board of appeals and
economic development planning board as follows:



      (1)   For single-family homes south of 79th Street, there
shall be a maximum of a twenty percent (20%) square footage footprint based
on the property size, not to exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet of living space, excluding the attached garage.



      (2)   For single-family homes north of 79th Street, there
shall be a maximum of a twenty five percent (25%) square footage footprint
based on the property size, not to exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet
of living space, excluding the attached garage.



      (3)   In all residential or multiple-family districts within
the village limits as stated herein, there shall be a minimum green space
requirement of thirty five percent (35%) of the lot size unless limited by
floodplain designation or other state or federal restrictions.



      (4)   In all residential or multiple-family districts within
the village limits as stated herein, wherein there is a request to subdivide
an existing, developed lot of record into two (2) or more lots, no such
subdivision shall be allowed unless each subdivided lot meets the minimum
requirements of this code and adheres to the minimum green space requirements
herein, whether such subdivided lot is developed or not.



   (b)   Phase Two:



      (1)   The south side of 79th Street from Roberts Road (80th
Avenue) to I-294 shall be zoned B-1. All property on the north side of Archer
Road with an Archer Road address in the village limits shall be zoned B-1.



      (2)   All property on the south side of Archer Road in the
village boundary limits shall be zoned B-1.



      (3)   All cemetery property shall be rezoned B-1.



      (4)   The property on the east and west sides of Roberts Road
shall be zoned B-1.



      (5)   The property on the east of 88th Avenue (Cork Avenue)
from 79th Street to the I-294, shall be zoned B-1.



      (6)   The property on the east side of 88th Avenue from I-294
to 83rd Street shall remain as currently zoned.



      (7)   The property along the east side of 88th Avenue from
83rd Street to 87th Street shall remain as currently zoned.



      (8)   The property on the west side of 88th Avenue from 79th
Street to I-294 shall be zoned B-1.



      (9)   The property on the west side of 88th Avenue from I-294
to 83rd Street shall remain as currently zoned.



      (10)   The property on the west side of 88th Avenue from 83rd
Street to 86th Street shall be zoned B-1.



      (11)   The property along the north side of 80th Street
between 82nd Avenue and the east Village limits shall be zoned B-1.



   (c)   Phase Three:



      (1)   The property adjacent to the east side of 88th (Cork)
Avenue between 83rd Street and 87th Street, currently zoned other than B-1 as
of the effective date of this amendments, shall be zoned B-1;



      (2)   The property adjacent to the north side of 87th Street,
between 88th (Cork) Avenue and 86th Avenue, shall be zoned B-1; and



      (3)   The property adjacent to the north side of 87th Street
between Roberts Road (80th Avenue) and the eastern Village of Justice
boundary (east north/south lot line of property between 78 Court and 78th
Avenue, perpendicular to 87th Street), shall be zoned B-1.



(Ord. 2004-24, § 2, 10-25-2004; Ord. 2005-13, § 2, 5-23-2005; Ord. 2010-04,
§ 3, 2-22-2010; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Secs. 12-25–12-35.  Reserved:



DIVISION 2. RESIDENCE DISTRICTS



Sec. 12-36.  R-1 Residence District–Permitted Uses:



   In the R-1 district the uses which may hereafter be established are:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings, each one (1) on a lot or tract
of land not less than eight thousand one hundred twenty-five (8,125) square
feet and having a minimum width of not less than sixty- five feet (65'),
excepting any smaller lot or parcel of land of public record on the adoption
of the ordinance from which this section derives;



      (2)   Churches, eleemosynary and public educational
institutions, but with a minimum of not less than one (1) acre of land per
institution;



      (3)   Public libraries;



      (4)   Public and community parks.



(Code 1972, § 10-4-1; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-37.  R-1 Residence District Building Regulations:



   In the R-1 district, easement requirements shall be ten feet (10') from
the rear lot line of each lot or tract of land; the setback line shall be
thirty feet (30') from  the front lot line and not less than ten percent
(10%) of the lot width or a minimum of five feet (5'), whichever is greater,
from the side lot lines, except where an easement exists along the side lot
lines the setback shall be not less than ten feet (10') from the side lot
line. The street side setback on a corner lot shall be not less than twenty
feet (20'). Attached garages shall be set not less than five feet (5') from
the side lot line; detached garages shall be set not less than five feet (5')
from the side lot line and be not less than ten feet (10') from the rear lot
line. The height limit for single-family residence shall be thirty feet (30')
from grade level. The height limit for public buildings shall be a maximum of
forty-five feet (45') from grade level.



(Code 1972, § 10-4-2; Ord. 78-32, 8-3-1978; Ord. 96-24, § 1, 8-12-1996;
Ord. 2007-12, § 2, 8- 27-2007; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-38.  R-1 Resident District Special Uses:



   The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 residence district,
but only if specifically authorized pursuant to the procedures of section
12-15 of this chapter:



   (1)   Private or professional schools, except those of an industrial
nature.



(Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-39.  R-2 Residence District Permitted Uses:



   In the R-2 district the uses which may hereafter be established are
those permitted in the R-1 district and, in addition, apartments or duplex
dwellings at the rate of not more than one (1) two-family apartment house or
duplex per lot or tract of land having a minimum width of sixty-five feet
(65') and a minimum depth of one hundred twenty-five feet (125').



(Code 1972, § 10-5-1; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-40.  R-2 Residence District Building Regulations:



   In the R-2 district, easement requirements shall be ten feet (10') from
the rear lot line of each lot or tract of land; the setback line shall be
thirty feet (30') from the front lot line and not less than ten percent (10%)
of the lot width or a minimum of five feet (5'), whichever is greater, from
the side lot lines, except where an easement exists along the side lot line
the setback shall be not less than ten feet (10') from the side lot line. The
street side setback on a corner lot shall be not less than twenty feet (20');
attached garages shall be not less than five feet (5') from the side lot
line; detached garages shall be set not less than five feet (5') from the
side lot line and be not less than ten feet (10') from the rear lot line. The
height limit for public buildings shall be a maximum of forty- five feet
(45') from grade level; the height limit for single-family residential
buildings (R-1 residence) or one (1) two-family apartment house or duplex(R-2
residence) shall not exceed thirty feet (30') from grade level. There shall
be three and one-half (3-1/2) parking spaces per unit.



(Code 1972, § 10-5-2; Ord. 78-33, 8-3-1978; Ord. 96-24, § 2, 8-12-1996;
Ord. 2007-12, § 2, 8- 27-2007; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-41.  R-3 Residence District–Permitted Uses:



   In the R-3 residence district the uses which may be hereafter
established are those permitted in the R-2 district and the minimum lot width
for single- or two-family dwellings shall be sixty-five feet (65') and the
minimum depth of one hundred twenty-five feet (125') and, in addition:



      (1)   For designated “senior citizens only” multiple-units
as defined by Illinois Complied Statutes there shall be a rate of three
thousand (3,000) square feet of lot or tract of land per unit. For nonage
restricted multiple-units there shall be rate of three thousand five hundred
(3,500) square feet of lot or tract of land per unit.



      (2)   Rest homes.



      (3)   Health and medical institutions on a lot or tract of
land not less than one (1) acre.



(Code 1972, § 10-7-1; Ord. 2001-36, § 1, 10-8-2001; Ord. 2004-24, § 3,
10-25-2004; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-42.  R-3 Residence District–Building Regulations:



   In the R-3 district, easement requirements shall be ten feet (10') from
the rear lot line of each lot or tract of land; the setback line shall be
thirty feet (30') from the front lot line and not less than ten percent (10%)
of the lot width or a minimum of five feet (5'), whichever is greater, from
the side lot lines, except where an easement exists along the side lot line
the setback shall be not less than ten feet (10') from the side lot line. The
street side setback on a corner lot shall be not less than twenty feet (20');
attached garages shall be set not less than five feet (5') from the side lot
line; detached garages shall be set not less than five feet (5') from the
side lot line and be not less than ten feet (10') from the rear lot line. The
height limit for public buildings shall be a maximum forty-five feet (45')
from grade level; the height limit for single-family residential buildings
(R-1 residence) or one (1) two-family apartment house or duplex (R-2
residence) shall not exceed thirty feet (30') from grade level. The height
limit for all other residential buildings shall be thirty-five feet (35')
from grade level.  No building shall contain more than three (3) stories
including a basement used for residential purposes.



(Code 1972, § 10-7-2; Ord. 78-35, 8-3-1978; Ord. 96-24, § 3, 8-12-1996;
Ord. 2007-12, § 2, 8- 27-2007; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-43.  R-3 Residence District Off Street Parking Regulations:



   In the R-3 district, parking spaces shall be provided as follows:



   For designated “senior citizens only” multiple-units as defined by
Illinois Complied Statutes there shall be two (2) designated parking spaces
per unit plus one-half (1/2) auxiliary parking space per unit in addition to
any added garage not attached or not primarily part of the original building.



   For nonage restricted multiple-units there shall be three (3)
designated parking spaces per unit plus one-half (1/2) auxiliary parking
space per unit in addition to any added garage not attached or not primarily
part of the original building.



(Code 1972, § 10-7-3; Ord. 84-27, 9-6-1984; Ord. 2004-24, § 4, 10-25-2004;
Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-44.  Condominiums and Common Interest Community Associations: 1



1   The provisions of the Illinois Condominium Property Act, 765 ILCS 605,
and the Illinois Common Interest Community Association Act, 765 ILCS 160
shall take precedence.



(Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-44.1.  Definitions:



   For the purpose of this division, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:



   Condominium Property means all the land, property and space comprising
the parcel, all improvements and structures erected, constructed or contained
therein or thereon, including the building and all easements, rights and
appurtenances belonging thereto, and all fixtures and equipment intended for
the mutual use, benefit or enjoyment of the unit owners, submitted to the
provisions of the Illinois Condominium Property Act. 1



   Common Interest Community means real estate other than a condominium or
cooperative with respect to which any person by virtue of his or her
ownership or a partial interest or a unit therein is obligated to pay for the
maintenance, improvement, insurance premiums or real estate taxes of common
areas described in a declaration which is administered by an association.
Common interest community may include, but not be limited to, an attached or
detached townhome, villa, or single-family home. A common interest community
does not include a master association. 1



(Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



1   The provisions of the Illinois Condominium Property Act, 765 ILCS 605,
and the Illinois Common Interest Community Association Act, 765 ILCS 160
shall take precedence.



Sec. 12-44.2.  Discrimination:



   No person shall be denied the right to purchase or lease a unit because
of race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry,
sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, military discharge
status, source of income, gender identity, or housing status, or the actual
or perceived association with such a person.



(Code 1972, § 10-6-4; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



   State law reference—Illinois Human Rights Act, 775 ILCS 5.



Sec. 12-44.3.  Compliance required; enforcement:



   The rights, obligations and remedies set forth in this division shall
be cumulative and in addition to any other available at law or in equity. The
village or any prospective purchaser, purchaser or owner of a unit may seek
compliance of any provision of this division; provided, however, that only
the village may enforce any provisions of section 12-44.4. In any action
brought to enforce provisions of this division except section 12-44.4, the
prevailing plaintiff shall be entitled to recover, in addition to any other
remedy available, his reasonable attorney's fees.



(Code 1972, § 10-6-10; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-44.4.  Penalty:



   Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
division, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than three hundred dollars
($300.00) for the first offense and not less than three hundred dollars
($300.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second and
each subsequent offense in any one hundred-eighty-day (180) period; provided,
however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines only shall be filed
as quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the Illinois Code of
Civil Procedure. Repeated offenses in excess of three (3) within any one
hundred-eighty-day (180) period may also be punishable as a misdemeanor or by
incarceration in the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months
under the procedure set forth in section 1-2-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code and under the provisions of the Illinois Code of Criminal Procedure of
1963 in a separate proceeding. Each failure to comply with the provisions of
this division with respect to each person shall be considered a separate
offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each
day on which such person shall continue or permit any such violations. In
addition to such fines and penalties, violations of any provision of this
division shall be cause for revocation of any license issued to such violator
or offending party by the village. Nothing herein shall be construed to
preclude the revocation of any license for violation of any other provision
of this code.



(Code 1972, § 10-6-11; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



   State law references—Ordinances making violation misdemeanor, 65 ILCS
5/1-2-1.1; Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963, 725 ILCS 5/ 100-1 et seq.;
Code of Civil Procedure, 735 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.; Civil Practice Law, 735
ILCS 5/2-101 et seq.



Sec. 12-44.5.  Severability:



   If any provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this
division, or application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall, for
any reason, be adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this division and the
application of such provision to other persons, firms, corporations, public
agencies or circumstances, but shall be confined in its operation to the
provisions, clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part thereof, directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered
and to the person, firm, corporation, public agency, or circumstances
involved. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the board of
trustees that this division would have been adopted had such unconstitutional
or invalid provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof,
not been included.



(Code 1972, § 10-6-12; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-44.6.  Inspections; Code Compliance Certificate:



   (a)   A developer submitting a property to the provisions of the
Illinois Condominium Property Act or the Common Interest Community
Association Act shall file a notice of intent to convert with the building
commissioner of the village within three (3) business days from the date the
notice is given to the tenants of the property. A code inspection of the
property, including all projected condominium or common interest units and
common elements and facilities, shall be scheduled by agreement between the
developer and the building commissioner when the notice of intent to convert
is received by the building commissioner.



   (b)   Any code violations and deficiencies detected during an
inspection of projected condominium or common interest units and common
elements and facilities shall be corrected by the developer at least thirty
(30) days prior to the closing of a sales contract on any condominium or
common interest unit. The correction shall be evidenced by a code inspection
report and certificate of code compliance, except as provided in subsection
(c) of this section, issued by the building commissioner.



   (c)   If substantial rehabilitation is being performed as part of a
conversion to condominium or common interest units, the building commissioner
may issue a partial certificate of code compliance to permit the closing of
sales contracts for those condominium or common interest units in which
rehabilitation is complete and all code violations are corrected. Partial
certificates also may be issued for common elements and facilities on which
rehabilitation is complete and all code violations are corrected. However,
prior to the issuance of a certificate of code compliance for the entire
property, a re-inspection shall be made on all common elements and facilities
and units for which sales contracts have not been closed. Any recurrence of
code violations in the common elements and facilities covered by a partial
certificate of code compliance shall be corrected by the developer at the
developer's expense unless control of the building has passed to the board of
managers.



   (d)   Until such time as all units in a condominium property or a
common interest community association are sold, the building commissioner
shall conduct annual  building inspections of all common elements and common
facilities, and at least ten (10) percent of the unsold units. Once all units
are sold, the building commissioner shall conduct annual building inspections
on all common elements and facilities. After the initial purchase of each
condominium or common interest unit, said unit(s) must comply with the
provisions of section 8-54 of this code.



   (e)   Subsequent to the sale of all condominium or common interest
units, the building commissioner shall conduct an annual inspection of all
the common elements and facilities of a condominium or common interest
property. The condominium or common interest building shall be subject to all
applicable village ordinances which may be enforced as to the developer, unit
owners, board of managers or any other person to whom the ordinances are
applicable.



   (f)   A developer shall be required to provide a prospective
purchaser with a copy of a code inspection report and a certificate or
partial certificate of code compliance prior to or at the closing of a
condominium or common interest unit sales contract. 1



   (g)   Inspections will require fees as covered in this code.



(Code 1972, § 10-6-14; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



1   765 ILCS 605/30.



Sec. 12-44.7.  Off Street Parking Regulations:



   Parking spaces shall be provided as follows: There shall be three (3)
designated parking spaces per unit plus one-half (1/2) auxiliary parking
space per unit in addition to any added garage not attached to or not
primarily part of the original building.



(Code 1972, § 10-6-15; Ord. 84-27, 9-6-1984; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-44.8.  Area:



   Each and every condominium and townhouse shall have an area of at least
two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of lot or tract of land per
unit. The minimum width of each lot or tract of land shall be eighty feet
(80') and a minimum depth of one hundred twenty-five feet (125'). The minimum
frontage of each lot or tract of land shall be eighty feet (80').



(Code 1972, § 10-6-16; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-44.9.  Building Regulations:



   Easement requirements shall be ten feet (10') from the rear lot line of
each lot or tract of land; the setback line shall be thirty feet (30') from
the front lot line and not less than ten percent (10%) of the lot width or a
minimum of five feet (5'), whichever is greater, from the side lot lines,
except where an easement exists along the side lot line the setback shall be
not less than ten feet (10') from the side lot line. The street side setback
on a corner lot shall be not less than twenty feet (20'), attached garages
shall be set not less than five feet (5') from the side lot line; detached
garages shall not be set less than five feet (5') from the side lot line and
be not less than ten feet (10') from the rear lot line. The height limit for
public buildings shall be a maximum forty-five feet (45') from grade level;
the height limit for single-family residential buildings (R-l residence) or
one (1) two-family apartment house or duplex (R-2 residence) shall not exceed
thirty feet (30') from grade level. The height limit for all other
residential buildings shall be thirty-five feet (35') from grade level. No
building shall contain more than three (3) stories including a basement used
for residential purposes.



(Code 1972, § 10-6-17; Ord. 96-24, § 4, 8-12-1996; Ord. 2007-12, § 2,
8-27-2007; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-45.  Reserved:



Sec. 12-46.  Exclusion Of Certain Areas:



   The square footage of drainage easements, retention ponds and detention
ponds is excluded from the minimum square footage requirements of residential
lots located in R-1, R-2 and R-3 residence districts.



(Ord. 96-11, § 2, 5-13-1996; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-47.  Garage Requirements, Corner Lots:



   (a)   In all residential, multi-family, business and commercial
districts a garage door setback of twenty-five feet (25') from the side lot
line and thirty feet (30') from the front lot line is hereby established.



   (b)   In all residential districts, only one (1) garage shall be
permitted per lot.



(Ord. 96-23, § 1, 8-12-1996; Ord. 2001-20, § 1, 5-14-2001; Ord. 2016-15, §
1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-48.  Limit Of One Storage Facility For Vehicles:



   Storage facilities for vehicles are limited to one (1) per lot, in all
residential districts, whether attached to the dwelling unit or freestanding.



(Ord. 93-39, § 1, 10-25-1993; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Secs. 12-49–12-65.  Reserved:



DIVISION 3. RESERVED



Secs. 12-66–12-85.  Reserved:



DIVISION 4. BUSINESS DISTRICTS



Sec. 12-86.  B-1 Business District Permitted Uses:



   In the B-1 district the uses which may hereafter be established are:



   (1)   Motels and hotels.



   (2)   Retail business or service establishment, excluding those
permitted only in the I-1, I-1-R  and I-2 districts.



   (3)   Restaurants.



   (4)   Professional and business offices.



   (5)   Private music, dancing, business and vocational schools and
colleges.



   (6)   Lodge halls.



   (7)   Municipal buildings, waterworks, police and fire stations.



   (8)   Theaters.



   (9)   The permissive use of a liquor license upon the board of
trustees’ approval to allow a business licensed in the village to sell
alcohol.



   (10)   Cemeteries and related uses.



   (11)   Taverns.



   (12)   Nightclubs.



   (13)   Dance halls.



   (14)   Picnic groves.



   (15)   Temporary carnivals and circuses operating not more than ten
(10) consecutive days in any one (1) year.



(Code 1972, § 10-9-1; Ord. 2005-13, § 3, 5-23-2005; Ord. 2007-23, § 2,
10-8-2007; Ord. 2013-04, § 5, 3-25-2013; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-87.  B-1 Business District Building Regulations:



   (a)   In the B-l district there shall be no rear lot setback
requirements from the rear lot line of each lot or tract of land, unless
there exists a recorded and dedicated easement agreement for the rear of the
property, then the rear set back shall not encroach on said easement. The
front setback line shall be thirty feet (30') from the front lot line. There
shall be no side lot setback required, except on corner lots, setback shall
be thirty feet (30') from street side lot lines. Building height limit shall
be thirty-five feet (35') from grade level, except for hotels as defined in
section 8-42 of this code.



   (b)   Building height for hotels shall be not less than forty (40)
feet above grade nor higher than Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
regulations allow for this area.



   (c)   Minimum Lot Size: No hotel shall be constructed on a lot less
than two (2) acres in size without a special use permit in accordance with
the terms and provisions of this title. Hotels may be constructed on lots
less than two (2) acres if they are part of a larger, master planned project,
provided the sum of all contiguous lots within the master planned project is
greater than ten (10) acres.



   (d)   All utilities for hotels and motels shall be placed
underground in easements established for the utilities. 



(Code 1972, § 10-9-2; Ord. 2013-04, § 6, 3-25-2013; Ord. 2016-15, § 1,
4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-88.  B-1 Business District Parking Regulations:



   (a)   Any business establishment permitted in the B-l district,
except hotels and motels, shall provide parking space at the rate of one (1)
square foot of parking area for each one (1) square foot of building ground
floor area plus one (1) square foot of parking space for each five (5) square
feet of building floor area above the first floor. No overnight parking shall
be permitted in the B-l district of any truck, bus, road equipment or other
vehicle on any lot or tract of land, vacant or improved, whether an
established permitted use exists thereon or not, unless such truck, bus, road
equipment or other vehicle  is part and parcel of the establishment wherein
such parking takes place and is used by such establishment as a necessary and
needful adjunct to the conduct of its permitted use therein; shopping centers
with multiple establishments shall provide parking area of not less than the
ground floor area of the building.



   (b)   Parking spaces for hotels and motels shall be provided at the
rate of one (1) space per guest room and one (1) space for every two (2)
employees; plus any spaces required for restaurant, lounge, banquet areas,
and meeting rooms as required under section {[0-9]+-[0-9]+}(a) of this code.
Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the most
current edition of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Parking of
vehicles, including but not limited to trucks, buses, road equipment, or
other vehicles in parking lots of hotels and motels, where vehicle
owners/operators are not patrons of the hotel or motel, is prohibited.



   (c)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct
offense shall be deemed to have been committed each day a violation occurs,
exists or continues. 



(Code 1972, § 10-9-3; Ord. 78-37, 8-3-1978; Ord. 98-6, § 2, 2-9-1998; Ord.
98-12, § 2, 3-23-1998; Ord. 2013-04, § 7, 3-25-2013; Ord. 2016-15, § 1,
4-25-2016)



Secs. 12-89.  Manufactured Home Community:



   The B-1 business zoning district shall make provisions for manufactured
homes in a manufactured home community, which will not be subdivided into
individual lots, in an appropriate, safe, sanitary and attractive
environment. Permitted uses are manufactured homes in a manufactured home
community and the sales of manufactured homes.



(Ord. 98-43, § 1, 11-9-1998; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-89.1.  Definitions:



   Unless the  context clearly  requires  otherwise, the  words and
phrases  set  forth  below  inclusive, shall have the meanings set forth
in this section. Additionally, words and phrases not defined in this section
shall have the meaning indicated by common dictionary definition.



   Dependent Mobile Home: A mobile home which does not have a toilet and
bath or shower facilities.



   Front: The end of the mobile or manufactured home to which the hitch is
or was attached and used for towing or for delivery to the site. When a
mobile home is placed in a mobile home park and the hitch is removed, the
village of Justice shall make a determination as to what constitutes the
front.



   Independent Mobile Home: A mobile home which has a self-contained
toilet and bath or shower facilities.



   License: Mobile home park operator’s license.



   Manufactured Home Accessory Buildings Or Structures: An assembly of
materials forming a construction for use which contributes to the comfort,
convenience or necessity of the principal building or structure served,
including, among other things, awnings, cabanas, garages, storage structures,
sheds, decks, carports, fences, windbreaks, porches or other like
appurtenances.



   Manufactured Home And Mobile Home: A structure designed for permanent
habitation, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the
traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty feet (40')
or more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or
more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, with wheels,
tongue, lug bolts and hitch permanently removed, when connected to the
required utilities, including plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems. Any structure defined in this section 12-89 as a
“mobile home” shall also be considered a “manufactured home”. For
purposes of this section 12-89, the terms “mobile home” and
“manufactured home” are used interchangeably.



   Manufactured Home Community And Mobile Home Park: A tract of land or
two (2) or more contiguous tracts of land that contain sites with the
necessary utilities for five (5) or more independent manufactured homes for
permanent habitation either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall
include any building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for
use as a part of the equipment of such manufactured home community. Separate
ownership of contiguous tracts of land shall not preclude the tracts of land
from common licensure as a manufactured home community if they are maintained
and operated jointly. Neither an immobilized manufactured home nor a
motorized recreational vehicle shall be construed as being part of a
manufactured home community. Any community defined as a “mobile home
park” shall also be considered a “manufactured home community”. For the
purposes of this section 12-89 the terms “mobile home park”, and
“manufactured home community”, are used interchangeably.



   Permanent Habitation: A period of one (1) or more months.



   School District: Any district created or operated under the provisions
of the school code, approved May 1, 1945, as amended.



   Site: The lot on which the mobile home is located for permanent
habitation.



   Village: The village of Justice, Illinois.



(Ord. 98-43, § 1, 11-9-1998; Ord. 2005-22, § 2, 10-24-2005; Ord. 2016-15,
§ 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-89.2.  General Requirements:



   Every manufactured home community shall comply with the following
provisions:



   (1)   Attendant: Every mobile home park shall be in the charge of a
responsible attendant or caretaker whose name shall be on file at all times
with the village and the village building commissioner and whose duty it
shall be to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in a clean,
orderly and sanitary condition, and it shall be the responsibility of the
licensee, for any violation of the provisions of this section 12-89.



   (2)   Drainage: No mobile home park shall be located such that the
drainage of the property will endanger any water supply. All mobile home
parks shall be well drained and free of any ponding, except in properly
engineered and approved detention or retention areas. No wastewater shall be
deposited on the surface of the ground within the mobile home park. The
village shall require the owner of the mobile home park to provide a report,
at the expense of the mobile home park, by an Illinois state licensed
engineer concerning drainage, overland water flow and compensatory storage
requirements, calculated on the basis of the 100-year frequency rainfall for
the area and the amount of impervious surfaces within the mobile home park.
Section 11-11 of this code shall also apply.



   (3)   Area: The total minimum area for each manufactured home
community shall be ten (10) acres.



   (4)   Maximum Density Of Units Per Acre: The total density of any
manufactured home park shall not exceed ten and one-half (10-1/2)
manufactured home sites per acre.



   (5)   Minimum Lot Size: Each site on which a mobile home is
accommodated shall have a minimum area of two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet, except that sites existing in parks or approved by the village
for construction prior to August 21, 1967, shall contain an area of not less
than one thousand (1,000) square feet. Not more than one (1) manufactured
home shall be placed on a space or site. Each manufactured home shall contain
not less than four hundred eighty (480) square feet of floor space nor more
than two thousand one hundred twenty-eight (2,128) square feet of floor space.



   (6)   Manufactured Home Sites: The exclusive space or site reserved
for the placement of each manufactured home shall conform to the following
standards:



      a.   Placement: No mobile home, or permitted accessory
structure, shall be located closer than five feet (5') to the side lot lines
of a mobile home park, or closer than ten feet (10') to a public street,
alley or building. Each individual site shall abut or face on a private or
public driveway or roadway of not less than twenty four feet (24') in width,
which driveway or roadway shall have unobstructed access to a public highway
or alley. There shall be an open space of at least ten feet (10') adjacent to
the sides of every mobile home and at least five feet (5') adjacent to the
ends of every mobile home for mobile homes placed on a site prior to the
effective date hereof. For mobile homes placed on a site after the effective
date hereof, no portion of a mobile home, excluding the tongue, shall be
closer than ten feet (10') side to side, eight feet (8') end to side, and six
feet (6') end to end horizontally from any other mobile home or community
building. Compliance with the setback and separation requirements shall be
adhered to whenever an owner of a mobile home community enlarges or expands a
concrete pad used to support a mobile home, installs a new mobile home, or
replaces an existing mobile home on or after the effective date hereof.



         For new mobile home parks constructed and licensed after
the effective date hereof, no mobile home shall be located closer than ten
feet (10') to a private street.



         In the instance where an owner of a mobile home community
enlarges or expands a concrete pad in an existing community used to support a
mobile home, installs a new mobile home in an existing community, or replaces
an existing mobile home in an existing community, on or after the effective
date hereof, the mobile home shall be no closer than ten feet (10') to a
public or private street.



      b.   Foundation: No manufactured home shall be occupied unless
it is placed on and attached to a permanent concrete foundation, concrete pad
or runners; connected to utilities; with wheels, tongues, and hitch removed,
and provided with skirting, from the bottom of the walls to the ground, made
of vinyl or other durable material. A manufactured home shall be secure to
its foundation in such a manner as to withhold winds of eighty (80) miles per
hour.



   (7)   Utilities:



      a.   Water: An adequate supply of water of safe, sanitary
quality, approved by the village shall be furnished at each mobile home park.
Where water from other sources than that supplied by the village is proposed
to be used, the source of such supply shall first be approved by the village.
Each site shall be provided with a cold water tap located in accordance with
regulations of the village. Connections to the water mains shall be made in
accordance with the village codes and regulations and the fees and charges
therein provided shall apply.



      b.   Sewer: All sewage and other water carried wastes shall be
disposed of into a municipal sewerage system whenever the interceptor or
sewer main of such system is adjacent to the mobile home park. In mobile home
parks in which such connections are not available, disposal shall be into a
private system which includes a sanitary means of disposal, the operation of
which creates neither a nuisance nor a menace to health.



      c.   Combined Waste Outlet: When a water carriage system of
sewage is used each site shall be provided with a sewer connection for the
combined liquid waste outlet or outlets of each mobile home. It shall be the
duty of the owner or operator of said park to provide an approved type of
water and odor tight connection from the mobile home water drainage to the
sewer connection, and it shall be the duty of said owner or operator to make
such connection and keep all occupied mobile homes connected to said sewer
while located in the park. Sewer connections in unoccupied sites shall be
closed such that they will emit no odors or cause a breeding place for flies.
No water or waste shall be allowed to fall on the ground from a mobile home.
Connections to the mains shall be made in accordance with the village codes
and regulations and the fees and charges therein provided shall govern.



      d.   Gas Mains: Natural gas shall be provided for each
manufactured home site.



   (8)   Garbage And Rubbish: A sufficient number of adequate vermin,
pest resistant and watertight containers in accordance with the rules and
regulations adopted by the village shall be supplied for the storage of
garbage. Grass, trees and shrubbery shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary
and attractive condition, which creates neither a nuisance nor menace to
public health. Garbage containers shall be emptied at least once a week and
shall not be filled to overflowing, or allowed to become foul smelling or a
breeding place for insects. Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in a
manner which creates neither a nuisance nor a menace to health and which is
approved by the village.



   (9)   Insect, Rodent Control: Adequate insect and rodent control
measures shall be employed. All buildings shall be vermin and pest resistant
and rodent harborages shall not be permitted to exist in the mobile home park
or pathways.



   (10)   Fire Protection: The authority having jurisdiction (AHJ)
shall require for any mobile home or manufactured home that is: 1) newly
constructed; or 2) all mobile homes brought into a mobile home park after
March 13, 2006, the installation of such approved automatic sprinkler
equipment throughout the entire structure as mandated by NFPA-13D. In
addition, one (1) fire sprinkler head at and in each heating plant area of a
mobile home, with the sprinkler head to be located within five feet (5') of a
furnace and the hot water heater; and one (1) fire sprinkler head within any
attached garage. Additionally, a smoke detector in working order, shall be
installed by the tenant in each bedroom in the mobile home, and one (1)
carbon monoxide detector shall be installed in the mobile home, in accordance
with standards approved by the fire prevention bureau having jurisdiction in
the village. The space under manufactured homes and accessory buildings and
structures shall not be used for the storage of combustible materials or for
the storage or placement of flammable liquids, gases or liquid or gas fuel
powered equipment.



   (11)   Fire Hydrants: If a mobile home community has fire hydrants,
the fire hydrant valves shall be tested annually and the flow rates
documented by the local fire department district, water department or other
entity capable of analyzing the available flow from the hydrants. Such test
results shall be available to the village upon request.



      The licensee shall provide notification in writing to the local
fire protection authority of the hydrants that have been deemed
unsatisfactory, which includes an agreement to either remove the hydrants,
reverse the top of the hydrant, or provide some other identification
acceptable to the fire protection district to indicate that the hydrant is
not acceptable. The licensee shall then take immediate, affirmative steps to
either eliminate the defective hydrants or restore them to working order.



      The residents of the mobile home community shall be advised in
writing by the licensee within thirty (30) days when a mobile home community
licensee becomes aware that one (1) or more hydrants in the community is
inadequate. The location of these fire hydrants shall be specified in writing
along with a plan to correct the situation and an anticipated date for
completion. A copy of such notification shall be provided to the village.



      All new mobile home parks created and licensed after the date of
adoption hereof, must be provided with fire hydrants at least every five
hundred feet (500') of any structure. At a minimum, the hydrants within the
community must be linked to a six-inch (6") water main that generates one
thousand (1,000) to one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons per minute,
with a static pressure of thirty-five (35) psi.



      Within five (5) years after the adoption hereof, all mobile home
parks must implement one (1) of the following fire protection systems:



      a.   A manufactured home community based system, connected to
the local fire protection district, with fire hydrants at least every five
hundred feet (500') of any structure. At a minimum, the hydrants within the
mobile home park must be connected to a six-inch (6") water main that
generates one thousand (1,000) to one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons
per minute, with a static pressure of thirty-five (35) psi; or



      b.   An adequate and reliable water supply system that meets
fire mitigation needs, if approved by the village in consultation with the
local fire protection district. Examples include, but are not limited to, the
following:



         1.   A mobile home park based system, connected to the
local water distribution system, with fire hydrants strategically placed. At
a minimum, the hydrants within the system must be connected to a six-inch
(6") water main that generates one thousand (1,000) to one thousand five
hundred (1,500) gallons per minute, with a static pressure of thirty-five
(35) psi;



         2.   An on site water reservoir, with a distribution
system meeting the minimum requirements of subsection (11)b.1. of this
section.



   (12)   Lighting: Streetlights of a standard kind and quality
approved by the village shall be installed on the streets at intervals as
approved by the village.



   (13)   Electric Power: All electric distribution wiring shall be
underground. All service lines to each manufactured home space shall be
underground.



   (14)   Storage Tanks: No storage facilities for gasoline, oil,
natural gas, liquefied gas or other fuels shall be permitted within the
manufactured home community. This prohibition is not intended to apply to
individual storage containers for small gas powered engines or for outdoor
cooking grill uses.



   (15)   Playgrounds: A recreational area shall be provided, of a size
approved by the building commissioner, generally in a central location, and
shall include suitable landscaping, fencing and benches. In larger
communities, decentralization will be allowed. Recreation



      areas shall include space for community buildings and community
use facilities, such as adult recreation, child playgrounds and natural open
space.



   (16)   Additions To Manufactured Homes: Temporary porches, canvas
roofed canopies and skirts may be permitted for mobile homes if in compliance
with applicable local fire safety and building codes. No permanent or
semi-permanent structure shall be affixed to any manufactured home as an
addition to such manufactured home. Permanent or semipermanent additions to
movable structures are considered a nonconforming use and are not allowed
under this code. One (1) enclosed storage shed shall be permitted on any
manufactured home site as an accessory structure. No accessory structure
shall be placed between the ends of two (2) manufactured homes. Manufactured
home accessory buildings or structures constructed after the date of adoption
hereof must maintain five foot (5') setbacks from all property lines and must
be constructed entirely of noncombustible materials, provided that such
buildings or structures are at least five feet (5') from an accessory
building or structure on an adjacent site. Accessory buildings and structures
constructed before the date of adoption hereof shall be permitted as
nonconforming.



   (17)   Manufactured Home Construction: No new manufactured home
shall occupy any space in a manufactured home community that does not meet
the fire resistance standards of the American Insurance Association or which
does not comply with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act of 1974 as may be amended from time to time.
Nonconforming existing homes shall be permitted to remain and be relocated
within the manufactured home community as legal nonconforming structures.



   (18)   Height: The height limit for all structures including
community buildings, shall not exceed twenty-five feet (25') from grade level.



   (19)   Perimeter Yard: A landscaped yard, not less than five feet
(5') wide shall be provided around the perimeter of a manufactured home
community.



   (20)   Compliance With Building Regulations: All buildings
constructed in a manufactured home community; all plumbing; all electrical;
and all heating installations shall be in accordance with existing
ordinances, rules, and regulations of the village.



   (21)   Off Street Parking: There shall be two (2) designated “off
street” parking spaces for each manufactured home within a manufactured
home community.



   (22)   Certificate Of Use And Occupancy Required: No manufactured
home community shall be occupied until a certificate of use and occupancy
shall have been issued by the village building commissioner to the effect
that the manufactured home community, or the portion thereof for which such
certificate is required, is in compliance with all applicable provisions of
this chapter and the village mobile homes and mobile home park ordinance of
2005, as amended from time to time.



(Ord. 98-43, § 1, 11-9-1998; Ord. 2005-22, § 2, 10-24-2005; Ord. 2006-06,
§ 4, 3-13-2006; Ord. 2009-06, § 3, 3-9-2009; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-90.  Special Uses:



   The following uses shall be permitted in the B-1 business district but
only if specifically authorized pursuant to the procedures of section 12-15
of this chapter:



   (1)   Medical cannabis dispensing organizations provided the
facilities otherwise comply with the provisions of Article V of this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-07, § 1, 3-31-2015);



   (2)   Automobile fuel service stations (gas stations);



   (3)   Automobile laundries (car washes);



   (4)   Bowling alleys, roller skating rinks, practice golf driving
course, archeries, carnival devices such as merry-go-rounds, miniature
railroads, pony riding tracks, circuses and commercial amusement
establishments;



   (5)   Cleaning establishments where work is done elsewhere (pick-up
stations only);



   (6)   Dress, millinery and tailor shops;



   (7)   Electrical appliance and/or repair shops;



   (8)   Health clubs;



   (9)   Meat markets where no stripping or slaughtering is involved;



   (10)   Office equipment sales and service;



   (11)   Private or professional schools of an industrial nature;



   (12)   Smoke shops;



   (13)   Tattoo parlors.



(Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-91–12-105.  Reserved:



DIVISION 5. C-1 PLANNED COMMERCIAL AND OFFICE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT



Sec. 12-106.  Definitions:



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Below Grade Occupancy means any finished floor of any level used for
any purpose which is below the established finished grade, office and
commercial uses may be placed below grade providing a minimum ceiling height
of ten (10) feet is maintained and further, that all other requirements of
the building code, fire prevention code and all other applicable standards of
the village are met.



   Complete Preliminary Building Plans means elevation renderings of all
sides of the proposed buildings including the type of materials, building
height and design, and signs. Preliminary building plans shall include
interior planned views and a site plan. All plans are to be fully
dimensioned. These are not working plans but completely developed preliminary
plans.



   Covenant Agreement means a recorded document to the village, acceptable
to the village attorney, providing for covenants to run with the land
providing for common usage of open space between two (2) or more buildings,
easements and cross easements, common driveways and/or parking area
agreements, maintenance agreements for common open space, and such other
provisions as may be necessary to maintain the intent and purpose of this
division.



   Efficiency Unit means a dwelling unit consisting of one (1) principal
room used for living, dining and sleeping purposes with a kitchen area,
either included within the room or as a separate room, and with a three (3)
fixtured bathroom including a bath tub/shower combination.



   Final Plans means final working drawings incorporating all provisions
as approved during preliminary discussion, and complying with all ordinance
requirements of the village.



   Floor Area, For Determining Floor Area Ratio: The floor area of a
building is the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all of the floors of the
building, both above and below grade, measured from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings.
The floor area of a building shall include basements, elevator shafts, stair
wells, mechanical equipment rooms, spaces and chases (except equipment
located on the roof), attic space having headroom of seven (7) feet or more,
interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches, lobbies and corridors,
and all other floor areas devoted to accessory uses. However, any space
devoted to off street parking or loading for commercial or office use shall
not be included in floor area.



   Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.) means total floor area as defined in this
section divided by the total lot area after all street dedications have been
made. To determine the maximum floor area allowed to be built on any lot or
parcel of land regulated by this division, multiply the total lot area, after
all street dedications have been made, by the floor area ratio as set forth
in section 12-115.



   Grade means the finished surface of the ground adjacent to exterior
walls of the building. The finished grade shall be determined by the village
in relation to surrounding streets, curbs, sidewalks, existing buildings and
other existing buildings and other existing finished grades.



   Interior Planned Views means views setting forth the size and square
foot area of all interior spaces, halls, stairways, equipment and mechanical
spaces, location of elevators, indicating fire walls and fire doors where
necessary. All floors of the building can be typical; however, any variations
between floor designs are to be shown separately. All plans are to be fully
dimensioned.



   Mini-Lots means public side street rights-of-way perpendicular to
principal streets within commercial or office zoning districts which are
developed by the developer in cooperation with the village for additional
parking areas within the commercial and/or office districts. Mini-lot
development is stressed for the implementation of this division and is
subject to approval by the village as part of the overall project development.



   Net Commercial And/Or Office Space means the net floor area of a
commercial or office building or structure, exclusive of hallways, stairways,
stairwells, elevator shafts, maintenance and mechanical spaces, lavatories,
fireproof vaults, closets or monumental or other type lobbies used solely for
ingress and egress through the commercial or office building structure.



   Primary Or Ground Floor, for the purpose of establishing minimum
required parking percentages per floor as regulated by this division, means
the first floor above grade level occupied or used as offices or commercial
except that when automobile parking is placed under the building on the grade
or ground level, and not a basement, then the first floor above the parking
level used or occupied by offices and/or commercial shall be counted as the
primary floor.



If parking is placed under the building at grade or ground level for less
than thirty-five (35) percent of the entire floor area, then the remaining
floor area of that level used for office and/or commercial shall be counted
at eighty (80) percent of the required parking and the first floor above the
combination parking, office and/or commercial level shall be counted as the
primary floor at one hundred (100) percent of parking requirement.



If parking is placed under the building at grade or ground level for
thirty-five (35) percent or more of the entire floor area, then the remaining
floor area shall be counted  at sixty-five (65) percent of the required
parking and the first floor above the combination parking, office and/or
commercial level shall be counted as the primary floor at one hundred (100)
percent of parking requirement.



In the case of an unusual design, the zoning board of appeals shall establish
which level shall constitute the primary floor for purposes of computing the
one hundred  (100) percent parking requirement.



   Site Plan means a plan placing the buildings on the land, showing
grades; all signs and their placement; general and parking area lighting
systems; public walks, parkways; layout showing the driveways, aisles and
parking spaces; screening, fences or plantings around parking areas; and the
general placement of trees, shrubs, fountains and other landscaping details.
The site plan shall be fully dimensioned.



(Code 1972, § 10-17-5; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-107.  Approval Required:



   There are no areas of the village specifically zoned for planned
commercial or planned office as hereafter defined; planned commercial and
planned office shall be permitted only upon approval of the zoning board of
appeals and the president and board of trustees of the village upon
compliance with all requirements of this chapter and other applicable
ordinance provisions of the village.



(Code 1972, § 10-17-1; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-108.  Purpose:



   The planned commercial and planned office concept as delineated in this
division is intended to provide rules, regulations, requirements and
procedures which offer alternative methods for development of B-1 zoned
districts and to ensure compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood and
with the master plan of the village.



(Code 1972, § 10-17-2; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-109.  Goals:



   The goals of this division are to create, enhance and/or conserve the
value of the land within the village; to provide for a healthy, reasonably
stable and economically sound business community; to create convenient and
attractive areas for shopping; to provide for reasonable car parking areas as
well as improve traffic flow; to create cooperation between public and
private sectors and, in general, encourage quality development in the village.



(Code 1972, § 10-17-3; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-110.  Scope:



   It is specifically intended that all planned commercial and planned
office be regulated by this division.



(Code 1972, § 10-17-4; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-111.  Approval Procedures:



   (a)   All buildings, developments or proposals covered by this
division shall be initiated by a preliminary hearing before the zoning board
of appeals prior to the submission of preliminary plans. The purpose of the
preliminary meeting is informative.



   (b)   Thereafter, preliminary sketches and plans embodying the
results of the preliminary meeting shall be submitted to the zoning board of
appeals for consideration. All preliminary plans so submitted at the meeting
must include:



      (1)   Complete preliminary building plans, with all exterior
walls to be of face brick, stone, poured or precast concrete panels, or of
other suitable contemporary materials as approved by the building
commissioner; all exterior wall materials shall meet the fire-resistance
requirements of the building code;



      (2)   Interior planned views;



      (3)   Site plan;



      (4)   Proposed covenant agreement, if required;



      (5)   Grades of all proposed buildings and finished grades of
the project; grades of all existing buildings and finished grades abutting
the project and/or of property likely to be affected by the proposed project.
Finished grades shall be approved by the village engineer and building
commissioner to ensure against flooding, undercutting of grades, or other
adverse effects of the finished grades of the project on existing abutting
property.



   (c)   Preliminary Approval: Preliminary plans must be approved by
the zoning board of appeals and then submitted to the president and board of
trustees for approval.



   (d)   Preparation Of Final Plans: Upon approval of preliminary plans
by the president and board of trustees the applicant shall, in the
preparation of final plans, consult with the building commissioner, who shall
obtain approval of the final plans from the village engineer and fire
protection district.



   (e)   Final Approval: Upon review and the approval of final plans,
and completion of any required public hearings, the zoning board of appeals
shall make its recommendations to the president and board of trustees within
sixty (60) days. The president and board of trustees shall take final action
on the recommendation of the zoning board of appeals within thirty (30) days
thereafter.



   (f)   Expiration Of Approval: Unless a building permit is taken out
within one (1) year after final approval by the president and board of
trustees, the approval shall expire.



(Code 1972, § 10-17-6; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-112.  Use Regulations:



   All buildings or premises approved for construction as planned
commercial or planned office development shall be used only for the following
purposes:



   (1)   Commercial retail and service uses:



      a.   Bakeries where all goods are sold on the premises at
retail or wholesale;



      b.   Banks, currency exchanges, savings and loan associations
and finance companies;



      c.   Barbershops and beauty parlors;



      d.   Book and stationery stores;



      e.   Business, music, dance, beauty or commercial schools;



      f.   Clothing, apparel and accessory stores;



      g.   Convenience and specialty food shops;



      h.   Department stores;



      i.   Drugstores;



      j.   Employment agencies, both public and private;



      k.   Florist shops;



      l.   Furniture stores;



      m.   General retail stores;



      n.   Hardware stores;



      o.   Jewelry stores;



      p.   Laundries:



         1.   Launderettes (self-service laundries);



         2.   Hand laundries employing not more than five (5)
persons;



         3.   Self-service drycleaning establishments.



      q.   Locksmiths;



      r.   Mail-order houses;



      s.   Messenger and telegraph service stations;



      t.   Pet stores, with no animal boarding for hire;



      u.   Photographic studios;



      v.   Radio, television sales, service and studios;



      w.   Sales and/or repair shops;



      x.   Sports equipment and apparel stores;



      y.   Travel agencies;



      z.   Telephone booths and coin telephone booths (outdoors).



   (2)   Offices:



      a.   Business offices, such as district offices, sales
offices, branch offices, manufacturers’ representatives and similar
business offices;



      b.   Dental, medical offices and/or clinics;



      c.   Insurance, real estate, small loan companies and other
similar offices;



      d.   Lawyer, architect, engineer and other professional
offices;



      e.   Stenographic offices, computer offices and telephone
answering services;



      f.   Wholesale showrooms and sales offices;



      g.   Government offices.



   (3)   The zoning board of appeals shall entertain projects which may
contain other similar commercial retail and service uses and office uses
which will be compatible to uses listed in (1) and (2) above. The zoning
board of appeals shall also entertain uses which, because of rapid
technological changes and business innovations, do not presently exist or are
not currently being listed in normal zoning use groups.



   (4)   Apartment units may be built on any floor above the first
floor providing that if there are any apartment units on any floor, no
commercial or office space shall be located on the same floor nor on any
floor above. Each and every apartment unit must contain the following net
minimum square footage area (area is totally within the inside perimeter of
each apartment unit):



 

Apartment Unit
 
Minimum Area (Square Feet)


Efficiency units
 

500



One-bedroom apartment
 

650



Two-bedroom apartment
 

800



Three-bedroom apartment
 

1,000



Four-bedroom apartment
 

1,200




 



   (5)   Parks, playgrounds and community buildings owned or operated
for the use of residents of the development and solely for recreational
purposes.



   (6)   Parking: There shall be a minimum of one (1) car stall for
each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of net commercial space; one (1) car
stall for each two hundred (200) square feet of net office space; and two (2)
car stalls for each apartment unit. In computing parking where the
requirement ends in a fraction of a car stall, add a full car stall for any
fraction. A loading space shall be provided as required in section 12-114(c).



   (7)   Signs as regulated by chapter 8, article III, except that the
planning commission shall approve the placement and design of all signs to be
erected within the development.



   (8)   Garages, carports and/or accessory buildings and fences as
incorporated in the original plans.



(Code 1972, § 10-17-7; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-113.  Height, Density, Setbacks, Open Space:



   (a)   All buildings built under this division shall be in strict
compliance with chapter 8, article II, division 2, of this code.



   (b)   All buildings built under this division must be a maximum of
three (3) stories in height, a minimum of two (2) hour fire-rated
construction with fire standpipes, and equipped with a minimum of one (1)
elevator for each one hundred (100) people or fraction thereof above the
first floor. The number of people per floor shall be computed by using the
formula for exit requirements in this code.



(Code 1972, § 10-17-8; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-114.  Minimum Parking Requirements:



   (a)   A minimum amount of land as set forth in section 12-115(b)-(d)
shall be required to qualify for consideration under this division. No
development shall be approved unless the minimum square-foot area of land
exists under one (1) ownership or control. If the land is owned under
multiple ownership such as condominium, cooperative or some other common
ownership, covenants shall be provided to guarantee the use of all common
quasi-public areas, parking lots and all other areas of common use to each
occupant of the development. Further, the land, buildings, parking areas,
landscaped areas and other features of the development shall not be
physically separated in any way which might negate the purpose of this
division.



   (b)   It shall be the policy of the village to develop dedicated
side streets within commercial and office zoning districts as additional
motor vehicle parking areas. Such mini-lots shall be developed in conjunction
with projects built under this division. The reduced percentages of required
parking in subsections (d) and (e) are based on the development of mini-lots.



   (c)   Minimum off street parking requirements are hereby established
as provided in section 12-112(6). Further, an off street loading space of at
least ten (10) feet by thirty (30) feet shall be provided for each building
and shall be adjacent to a receiving space within the building.



   (d)   The following table establishes the percentage of parking
required per floor under this division with the development of mini-parking
lots and as approved by the zoning board of appeals:



 

Below grade occupancy
 
60% of requirement


Any floor between grade and the primary floor with a combination parking and
office/commercial use with less than 35% of the area of the level in parking
 
80% of requirement


Any floor between grade and the primary floor with a combination parking and
office/commercial use with 35% or more of the area of the level in parking
 
60% of requirement


Primary or ground floor
 
100% of requirement


Second floor
 
70% of requirement


Third floor
 
40% of requirement


All apartment units, regardless of which floor they are located on
 
2 car stalls per apartment unit



 



   (e)   Development of mini-lots in conjunction with the village shall
be a prerequisite of planned commercial or planned office projects. If
development of mini-lots is not practical then the percentages of parking
requirements shall be as follows:



 



Below grade occupancy
 
80% of requiremen t


Any floor between grade and the primary floor with a combination parking and
office/commercial use with less than 35% of the area of the level in parking
 
100% of requiremen t


Any floor between grade and the primary floor with a combination parking and
office/commercial use with 35% or more of the area of the level in parking
 
80% of requiremen t


Primary or ground floor
 
100% of requiremen t


Second floor
 
80% of requiremen t


Third floor
 
60% of requiremen t


All floors over the third floor
 
60% of requiremen t


All apartment units, regardless of which floor they are located on
 
2 car stalls per apartment unit




 



   (f)   Off-street parking which is not adjacent to the principal
building site but is located within three hundred (300) feet of the site may
be counted toward the total required parking, provided that the parking site
is on the same side of the principal street as the building and, further,
that the parking site is owned, not leased, by the development and shall not
be sold, conveyed or in any other way divested or encumbered, as a separate
parcel so long as the planned commercial or planned office building continues
to exist. Such provision shall be included in the covenants to be approved by
the village attorney.



   (g)   Policy Zoning Statement: It shall be the policy of the village
to rezone in the appropriate zoning classification residential property
immediately contiguous to existing commercial and/or office use as
contemplated, provided that:



      (1)   The commercial, office, townhouse, condominium and/or
duplex use requesting zoning in depth needs the additional zoning in order to
meet the parking, loading and yard requirements of this division and
providing the commercial, office, townhouse, condominium and/or duplex use
owns or controls the property.



      (2)   The residential property proposed for rezoning extends
no deeper than two (2) residential lots, not to exceed a combined total of
one hundred fifty (150) feet, from the lot line or from an alley contiguous
to the commercial office, townhouse, condominium and/or duplex use.



      (3)   The commercial, office, townhouse, condominium and/or
duplex use creates a landscaped area, fenced or hedged, of not less than five
(5) feet immediately adjacent to all residential property or to an alley
which serves residential property. Such landscaped buffer zone shall not be
used for parking, storage of containers or any use accessory to the
commercial, office, townhouse, condominium and/or duplex use but shall be
maintained as a green-strip buffer for the protection of the residential
property.



(Code 1972, § 10-17-9; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-115.  Minimum Land Requirements:



   (a)   The minimum amount of land necessary for consideration under
this division is twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet of land
after all street dedications have been made.



   (b)   When there is a minimum of twelve thousand five hundred
(12,500) square feet of commercial land, not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the
area of the lot may be covered by buildings except additional area may be
built upon for parking structures only. The total floor area ratio shall not
exceed seventy-five hundredths of the lot area.



   (c)   When there is a minimum of twenty-four thousand (24,000)
square feet of commercial land, not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of
the lot may be covered by buildings except additional area may be built upon
for parking structures only. The total floor area ratio shall not exceed
seventy-five hundredths (75/100) of the lot area.



   (d)   When there is a minimum of fifty-five thousand (55,000) square
feet of commercial land, not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the lot
may be covered by buildings except additional area may be built upon for
parking structures only. The total floor area ratio shall not exceed
seventy-five one-hundredths (75/100) of the lot area.



   (e)   The maximum height of any building or structure covered by
this division shall not exceed thirty-five feet (35').



(Code 1972, § 10-17-10; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-116.  Public Utilities 1:



   All on site public utilities in the C-1 district shall be underground.



(Code 1972, § 10-17-11; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



1   See also chapter 11, "Utilities", of this code



Sec. 12-117.  Refuse, Rubbish And Garbage:



   Each building built under this division shall provide a refuse room
within the building or an enclosed refuse stall outside the building for
garbage and rubbish. If provided for outside the building, it shall be
located at a site approved by the building commissioner.



(Code 1972, § 10-17-12; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-118.  Performance Standards:



   Buildings, premises and uses permitted in this division are subject to
the applicable standards of this code.



(Code 1972, § 10-17-13; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-119.  Parking Spaces:



   The following shall apply to developments under this division:



   (1)   Off Street Parking: Off street outside parking spaces shall be
at least ten feet (10') in width  and have a minimum of twenty feet (20') in
length and a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7').



   (2)   Underground Parking: Off street parking located under a
building or under a structure extended from a building, shall have a minimum
clear car stall width of ten feet (10') and a minimum length of twenty feet
(20') and a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7').



   (3)   For Multiple-Story Buildings: Parking spaces may be included
on one (1) floor only of multiple-story buildings.



   (4)   Access: Driveway aisle widths shall be a minimum of twelve
feet (12') for one-way traffic and twenty-four feet (24') for two-way
traffic. All car stalls shall have direct access to an aisle. Access
driveways shall have a circular traffic flow except that ninety degree (90°)
angle parking may be dead ended.



   (5)   Aisle Width: The minimum aisle width for parking stall
approaches shall be as follows:



      90° angle parking   24 feet



      60° angle parking   18 feet



      45° angle parking   13 feet



      30° angle parking   12 feet



      0° angle parking   12 feet



   (6)   Plan Of Parking Facilities: A plan of parking facilities shall
be submitted with the site plan. Completion of improvement for parking as
shown on the plan and as required by the village shall be a requisite for the
validity of an occupancy permit.



   (7)   Construction: Open to the sky, ground level parking spaces and
access drives shall be constructed in accordance with standards established
by the village. Storm water drainage shall be provided as required by the
village to tie in with existing storm water systems. All parking spaces and
access drives shall be striped, screened and lighted as approved by the
planning commission. 



(Code 1972, § 10-17-14; Ord. 75-10, 4-3-1975; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-120.  Prohibited Uses:



   Residential, business, and industrial uses permitted as a right or as a
special use within their respective zoning districts shall be prohibited in
the C-1 district unless specifically identified as a permitted use, and not
merely similar to a permitted use, under section 12-112 of this division.



(Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Secs. 12-121–12-130.  Reserved:



DIVISION 6. I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRY DISTRICT



Sec. 12-131.  Permitted Uses:



   (a)   In the I-1 district the only uses which may hereafter be
established are:



      (1)   Building material yards;



      (2)   Fuel yards;



      (3)   Contractors’ yards;



      (4)   Truck or bus terminals or storage yards;



      (5)   Railroad rights-of-way, switch tracks and yards;



      (6)   Light industrial manufacturing uses, automobile
body/fender repairs, auto painting and major mechanical repairs but expressly
prohibiting automobile wrecking in the open or junk storage in the open, or
any use which is especially detrimental to property or the health and safety
of persons beyond the district by reason of the emission of odors, dust, gas,
fumes, smoke, noise, vibration or waste material.



      Businesses that meet the above criteria in any other zoning
district and that exist as of the effective date of ordinance 2007- 23 shall
be grandfathered in as permitted uses in said zoning district;



      (7)   Electrical distribution centers;



      (8)   Self-service storage facilities and industrial use
storage rental units. No storage of hazardous or flammable materials, whether
solids, gases or liquids shall be allowed. This shall include, but not be
limited to, explosives, chemical wastes, gasoline, cyanide and acids.



      (9)   “Adult entertainment”, as defined by section 3-610
of this code, shall be allowed, subject to the provisions of sections 3-611
through 3-616 of this code.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful to build apartment buildings of any kind
or description on property zoned I-1.



(Code 1972, § 10-11-1; Ord. 78-39, 8-3-1978; Ord. 87-3, 3-9-1987; Ord.
89-17, § 1, 7-24-1989; Ord. 91-22, § 1, 7-22-1991; Ord. 95-34, § 1,
12-11-1995; Ord. 2003-22, § 2, 6-23-2003; Ord. 2007-23, § 3, 10-8-2007;
Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-132.  Building Regulations:



   In the I-1 district, easement requirements shall be ten feet (10') from
the rear lot line of each lot or tract of land; the setback line shall be
thirty feet (30') from the front lot line. There shall be no side lot line
setback required, except on the corner lots setback shall be thirty feet
(30') from the street side lot line. Building height limit shall be
thirty-five feet (35') from grade level. The use of a wooden frame structure
is strictly prohibited.



(Code 1972, § 10-11-2; Ord. 79-24, 10-4-1979; Ord. 2003-19, § 1, 5-27-2003;
Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-133.  Parking Regulations:



   In the I-1 district, parking space shall be provided at the rate of one
(1) square foot of parking area for each two (2) square feet of building
ground floor area plus one (1) square foot of parking space for each five (5)
square feet of building floor area above the first floor. No overnight
parking shall be permitted in the I-1 district of any truck, bus, road
equipment or other vehicle on a lot or tract of land, vacant or improved,
whether an established permitted use exists or not unless such truck, bus,
road equipment or other vehicle is part and parcel of the establishment
wherein such parking takes place and is used by such establishment as a
necessary and needful adjunct to the conduct of its permitted use therein. In
addition, parking spaces shall be provided in adequate number as determined
by the department of building.



(Code 1972, § 10-11-3; Ord. 78-39, 8-3-1978; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Secs. 12-134.  Special Uses:



   The following uses shall be permitted in the I-1 industrial district,
but only if specifically authorized pursuant to the procedures of section
12-15 of this chapter:



   (1)   Laboratories;



   (2)   New/used automobile dealers;



   (3)   Printing shops;



   (4)   Tobacco shops (non-accessory use).



(Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Secs. 12-135–12-145.  Reserved:



DIVISION 7.  I-1-R RESTRICTED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



Sec. 12-146.  Purpose:



   The purpose of this division is to provide lands for large,
attractively landscaped sites for office buildings,  research activities or
specialized compatible industrial activities.



(Code 1972, § 10-12-1; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-147.  Policy:



   It shall be the policy of the village, as set out in this division, to:



   (1)   Require adequate off street parking and limited access to
roads through the use of frontage roads.



   (2)   Promote the grouping of I-1-R uses and oppose and discourage
the hazards to safety and nuisance of traffic congestion generated by strip
commercial development.



   (3)   So locate I-1-R districts to other districts nearby or
adjacent to available municipal police and fire protection so as to protect
these areas from the dangers of fire, explosion or noxious fumes and the
irritations of offensive odors, noise, smoke, vibrations, glare or other
threats to health and well being.



(Code 1972, § 10-12-2; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-148.  Permitted Uses:



   In the I-1-R district, no land shall be used or occupied and no
building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied
or used, except as otherwise provided in this division for other than one (1)
or more of the following specified uses:



   (1)   Business service and/or office establishments:



      a.   Bank and/or financial institutions;



      b.   Business offices;



      c.   Personnel training center, including dormitory facilities;



      d.   Professional offices;



      e.   Regional sales offices;



      f.   Merchandise and product display space, but not direct
sales;



      g.   Clinics in conjunction with research.



   (2)   Industrial type uses:



      a.   Design firms;



      b.   Electronic industries;



      c.   Laboratories;



      d.   Research firms.



   (3)   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities:



      a.   Essential services, electric substation, sewage disposal
plant, well site;



      b.   Museum, art gallery;



      c.   Office building;



      d.   Post office.



(Code 1972, § 10-12-3; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-149.  Special Permitted Uses:



   The following uses shall be permitted in the I-1-R district only if
specifically authorized pursuant to the procedures of section 12-15 of this
chapter:



      (1)   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
permitted uses in this district;



      (2)   Planned unit development;



      (3)   Railroad rights-of-way and passenger stations, but not
including railroad yards and shops;



      (4)   Hospitals.



      (5)   Medical cannabis facilities provided the facilities
otherwise comply with the provisions of Article V of this chapter. 



(Code 1972, § 10-12-4; Ord. 2014-01, § 3, 1-27-2014; Ord. 2016-15, § 1,
4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-150.  Temporary Uses Permitted:



   Upon application to and issuance by the building commissioner of a
permit therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses in the
I-1-R district:



      (1)   Temporary building or yard for construction materials
and/or equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and
the area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period
of not more than six (6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for more
than four (4) successive periods at the same location.



      (2)   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the
sale or rental of real property. Each permit shall specify the location of
the office and the area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be
valid for a period of not more than one (1) year and shall not be renewed for
more than five (5) successive periods at the same location.



      (3)   Real estate subdivision sign not to exceed one hundred
(100) square feet for each face. The sign shall be non-illuminated. Each
permit shall specify the location of the sign. Each such permit shall be
valid for a period of not more than one (1) year and shall not be renewed for
more than five (5) successive periods at the same location.



(Code 1972, § 10-12-4; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-151.  Accessory Uses Permitted:



   Accessory uses, building or other structures and devices customarily
incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted use or special use may
be permitted in the I-1-R district, provided they are operated and maintained
under the same ownership, on the same parcel, and do not include structures
or features inconsistent with the permitted use or special use.



(Code 1972, § 10-12-5; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-152.  Prohibited Uses:



   All uses not expressly authorized in sections 12-148 and 12-149 of this
division are hereby prohibited in the I-1-R district.



(Code 1972, § 10-12-6; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-153.  Site And Structure Requirements:



   The site and structure requirements for the I-1-R district are as
follows:



      (1)   Minimum Lot Area: A separate ground area of not less
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall be designated, provided and
continuously maintained for each structure or land containing a permitted or
special use.



      (2)   Minimum Lot Frontage: A minimum lot frontage of eighty
feet (80') shall be provided for each permitted or special use.



      (3)   Front Yard: All structures shall be set back at least
eighty feet (80') from the front lot line on dedicated roads and one hundred
thirty-five feet (135') from the centerline on nondedicated roads.



      (4)   Side Yard: All structures shall be set in a distance of
not less than thirty feet (30') from the side lot line.



      (5)   Rear Yard: All structures shall be set in a distance of
not less than thirty feet (30') from the rear lot line.



      (6)   Maximum Height: No structure or portion thereof shall
exceed a height of thirty-five feet (35').



      (7)   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 1.0.



      (8)   Maximum Lot Coverage: Not more than twenty-five percent
(25%) of the lot area may be occupied by buildings and structures including
accessory buildings. The use of a wooden frame structure is strictly
prohibited.



(Code 1972, § 10-12-7; Ord. 2003-19, § 1, 5-27-2003; Ord. 2016-15, § 1,
4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-154.  Special Provisions:



   The following special provisions shall apply to the I-1-R district:



   (1)   Enclosure Of Operations: All business, servicing or processing
shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except:



      a.   Off street parking or loading;



      b.   Accessory uses when allowed by the building commissioner.



   (2)   Parking Requirements: Parking space at the rate of one (1)
square foot of parking area for each two (2) square feet of building ground
floor area plus one (1) square foot of parking space for each five (5) square
feet of building floor area above the first floor. No overnight parking shall
be permitted in the I-1-R district of any truck, bus, road equipment or other
vehicle on a lot or tract of land, vacant or improved, whether an established
permitted use exists or not unless such truck, bus, road equipment or other
vehicle is part and parcel of the establishment wherein such parking takes
place and is used by such establishment as a necessary and needful adjunct to
the conduct of its permitted use therein. In addition, parking spaces shall
be provided in adequate number as determined by the department of building.



   (3)   Sign Requirements: Sign requirements shall be in accordance
with the application regulations set forth in subsection 12-150(3) of this
division and chapter 8, article III, of this code.



   (4)   Screening: Where an office, commercial or industrial use abuts
or is across the street from a residential district, adequate screening and
landscaping shall be provided.



(Code 1972, § 10-12-8; Ord. 80-22, 11-20-1980; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Secs. 12-155–12-165.  Reserved:



DIVISION 8. I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRY DISTRICT



Sec. 12-166.  Permitted Uses:



   (a)   In the I-2 district the uses which may be hereafter
established are those permitted in the I-1 district and any purpose not in
conflict with any lawful provisions of this code and including:



   (1)   Automobile wrecking and storage;



   (2)   Municipal incinerators;



   (3)   Riding academies and stables;



   (4)   Heavy manufacturing, but expressly excluding the following:



      a.   Acid manufacture;



      b.   Creosote manufacture;



      c.   Explosive manufacture and storage;



      d.   Fertilizer manufacture;



      e.   Gas manufacture;



      f.   Smelting of iron, tin, copper or zinc ores;



      g.   Stockyards;



      h.   Tanning, curing and storage of rawhides or skins;



      i.   Tar distillation or manufacture.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful to build apartment buildings of any kind
or description on property zoned I-2.



(Code 1972, § 10-13-1; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-167.  Building Regulations:



   In the I-2 district, easement requirements shall be ten feet (10') from
the rear lot line of each lot or tract of land; the setback line shall be
thirty feet (30') from the front lot line. There shall be no side lot setback
required. Building height limit shall be forty-five feet (45'). The use of a
wooden frame structure is strictly prohibited.



(Code 1972, § 10-13-2; Ord. 2003-19, § 1, 5-27-2003; Ord. 2016-15, § 1,
4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-168.  Parking Regulations:



   In the I-2 district parking spaces shall be provided on the lot or in a
building on the lot adequate to park cars of employees as well as vehicles
and trucks of establishments permitted herein. In addition, parking spaces
shall be provided in adequate number as determined by the building
commissioner.



(Code 1972, § 10-13-3; Ord. 80-23, 11-20-1980; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



DIVISION 9. PLANNED URBAN DEVELOPMENT CLASSIFICATION BY SPECIAL USE FOR ALL
ZONING DISTRICTS



Sec. 12-169.  Statement Of Purpose:



   (a)   Planned developments are such substantially different
character from other special uses that specific and additional standards and
exceptions are hereby established to govern the recommendations of the zoning
board of appeals and economic development planning board and the action of
the village board of trustees.



   (b)   These regulations are designed to provide for the integrated
development of substantial land areas into planned developments considering
all the elements of planning; providing adequate relationship between
structures and land uses; relaxing specific provisions of applicable district
requirements; but at the same time providing for adequate space, light, air,
use and bulk limitations.



   (c)   These provisions are intended to encourage and accommodate
more creative and imaginative design for land development than would
otherwise be possible under strict application of the village’s
conventional zoning ordinance provisions.



   (d)   Implementation of this article will result in efficient land
patterns and, therefore, more economical land development, that:



      (1)   Fosters high quality development by allowing flexibility
in land use and design standards, thereby encouraging innovative site
planning;



      (2)   Promotes more efficient land patterns, which not only
preserve open space and natural resources, but also provide for more
economical networks of utilities, streets and other facilities;



      (3)   Promotes diverse, high quality, residential
environments, which include a mixture of dwelling unit types;



      (4)   Promotes a land use pattern with a mixture of
residential and nonresidential uses that will mutually support each other;



      (5)   Provides for the permanent preservation of open space
for the continued use and enjoyment of residents of each subdivision and the
village;



      (6)   Provides for usable and suitably located public and
private recreational facilities;



      (7)   Encourages developers to provide amenities that enhance
the quality of life, both within the planned development, as well as within
the community as a whole;



      (8)   Encourages a land use pattern which promotes the public
health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare; and



      (9)   Allows more than one (1) building per zoning lot, when
determined to be of benefit to residents of a subdivision or the operation of
a mixed use or business planned development.



(Ord. 2001-39, § 2, 11-12-2001; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-170.  General Requirements:



   A planned development shall conform to the following requirements:



   (1)   Be consistent with the purpose and intent of this division.



   (2)   Be laid out and developed as a unit in accordance with an
integrated overall design, as approved and authorized by the board of
trustees.



   (3)   The number of dwelling units erected shall not exceed the
number permitted by the regulations of the district in which it is located
unless an exception is permitted as stipulated under bulk regulations of this
division, subsection 12-171(3) of this division.



   (4)   The yards and open spaces adjoining the boundaries of the
project shall not be less than the yard requirements of the district in which
it is located.



   (5)   No building is permitted to exceed the height limit of the
district by more than ten (10) percent.



   (6)   If more intensive uses (i.e., uses other than for which the
district is zoned, such as B-1 community business district usage in R-3
general residence districts) are granted than are permitted by the district
regulations, there must be clear evidence that such uses are needed to
service the project provided the evidence shall show:



      a.   That the uses permitted by such exceptions are necessary
or desirable and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the
development;



      b.   That the uses permitted by such exception are not of such
a nature or so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the
development nor on the surrounding neighborhood;



      c.   That in a planned industrial development such additional
uses allowed by exception shall conform with the performance standards of the
district in which the development is located as set forth in this division;



      d.   That the use exceptions so allowed are recorded on the
zoning district maps by appropriate symbols or by reference to documents on
file with the building commissioner;



      e.   Where the planned development is to be located in a
residential district, no use exceptions shall be allowed unless the size of
the planned development exceeds twenty (20) acres.



   (7)   The amount of off street parking must be adequate to serve the
needs of the projects and the board of trustees may require more off street
parking than is otherwise required by this division.



   (8)   If any open space or recreational facility is to be used
solely by the residents of the project, adequate provisions shall be made for
assessments against the property within the project for their proper
improvement, maintenance and operation.



   (9)   Underground utilities including communications and electric
systems, are required within the limits of a planned development.
Appurtenances to these systems which can be effectively screened may be
excepted from this requirement if the board of trustees finds that such
exemption will not violate the intent or character of the development.



   (10)   The streets proposed must be suitable and adequate to carry
anticipated traffic and increased densities must not overload the street
network outside the development. All ingress and egress streets must be
constructed in accordance with the subdivision code.



   (11)   The planned development must be in accord with the
comprehensive plan of the village.



   (12)   The existing and proposed utility services must be adequate
for the population densities proposed.



(Ord. 2001-39, § 2, 11-12-2001; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-171.  Bulk Regulations:



   In the case of any planned development, the zoning board of appeals may
recommend, and the village board may authorize, exceptions to the applicable
bulk regulations of this division within the boundaries of such development,
provided that the evidence shall show:



   (1)   That such exception shall be solely for the purpose of
encouraging a desirable living environment no less beneficial to the
residents or occupants of such development, as well as of neighboring
properties, than would be obtained, under the bulk regulations of this
division for buildings developed on separate zoning lots.



   (2)   Standards for square footage, density, yard regulations,
parking, loading and screening for a planned development shall be governed by
the standards of the residential, commercial or industrial zoning district(s)
most similar in nature and function to the proposed planned development as
determined by the village board. Standards for public improvements shall be
governed by the applicable ordinances and laws of the village. Exceptions to
these standards by the village board are possible when they find that such
exceptions are warranted in terms of the total proposed development. However,
in regard to developments containing residential uses: a) in no event shall
the square footage of either multiple units or single-family attached homes
fall below two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of land per unit, b)
in no event shall the minimum square footage per dwelling unit requirements
applicable to such districts be decreased by more than twenty (20) percent. A
further decrease of not more than ten (10) percent on the already reduced
square footage per dwelling unit may be permitted in the event that parking
facilities are provided either underground or in the building proper, i.e.,
for each underground or on building parking space, an equivalent reduction
may be permitted to the allowable limit of ten (10) percent before specified.



   (3)   That in a planned development, a developer be allowed to
install site signs on the development, said signs being for the purpose of
denoting street locations, development plans for various sites within the
project, location of various units within the project, map and layouts, and
proposed public and commercial facilities. Such signs shall be removed by the
developer when the project is completed, at the option of the village.



(Ord. 2001-39, § 2, 11-12-2001; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-172.  Application And Approval:



   (a)   Tentative Approval On Application For A Planned Development:



   (1)   The developer shall submit a tentative planned development to
the zoning board of appeals for an approval in principle and the committee
shall approve prior to the submission of an application for approval of a
planned development special use permit. The written consent of all property
owners within the proposed tentative development area shall be on file with
the village before study of a tentative planned development shall be
commenced.



   (2)   Any tentative development plan shall be prepared and include
the following information presented in a general schematic fashion:



      a.   Proposed land uses, population densities and building
intensities.



      b.   Proposed circulation pattern indicating both public and
private streets and off street parking ratios.



      c.   Proposed parks, playgrounds, school sites and other open
spaces.



      d.   A market analysis of proposed commercial uses if the
property is not zoned for commercial purposes at the time of submittal of the
preliminary development plan.



      e.   Delineation of the units to be constructed in progression
if any.



      f.   Relation to future land use in surrounding area and
Justice comprehensive plan.



   (3)   Approval in principle of the tentative planned development
shall be limited to the general acceptability of the land uses proposed and
the interrelationships, and shall not be construed to endorse precise
location of uses, configuration of parcels, or engineering feasibility. The
purpose of this conference is to afford the developer an opportunity to avail
himself of the advice and assistance of the plan committee before incurring
the expense of a plan.



   (b)   Application For Approval Of A Planned Development Special Use
Permit:



   (1)   Any person or persons owning lots or land within the village
or any persons owning lots or land outside the village coming in under a
preannexation agreement may apply to the village board for approval of a
planned development special use permit.



   (2)   The development plan submitted to the zoning board of appeals
after the preliminary conference shall include, as a minimum, the following:



      a.   A topographic and boundary line map of the project,
locating its relationship to surrounding properties;



      b.   Pattern of public and private roads, driveways, parking
facilities, and intended design standards;



      c.   Size, area and location of lots or of proposed building
groups;



      d.   Location, type and size of landscaping;



      e.   Use, type, size and location of structures;



      f.   Location of sewer and water facilities;



      g.   Architectural drawings and sketches illustrating the
design and character of proposed structures;



      h.   Location of recreational and open space area;



      i.   Existing and proposed storm drainage pattern;



      j.   Statistical data pertinent to a comprehensive evaluation
of the proposed development;



      k.   Organizational details of any property owners’
association;



      l.   Aspects of the maintenance of common open space areas;



      m.   Schedule for the development of units to be constructed
in progression;



      n.   List of use, and bulk exceptions requested;



      o.   Engineering feasibility studies as necessary; and



      p.   Relation to future land use in surrounding area and
Justice comprehensive plan.



   (3)   The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on the
application. The zoning board of appeals may recommend approval or
disapproval of the application or make recommendations regarding changes or
revisions that it deems desirable, and forward their report and
recommendation to the village board. Approval for each unit of the
development by the village board shall be valid for one (1) year. The initial
building permits required by the municipal code requirements must be obtained
within this one (1) year approval period.



   (4)   There shall also be submitted with the final plan, a written
agreement or restriction assigned by the owners of the planned development
assuring the village that the development will be carried out in full
compliance with the final plan and within the time schedule of construction
submitted with the final plan. Once the plan is authorized by the village
board, no modification may be made without authorization of the village board.



(Ord. 2001-39, § 2, 11-12-2001; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-173.  Issuance Of Permits:



   Whenever the village board approves the final plan accompanying
agreements, the building commissioner shall issue the necessary permits for
all of the project or for such units thereof that are to be constructed in
accordance with the village municipal code.



(Ord. 2001-39, § 2, 11-12-2001; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-174.  Time Limit:



   If no construction has been started within one (1) year from the date
of issuance of the initial building permits, the permits shall be declared
null and void and the project shall not be initiated unless it is resubmitted
and reapproved by the zoning board of appeals in the same manner that it was
approved of in the first instance. Upon resubmittal of the application to the
zoning board of appeals, all application fees and costs must be repaid. The
village board may, however, extend the period for initiating construction
upon a showing of good and sufficient cause.



(Ord. 2001-39, § 2, 11-12-2001; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-175.  Performance:



   At the time of the granting of the permit, the village board shall make
appropriate arrangements with the applicant which will ensure the
accomplishment at the scheduled times, of the public improvements and grants
of easement shown on the approved final plan.



(Ord. 2001-39, § 2, 11-12-2001; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Secs. 12-176–12-180.  Reserved:



ARTICLE III. NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, USES



Sec. 12-181.  Buildings, Structures:



   Any use, building or structure lawfully existing or under construction
on the adoption date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives or of
any subsequent amendment thereto, which does not conform to theprovisions of
this chapter, shall be known as nonconforming. Such nonconforming use,
building or structure may be continued, maintained or changed to a conforming
use, but a nonconforming use shall not be:



      (1)   Changed to a use of a lower class.



      (2)   Expanded or structurally altered.



      (3)   Reestablished if discontinued for six (6) months or more.



      (4)   Reestablished if any building or structure is destroyed
by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of the net square
footage of the living area; such building or structure shall not be rebuilt
or reoccupied for any use except in accordance with the regulations of the
zoning district and building codes in which it is located. For the purposes
of this article, “net square footage” shall be defined as the gross
square footage less the square footage for any attached garage, basement,
irrespective of whether it is finished or not, and rooms or decks that are
not secured with a properly poured legal foundation.



      (5)   Expanded or structurally altered in any way in the event
the damage or destruction to any building or structure is less than fifty
(50) percent of the “net square footage” as defined in this article; the
building or structure may then be restored to its original condition in
accordance to current building codes and such use and occupancy may be
continued as it existed at the time of partial destruction. The burden of
proof of square footage shall be upon the owner. Normal maintenance and
repairs shall be permitted.



      (6)   Reestablished if a nonconforming use, building or
structure permitted to exist as nonconforming use, building or structure is
altered upon the occurrence of catastrophic destruction, destruction as
provided for in this article, or upon the transfer, reconfiguration or change
of one (1) of the following, whichever shall first occur: a) the ownership of
the business; or b) the real estate or structure, irrespective of the manner
of such transfer, reconfiguration or change of ownership. A transfer due to a
death of a joint tenant, a tenant in entirety, tenant in common or of an
immediate family member shall not be considered a transfer, reconfiguration
or change of ownership under this section.



(Code 1972, § 10-14-1; Ord. 2005-13, § 4, 5-23-2005; Ord. 2016-15, § 1,
4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-182.  Land:



   The nonconforming use of land not involving a building or structure or
in connection with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or
accessory to the principal use of the land, if discontinued for a period of
more than six (6) consecutive months, shall not thereafter be renewed and any
subsequent use of the land shall conform to the regulations of the district
in which it is located.



(Ord., 9-21-1961; Code 1972, § 10-14-2; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-183.  Illegal Nonconforming Uses:



   Any and all special use permits granted prior to 1972 or after 1972 in
a zoning district other than I-1-R is/are declared to be an illegal
nonconforming use which use shall not be transferable to any person or entity
of whatever type or for whatever reason whatsoever and current uses will not
be allowed to expand, reestablish any destroyed or damaged building(s) or
renew any subsequent use of the land as a special use. Businesses existing
with an illegal nonconforming special use permit shall convert back to the
regulations of the district in which it is located upon business transfer of
any kind whatsoever, destruction, or abandonment. It is the intent of the
village to abate all illegal nonconforming special use permits.



(Ord. 2004-08, § 2, 4-12-2004; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Secs. 12-184–12-200.  Reserved:



ARTICLE IV. APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS



Sec. 12-201.  Filing Of Application; Required Information; Accompanying
Documents:



   (a)   Applications for permits shall be filed in written form with
the building commissioner; shall state the legal description of the property
as of public record and the name of the owner and applicant; shall describe
the uses to be established or expanded and shall give such other information
as may be required for the enforcement of this chapter. Each copy of the
application shall be accompanied by a plat of survey of the building plot
showing the location of proposed buildings and structures, lot areas to be
used, auto parking areas, and water supply and sewage disposal facilities.



   (b)   Building permits shall be issued in triplicate, one (1) for
the applicant, one (1) for the village clerk and the third to be retained by
the building commissioner in his files.



(Code 1972, § 10-16-1; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-202.  Permit Issuance; Denial:



   (a)   The building commissioner shall issue a written permit, or
denial thereof with reasons in writing, within fifteen (15) days from the
date of the acceptance of the application. If the permit or denial thereof is
not issued within fifteen (15) days, the applicant may appeal directly to the
village board of trustees which shall order the issuance of the permit or
denial thereof with reasons in writing. Permit fees and other fees shall be
established by resolution of the village president and board of trustees.



   (b)   No building or addition thereto shall be constructed and no
land vacant on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section
derives shall be used for any purpose until a permit has been issued by the
building commissioner.



(Ord., 9-21-1961; Code 1972, § 10-16-2; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-203.  Payment Of All Taxes And Fees:



   Before any application for building permit shall be accepted by the
building commissioner, the applicant must produce evidence in the form of a
paid tax bill or cancelled check that all outstanding real estate taxes have
been paid in full. No application will be accepted if any fees are due, or
bills unpaid to the village.



(Ord. 94-12, § 1, 6-27-1994; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Secs. 12-204–12-210.  Reserved:



ARTICLE V. MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION AND DISPENSARIES



Sec. 12-211.  Purpose And Applicability:



   It is the intent and purpose of this article to provide regulations
regarding the cultivation and dispensing of medical cannabis occurring within
the corporate limits of the village of Justice. Such facilities shall comply
with all regulations provided in the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Pilot Program Act, as enacted by the State of Illinois, as may be amended
from time to time (the “Act”), regulations enacted pursuant to authority
granted through the Act, and the regulations provided herein. In the event
that the Act is amended, the more restrictive of the state or village
regulations shall apply.



(Ord. 2014-1, § 4, 1-27-2014; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-212.  Process:



   Medical cannabis facilities shall be located in such zoning districts
as are authorized by this chapter, and applications for such use shall be
processed in accordance with the provisions of section 12-15 of this chapter.
No medical cannabis facility shall be opened or operated unless specifically
authorized under and pursuant to the Act and this chapter. 



(Ord. 2014-1, § 4, 1-27-2014; Ord. 2015-07, § 2, 3- 31-2015; Ord. 2016-15,
§ 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-213.  Medical Cannabis Facility Components:



   In determining compliance with section 12-15 of this chapter, the
following components of the medical cannabis facility shall be evaluated
based on the entirety of the circumstances affecting the particular property
in the context of the existing and intended future use of other properties in
the vicinity:



   (a)   Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses
located within the vicinity of the subject property.



   (b)   Proposed structure in which the facility will be located,
total square footage, security installations/security plan, and building code
compliance.



   (c)   Hours of operation and anticipated number of
customers/employees.



   (d)   Anticipated parking demand based and available private parking
supply, including any unique demand for handicapped parking.



   (e)   Traffic generation and adjacent roadway capacity.



   (f)   Site design, including access points, internal site
circulation and commercial vehicle loading, unloading and parking.



   (g)   Proposed signage plan.



   (h)   Compliance with all requirements provided in section 12-214
(Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center) or section 12-215 (Medical Cannabis
Dispensing Organization), as applicable.



   (i)   Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance
with section 12-15 of this chapter. 



(Ord. 2014-1, § 4, 1-27-2014; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-214.  Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center:



   In those zoning districts in which a medical cannabis cultivation
center may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:



   (a)   Facility (the enclosed and locked facility where medical
cannabis will be grown, harvested, manufactured, packaged, or otherwise
prepared for distribution) may not be located within two thousand five
hundred (2,500) feet of the property line of a preexisting public or private
nursery school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day
care home, or residential care home.



   (b)   Facility may not be located within two thousand five hundred
(2,500) feet of the property line for an area zoned residential.



   (c)   Facility may not conduct any retail sales.



(Ord. 2014-1, § 4, 1-27-2014; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-215.  Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization:



   In those zoning districts in which a medical cannabis dispensing
organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following:



   (a)   Facility may not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet
of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school,
preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home,
residential care home, or public park.



   (b)   Facility may not be located within a building or structure,
which in any part, is used or occupied as a residence.



   (c)   Facility may not have drive-thru service.



   (d)   Space occupied by medical cannabis dispensing organization
shall not be occupied or shared by any other business or tenant, or used for
any other purpose other than a medical cannabis dispensing organization.



   (e)   Retail sales occurring within said facility shall be accessory
to the facility’s intended use as a dispensing organization and shall not
occupy greater than ten (10) percent of the total square footage of the
facility. For purposes of calculating the total square footage dedicated to
retail sales, that portion of the floor area dedicated to the distribution of
medical cannabis or medical cannabis infused products shall be excluded from
this calculation; all floor area dedicated to the sale of other medical
cannabis products and/or paraphernalia shall be included. 



(Ord. 2014-1, § 4, 1-27-2014; Ord. 2015-07, § 3, 3-13-2015; Ord. 2016-15,
§ 1, 4-25-2016)



Sec. 12-216.  Additional Requirements:



   Applicant shall install building enhancements, such as security
cameras, lighting, or other improvements, as needed or at the request of the
village, to ensure the safety of employees and customers of the medical
cannabis facilities. The improvements may be required by the village in
excess of those security measures required by the Act. 



(Ord. 2014-1, § 4, 1-27-2014; Ord. 2016-15, § 1, 4-25-2016)



CHAPTER 13
RATES AND FEES



   Art. I.   Rates And Fees,  § 13-1



ARTICLE I.  RATES AND FEES



Sec. 13-1.  Rates And Fees:



   Listed below are rates and fees for certain sections of this code:



 

Code Section
 
Description
 
Amount




Administrative Fees:


2-34.1
 
Village Attorney
 
 


 
 
   Prepare ordinance for zoning variance
 
Current hourly rate


 
 
   Prepare ordinance for subdivision
 
Current hourly rate


 
 
   Prepare ordinance for special use
 
Current hourly rate


 
 
   Record plat of subdivision with Cook County Recorder of Deeds
 
$285.00


 
 
   Review agreement between village and private party
 
50.00


 
 
   Prepare agreement between village and private party
 
300.00


 
 
   Prepare resolution to execute agreement
 
75.00


 
 
   Prepare and record lien on property
 
200.00


 
 
   Prepare and record release of lien
 
200.00


 
 
Village Engineer
 
 


 
 
   Review fee
 
Current hourly rate


 
 
Village Departments
 
 


 
 
   Public works: 2 workers and 1 truck for each 1/2 hour
 
50.00


 
 
   Public works inspections
 
40.00


 
 
   Building department: plan review, per hour
 
50.00


 
 
   Building department inspections
 
40.00


Business License Fees:


3-13(d)
 
Certificate of building inspection - businesses
 
$200.00 + .20 per square foot


3-41
 
Home occupation registration fee
 
50.00


3-61
 
Alcoholic liquor
 
 


 
 
   Class A, retail sales, consumption off premises
 
750.00


 
 
   Class A-1, retail sales, beer and wine only, consumption off premises
 
750.00


 
 
   Class B, retail sales, consumption on or off premises
 
2,000.00


 
 
   Class E, retail sales, consumption on premises, restaurants, service
bar open to customers
 
2,000.00


 
 
   Class F, retail sales, beer and wine only, consumption on or off
premises
 
500.00


 
 
   Class G, retail sales, non-profit organizations, per day, 12-hour time
limit
 
25.00


 
 
   Class H, tasting, beer only, consumption on premises, retail sales,
beer only, consumption off premises
 
500.00


 
 
   Special event liquor license
 
To be determined by the liquor commissioner


 
 
Businesses
 
 


 
 
   Ambulance service, per ambulance
 
170.00


 
 
   Animal care and sales
 
 


 
 
      Animal grooming
 
170.00


 
 
      Animal kennel
 
220.00


 
 
      Small animal sales dealer
 
170.00


 
 
      Veterinary hospital
 
220.00


 
 
   Antique dealer
 
170.00


 
 
   Arts and crafts sales
 
170.00


 
 
   Auctioneers
 
 


 
 
      Annual
 
770.00


 
 
      Per day
 
170.00


 
 
   Automotive/truck accessories and/or parts sales
 
170.00


 
 
   Automotive/truck repair or sales
 
 


 
 
      Heavy automotive/truck repair or sales
 
270.00


 
 
      Light auto repair and/or sales (replacement and repair of
essential parts as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-118 prohibited)
 
270.00


 
 
   Automotive/truck washing (coin operated)
 
270.00


 
 
   Bakery and bakeries
 
 


 
 
      Bakery vendor, per vehicle
 
120.00


 
 
      Bakery, retail
 
170.00


 
 
      Bakery, wholesale
 
170.00


 
 
   Banks
 
520.00


 
 
   Banquet hall (not a restaurant)
 
 


 
 
      Occupancy up to 100 persons
 
170.00


 
 
      Occupancy over 100
 
220.00


 
 
   Barber and beauty shops
 
 


 
 
      Up to 5 chairs or stations
 
170.00


 
 
      Each additional chair or station over 5
 
50.00


 
 
   Billboard, per square foot, per face
 
1.50


 
 
   Billiard and pool halls
 
 


 
 
      Up to 5 tables
 
520.00


 
 
      Each additional table over 5
 
50.00


 
 
   Bookstore
 
170.00


 
 
   Bowling alley
 
 


 
 
      Up to 10 lanes
 
320.00


 
 
      Each additional lane over 10 lanes
 
25.00


 
 
   Bridal shop
 
170.00


 
 
   Bus service, charter or lease
 
520.00


 
 
   Camper sales and service
 
270.00


 
 
   Carpet/rug, sales/cleaning
 
170.00


 
 
   Catalogue order store or office
 
170.00


 
 
   Catering service, prepared food
 
170.00


 
 
   Chinaware, pottery or ceramics sales
 
170.00


 
 
   Clothing store
 
170.00


 
 
   Confectionery store
 
170.00


 
 
   Construction trades
 
170.00


 
 
   Delicatessen
 
170.00


 
 
   Department stores
 
 


 
 
      Up to 2,000 square feet
 
170.00


 
 
      2,001 to 5,000 square feet
 
270.00


 
 
      Over 5,000 square feet
 
520.00


 
 
   Driving school
 
 


 
 
      With only one vehicle
 
170.00


 
 
      Each additional vehicle over 1
 
50.00


 
 
   Drugstore, pharmacy or prescription sales (plus additional licenses for
individual commodities or services)
 
170.00


 
 
   Dry cleaners and dyers
 
 


 
 
      Retail
 
170.00


 
 
      Coin operated, up to 5 machines
 
170.00


 
 
      Coin operated, each additional machine
 
50.00


 
 
      Wholesale
 
220.00


 
 
   Electrical appliance sales
 
170.00


 
 
   Entertainment
 
 


 
 
      Disc jockey, in a business establishment
 
100.00


 
 
      Live band, piano, singer, in a business establishment
 
100.00


 
 
      Modeling fashion show, lingerie
 
1,500.00


 
 
   Exterminators
 
170.00


 
 
   Filing stations, refueling depots, private fuel systems, liquid or
chemical storage
 
 


 
 
      Up to 500 gallons of storage capacity, plus additional licenses
for individual commodities or services
 
170.00


 
 
      501 to 5,000 gallons of storage capacity, plus additional
licenses for individual commodities or services
 
320.00


 
 
      5,001 to 10,000 gallons of storage capacity, plus additional
licenses for individual commodities or services
 
520.00


 
 
      Over 10,000 gallons of storage capacity, plus additional licenses
for individual commodities or services
 
1,020.00


 
 
   Firearms dealer, store, warehouse or supplier
 
320.00


 
 
   Florists
 
170.00


 
 
   Food delivery vehicles and mobile food vendors from other
jurisdictions, per vehicle
 
170.00


 
 
   Food vending (prepared) other than restaurant, machine or mobile
 
100.00


 
 
   Fruit and/or vegetable store
 
170.00


 
 
   Funeral home
 
 


 
 
      1 visitation room
 
320.00


 
 
      2 visitation rooms
 
420.00


 
 
      Each additional visitation room
 
50.00


 
 
   Furniture store
 
170.00


 
 
   Furriers
 
170.00


 
 
   Garden equipment and supplies
 
170.00


 
 
   General contractor
 
170.00


 
 
   General merchandise
 
170.00


 
 
   Gift or novelty store
 
170.00


 
 
   Grocery store
 
 


 
 
      With fresh meat and poultry
 
220.00


 
 
      Without fresh meat and poultry
 
170.00


 
 
   Hardware and paint sales store
 
170.00


 
 
   Hotels and motels
 
520.00


 
 
   Ice cream parlor or store
 
170.00


 
 
   Ice cube sales
 
25.00


 
 
   Interior decorators
 
170.00


 
 
   Jewelry sales
 
170.00


 
 
   Junk dealer
 
 


 
 
      Scrap yard
 
1,520.00


 
 
      Used auto parts
 
1,520.00


 
 
      Wrecking yard (automotive)
 
1,520.00


 
 
   Knitting and fabric stores
 
170.00


 
 
   Laundry
 
 


 
 
      Commercial service
 
270.00


 
 
      Commercial service, over 25 machines, per machine
 
10.00


 
 
      Self-service, or coin operated, up to 25 machines
 
170.00


 
 
      Self-service, or coin operated, over 25 machines, per machine
 
10.00


 
 
   Linoleum, tile or floor covering sales
 
170.00


 
 
   Lumberyards or stores
 
170.00


 
 
   Machine shops
 
170.00


 
 
   Massage parlors
 
1,520.00


 
 
   Massage therapists, registration fee
 
25.00


 
 
   Meat dealers and stores
 
170.00


 
 
   Milk or dairy
 
 


 
 
      Store
 
170.00


 
 
      Sales, in addition to other business
 
50.00


 
 
   Millwork or cabinet store
 
170.00


 
 
   Mobile home sales office
 
220.00


 
 
   Mobile home or manufactured housing community
 
 


 
 
      Base fee
 
120.00


 
 
      Per space, whether occupied or not
 
25.00


 
 
   Monument dealers
 
170.00


 
 
   Nursery, daycare, preschool
 
170.00


 
 
   Office supply store
 
170.00


 
 
   Pawn broker
 
520.00


 
 
   Pet shops
 
170.00


 
 
   Photographers and photography studio
 
170.00


 
 
   Plumbing or contractor supplies
 
170.00


 
 
   Precious gems broker
 
520.00


 
 
   Printing or reproduction shops
 
170.00


 
 
   Propane sales
 
50.00


 
 
   Public dance hall
 
520.00


 
 
   Public ice or roller rink
 
520.00


 
 
   Record, recorded music store
 
170.00


 
 
   Restaurant
 
 


 
 
      Maximum occupancy up to 50 persons
 
170.00


 
 
      Maximum occupancy 51 to 150 persons
 
220.00


 
 
      Maximum occupancy over 150 persons
 
270.00


 
 
      Drive-in
 
170.00


 
 
   Scavenger, waste hauler, or refuse service
 
1,000.00


 
 
   Secondhand dealers or used merchandise store
 
170.00


 
 
   Self-storage facilities, rental units
 
 


 
 
      Base fee
 
120.00


 
 
      For each unit up to 50 square feet
 
5.00


 
 
      For each unit 51-100 square feet
 
10.00


 
 
      For each unit 101 to 200 square feet
 
15.00


 
 
      For each unit 201 to 300 square feet
 
20.00


 
 
      For each unit 301 square feet or more
 
25.00


   
 
   Soda pop, in addition to other business
 
50.00


 
 
   Sporting goods store or supplier
 
170.00


 
 
   Tattoo and body piercing studio
 
 


 
 
      Tattoo studio, only
 
220.00


 
 
      Body piercing studio, only
 
220.00


 
 
      Tattoo and body piercing studio, combined
 
440.00


 
 
   Tavern, without a restaurant license
 
220.00


 
 
   Taxicab and/or limousine service
 
 


 
 
      Per vehicle, up to 5
 
170.00


 
 
      Each additional vehicle over 5
 
20.00


 
 
   Theater
 
 


 
 
      Drive-in
 
520.00


 
 
      Inside seating capacity 1 - 500
 
520.00


 
 
      Inside seating capacity over 500
 
720.00


 
 
   Tobacco sales
 
 


 
 
      Retail, counter sales
 
170.00


 
 
      Retail, machine sales
 
100.00


3-653
 
      Retailer’s license
 
170.00


 
 
      Wholesale
 
220.00


 
 
   Toy store
 
170.00


 
 
   Travel agency
 
170.00


 
 
   Vacuum cleaner or sewing machine store
 
170.00


 
 
   Vending machine
 
50.00


 
 
   Video gaming terminal vendor
 
170.00


 
 
   Video sales and rental store
 
170.00


 
 
   Video sales and rental, incidental to other business
 
50.00


 
 
   All other business not specifically named
 
170.00


 
 
   Registration fee, for businesses not required a license under state
statute (doctors, insurance agents)
 
25.00


3-63(a)
 
Inspection fee, new business license, per inspection
 
40.00


 
 
Administration fee, new business
 
40.00


3-63(b)
 
Inspecting fee, existing business, per inspection and re- inspection
 
40.00


3-63(d)
 
Penalty, registration license, per month until paid
 
100.00


3-124(e)
 
Special events
 
 


 
 
   Athletic contests and exhibitions, per day
 
100.00


 
 
   Auto show, per day
 
100.00


 
 
   Block parties, per day
 
50.00


 
 
   Circus, per event
 
1,500.00


 
 
   Fairs and festivals, per event
 
1,500.00


 
 
   Horse, dog, or other animal show, per day
 
100.00


 
 
   Musical entertainment performance, per day
 
100.00


 
 
   Picnic, per day
 
100.00


 
 
   Rodeo, per event
 
1,500.00


 
 
   Special event, not including other amenities
 
100.00


3-126(a)(2)
 
Carnival games (only)
 
250.00


 
 
Amusement rides
 
500.00


3-126(a)(3)
 
Fireworks exhibitions
 
500.00


3-126(a)(4)
 
Parades and street closures, per day
 
100.00


3-126(a)(5)
 
Signs
 
See 8-168


3-127(a)(1)
 
Building inspection, per inspection
 
40.00


3-127(a)(2)
 
Electrical inspection, per inspection
 
40.00


3-127(a)(3)
 
Plumbing inspection, per inspection
 
40.00


3-127(a)(4)
 
Health inspection, per vendor, per day
 
40.00


 
 
Amusement games
 
 


3-152
 
Table games
 
100.00


3-153
 
Slot machines, per 5 machines
 
100.00


3-154
 
Juke boxes and other musical devices, per 5 machines
 
100.00


3-158(a)
 
Amusement operator’s license
 
100.00


 
 
Coin operated devices, per 5 devices
 
100.00


3-159(b)
 
Video arcade operator’s license
 
250.00


Health and Sanitation:


5-18
 
Compensation of health inspector, per inspection
 

$25.00



5-61(B)(1)
 
Inspection fee, per vendor, per day
 
40.00


5-260(b)
 
Garbage collection, senior citizen discounted rate/per month
 
13.50



 
9/1/2013 - 8/30/2014
 
14.50



 
9/1/2014 - 8/30/2015
 
17.10



 
9/1/2015 - 8/30/2016
 
17.70



 
9/1/2016 - 8/30/2017
 
18.10



 
9/1/2017 - 8/30/2018
 
18.50



 
9/1/2018 - 8/30/2019
 
19.10


5-261
 
Garbage collection, single family, regular rate/month
 
18.00


 
 
9/1/2013 - 8/30/2014
 
19.00


 
 
9/1/2014 - 8/30/2015
 
20.80


 
 
9/1/2015 - 8/30/2016
 
21.60


 
 
9/1/2016 - 8/30/2017
 
22.10


 
 
9/1/2017 - 8/30/2018
 
22.70


 
 
9/1/2018 - 8/30/2019
 
23.20


 
 
Garbage collection, single family, late charge
 
10%


 
 
Garbage collection, single family, bimonthly interest on all past due amounts
 
5%


5-262
 
Garbage collection, per each dwelling unit in two-flat and three-flat
buildings, regular rate per month
 
$18.00


 
 
Regular rate per unit:
 
 


 
 
9/1/2013 - 8/30/2014
 
19.00


 
 
9/1/2014 - 8/30/2015
 
20.80


 
 
9/1/2015 - 8/30/2016
 
21.60


 
 
9/1/2016 - 8/30/2017
 
22.10


 
 
9/1/2017 - 8/30/2018
 
22.70


 
 
9/1/2018 - 8/30/2019
 
23.20


 
 
Garbage collection, per each dwelling unit in two-flat and three-flat
buildings, late charge
 
10%


 
 
Garbage collection, per each dwelling unit in two-flat and three-flat
buildings, bimonthly interest on all past due amounts
 
5%


Offenses And Miscellaneous Provisions:


7-29(k)
 
Alarm systems, per inspection
 

$40.00



7-97(a)(1)
 
Impounding, per day
 
25.00


Planning And Development:


8-32(h)(1)
 
Building permits, zone R-1, R-2, R-4, per square foot
 
$0.60


 
 
Building permits, zone R-1, R-2, R-4, minimum charge
 
70.00


8-32(h)(2)
 
Building permits, zone R-2A, R-3, B-1, C-1, I-1, I-1R, I-2, from 1 to 20,000
square feet
 
0.40/sq. ft.


 
 
Building permits, zone R-2A, R-3, B-1, C-1, I-1, I-1R, I-2, from 20,001 to
40,000 square feet
 
2,400 + .20/sq. ft. over 20,000


 
 
Building permits, zone R-2A, R-3, B-1, C-1, I-1, I-1R, I-2, from 40,001 to
60,000 square feet
 
4,400 + .10/sq. ft. over 40,000


 
 
Building permits, zone R-2A, R-3, B-1, C-1, I-1, I-1R, I-2, from 60,001 to
80,000 square feet
 
6,000 + .09/sq. ft over 60,000


 
 
Building permits, zone R-2A, R-3, B-1, C-1, I-1, I-1R, I-2, from 80,001 to
100,000 square feet
 
7,400 + .08/sq. ft. over 80,000


 
 
Building permits, zone R-2A, R-3, B-1, C-1, I-1, I-1R, I-2, from 100,001 to
120,000 square feet
 
8,600 + .07/sq. ft. over 100,000


 
 
Building permits, zone R-2A, R-3, B-1, C-1, I-1, I-1R, I-2, for more than
120,000 square feet
 
9,600 + .06/sq. ft. over 120,000


8-32(h)(3)
 
Garage permit
 
.20/sq. ft., 60.00 minimum, + 2 inspections @ 40.00 each


8-32(h)(4)
 
Demolition
 
.30/sq. ft., 60.00 minimum, + 2 inspections @ 40.00 each


8-32(h)(5)
 
Occupancy bond, garages only
 
300.00


8-32(h)(6)
 
Foundation bond
 
1,000.00


 
 
Foundation permit, + 2 pre pour inspections
 
100.00 + 80.00


 
 
Shingle roof permit
 
50.00 + 1 inspection of 40.00


 
 
Flat roof permit
 
0.05/sq. ft. + minimum of 2 inspections of 40.00 each


 
 
Siding permit
 
50.00 + 1 inspection of 40.00


 
 
Gutter permit
 
50.00 + 1 inspection of 40.00


 
 
Soffit and fascia permit
 
50.00 + 1 inspection of 40.00


 
 
Soffit, fascia and gutters in one operation
 
100.00 + 1 inspection of 40.00


 
 
Windows and doors permit
 
50.00 + 1 inspection of 40.00


 
 
Furnace installation permit
 
100.00 + 2 inspections of 40.00


 
 
Air conditioning installation permit
 
100.00 + 2 inspections of 40.00


 
 
Fire place installation permit
 
100.00 + 2 inspections of 40.00


 
 
Concrete flat work (patios, aprons, stoops)
 
0.05 per square foot


 
 
Construction dumpster permit
 
25.00


8-32(n)
 
Building development fee
 
3,000.00


8-45(b)
 
Work permit
 
150.00


8-49(d)
 
Cable TV permit
 
100.00 + 1 inspection of 40.00


8-50(b)
 
Inspection fees
 
40.00


8-50(c)
 
Re-inspection fees
 
40.00


8-54(d)(1)
 
Certificate of housing inspection, single family
 
100.00


8-54(d)(2)
 
Certificate of housing inspection, co-op or condominium
 
100.00


8-54(d)(3)
 
Certificate of housing inspection, multi-family dwelling
 
100.00 + 25.00 per each additional unit


8-54(e)
 
Certificate of housing inspection, additional inspections
 
40.00


8-55(a)
 
Metropolitan sanitary district permit review fee
 
400.00


8-55(b)
 
Engineer review fees in excess of 8-55(a)
 
Actual costs


8-57(a)
 
Elevator inspection fee
 
75.00


8-57(b)
 
Elevator re-inspection fee
 
75.00


8-59(c)
 
Storage shed permit
 
50.00


8-59(d)
 
Storage shed inspection fee
 
40.00


8-69
 
Plumbing permit fee, minimum charge
 
60.00


 
 
Plumbing permit fee, per fixture
 
12.00


 
 
Plumbing permit fee, fire sprinkler, per fixture
 
1.00


 
 
Plumbing permit fee, lawn sprinkler, per fixture
 
1.00


 
 
Plumbing inspection fee, per inspection
 
40.00


8-105(j)
 
Electrical inspection
 
40.00


8-105(k)
 
Plan exam fee
 
50.00


8-105(l)
 
Electrical fee
 
40.00


8-105(m)
 
Low voltage burglar alarm systems, residential
 
75.00


 
 
Low voltage burglar alarm systems, commercial
 
75.00 + 5.00 per device


 
 
Aural communications systems, residential
 
75.00


 
 
Aural communications systems, commercial
 
75.00 + 5.00 per device


 
 
Visual communications systems, residential
 
75.00


 
 
Visual communications systems, commercial
 
75.00 + 5.00 per device


 
 
Fire alarm system, with a minimum of 2 inspections, residential and commercial
 
75.00 + 5.00 per device


 
 
Fire alarm test, per inspection
 
75.00


8-105(n)
 
Fees for electrical service installation
 
 


 
 
   100 ampere
 
55.00


 
 
   200 ampere
 
65.00


 
 
   400 ampere
 
70.00


 
 
   600 ampere
 
75.00


 
 
   800 ampere
 
85.00


 
 
   1,000 ampere
 
100.00


 
 
   1,200 ampere
 
120.00


 
 
   1,600 ampere
 
135.00


 
 
   2,000 ampere
 
200.00


 
 
   3,000 ampere
 
260.00


 
 
   4,000 ampere
 
340.00


8-105(o)
 
Street lighting equipment, per lamp post
 
10.00


8-122(b)
 
Moving a building
 
500.00


8-166(e)
 
Annual inspection, per inspection
 
40.00


8-167(c)
 
Electrical and non-electrical sign, per square foot
 
2.00


 
 
Minimum sign fee
 
10.00


8-168
 
Inspection fee
 
40.00


 
 
Annual inspection
 
40.00


8-169(f)(2)
 
Benches and bus shelters
 
50.00


8-171
 
Sign removal fee, per sign
 
10.00


 
 
Sign storage fee, per sign
 
5.00


8-171(b)
 
Garage sale permit
 
5.00


8-171(e)
 
Portable sign permit
 
75.00


8-171(e)(1 1)
 
Sign inspection fee
 
40.00


8-213(b)
 
Pool permit fee + installation inspection and electrical inspection
 
50.00 + 80.00


8-247(c)
 
Fence permit + inspection fee
 
50.00 + 40.00


8-268(d)
 
Satellite dish installation
 
100.00


8-318
 
Engineer’s inspection fee:
 
Current hourly rate


 
 
   Village department inspection fee
 
40.00/inspection


8-354
 
Flood elevation determination
 
150.00


8-508(b)(3)
 
Multi-family license fee, per unit
 
 


 
 
   Prior to June 1
 
35.00


 
 
   After June 1
 
50.00


Streets, Sidewalks, Driveways And Parking Lots:


10-51(b)
 
Driveway permit, asphalt, concrete, paver block, per square foot
 
$0.10


10-52
 
Single family residential driveway permit, asphalt, concrete, and paver block
 
0.05 per square foot, with a maximum of 100.00



 
Driveway inspection fee, pre pour
 
40.00


10-76(a)
 
Sidewalk permit, per square foot
 
0.05


 
 
Sidewalk inspection fee, pre pour
 
40.00


10-86
 
Bond, sidewalk installation
 
2,500.00


 
 
Construction of sidewalks, cash deposit
 
2,500.00


10-112(b)
 
Multi-family dwelling and commercial driveway and parking areas permit
 
1.50% of contract price


 
 
Pre pour inspection
 
40.00


Sewer Usage:


11-53(1)
 
Residential use, monthly flat rate
 
$7.00


 
 
Residential use, senior citizen, flat rate
 
5.25


 
 
Minimum monthly usage, in gallons
 
4,000


 
 
Residential usage rate per 1,000 gallons
 
0.30


11-53(2)
 
Commercial, institutional, governmental, monthly flat rate
 
9.00


 
 
Minimum monthly usage, in gallons
 
4,000


 
 
Commercial usage rate per 1,000 gallons
 
0.60




 



(Ord. 98-6, § 1, 2-9-1998; Ord. 98-12, § 1, 3-23-1998; Ord. 98-16, § 2,
4-27-1998; Ord. 98-19, § 1, 5-26-1998; Ord. 98-37, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord.
2000-13, § 1, 3-13-2000; Ord. 2000-14, § 1, 3-13-2000; Ord. 2000-15, § 1,
3-13-2000; Ord. 2000-17, § 1, 3-27-2000; Ord. 2000-19, § 1, 4-10-2000; Ord.
2000-20, §§ 1, 2, 4-10-2000; Ord. 2000-38, § 1, 8-14-2000; Ord. 2002-07,
§ 2, 3-25-2002; Ord. 2002-22, § 1, 6-24-2002; Ord. 2003-33, §§ 1, 3,
8-25-2003; Ord. 2003-41, §§ 2, 3, 12-22-2003; Ord. 2004-5, §§ 2, 3,
3-22-2004; Ord. 2005-22, § 3, 10-24-2005; Ord. 2006-02, §§ 3, 7, 1-9-2006;
Ord. 2006-04, § 5, 2-13-2006; Ord. 2007-24, § 3, 10-9-2007; Ord. 2007-28,
§ 3, 11-12-2007; Ord. 2007-29, § 2, 11-12-2007; Ord. 2008-03, § 7,
2-11-2008; Ord. 2008-05, § 1, 2-11-2008; Ord. 2008-10, § 5, 3-10-2008; Ord.
2008-21, § 1, 5-27-2008; Ord. 2008-23, § 3, 5-27-2008; Ord. 2008-28, § 4,
8-11-2008; Ord. 2009-05, § 9, 3-9-2009; Ord. 2009-15, § 53, 6-22-2009; Ord.
2009-23, § 2, 10-26-2009; Ord. 2009-27, § 13, 11-23-2009; Ord. 2010-01, §
3, 1-11-2010; Ord. 2010-19, § 2, 9-27-2010; Ord. 2011-13, § 2, 9-12-2011;
Ord. 2012-02, § 3, 1-9-2012; Ord. 2012-21, §§ 1, 2, 8-13-2012; Ord.
2012-25, § 4, 9-24-2012; Ord. 2013-01, § 3, 2-11-2013; Ord. 2013-08; § 3,
6-10-2013; Ord. 2013-12, § 1, 7-8-2013; Ord. 2014-09, § 2, 8-11-2014; Ord.
2014-10, § 2, 8-11-2014; Ord. 2014-19, §§ 1, 2, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2014-20,
§ 5, 10-13-2014)



PARALLEL REFERENCES



CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
1969 CODE



   This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the
1969 Code.



 

1969 Code Section
 
Section this Code




Ch. 1
 
2-56


 
 
2-85


 
 
2-97


 
 
Ch. 2


 
 
1-4


 
 
2-1


 
 
2-38


 
 
2-637


Ch. 3, Art. 1
 
2-33


 
 
2-37


Ch. 3, Art. 2
 
2-30


 
 
2-118


Ch. 3, Art. 3
 
2-142


Ch. 3, Art. 4
 
2-164


Ch. 3, Art. 5
 
2-184


Ch. 4, Art. 2
 
2-558


Ch. 4, Art. 3
 
2-582


Ch. 4, Art. 4
 
2-601


Ch. 5
 
5-37


 
 
7-90


Ch. 5, § 27, Ch. 5, § 28
 
2-622


Ch. 7, Art. 1
 
10-2


 
 
10-27


Ch. 7, Art. 2
 
10-56


Ch. 7, Art. 4
 
7-313


Ch. 7, Art. 5
 
10-86


Ch. 8
 
9-1


 
 
9-3, 9-4


 
 
9-9


Ch. 9
 
4-16


 
 
4-28


Ch. 11, Art. 2
 
3-84


 
 
3-87


 
 
3-101


 
 
3-103


Ch. 11, Art. 4
 
3-177


Ch. 11, Art. 5
 
5-90


Ch. 11, Art. 6
 
5-115


Ch. 11, Art. 7
 
5-142


Ch. 11, Art. 8
 
5-162


Ch. 11, Art. 9
 
5-202


Ch. 11, Art. 11
 
3-242


Ch. 11, Art. 12
 
3-277


Ch. 11, Art. 15
 
3-389


Ch. 13
 
5-1


Ch. 14, Art. 1
 
7-315


Ch. 15
 
5-226


Ch. 17
 
7-331


 
 
7-335


Ch. 18
 
2-5


Ch. 19, Art. 2
 
4-119


 
 
7-48


Ch. 20, Art. 2
 
6-25


Ch. 23
 
8-226


 
 
 




 



CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
1972 CODE



   This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the
1972 Code, as supplemented through Ordinance No. 86-1, which are included
herein. Sections of the 1972 Code not listed herein have been omitted as
repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a genera] and permanent nature. For
the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table
immediately following this table.



 

1972 Code Section
 
Section this Code




8-5-4
 
7-309


8.8-50
 
11-63


10-6-4
 
12-59


11-1-3
 
8-308


1-1-1, 1-1-2
 
1-1, 1-2


1.1-3
 
1-15


1-1-4
 
1-5, 1-6


1-1-5
 
1-14


1-2-1, 1-2-2
 
1-13


1-2-3
 
1-12


1-3-2
 
1-4


1-4-1
 
1-7


1-4-3-1-4-5
 
1-8—1-10


1-5-1-1-5-3
 
2-26—2-28


1-5-4
 
2-29, 2-30


1-5-5—1-5-14
 
2-31—2-40


1-6-1—1-6-4
 
2-56—2-59


1-6-5
 
2-76—2-97


1-6-6
 
2-60


1-7-1
 
2-111, 2-112


1-7-3-1-7-8
 
2-113—2-118


1-7-10
 
2-119


1-7-12
 
2-120


1-7-13
 
2-37


1-8-2-1-8-12
 
2-136—2-146


1-9-2-1-9-5
 
2-161—2-164


1-10-2-1-10-5
 
2-181—2-184


1-11.2-1-11-6
 
2-201—2-205


1-11-7, 1-11-8
 
2-206


1-12-2
 
2-226


1-12-3
 
2-227


1-12-4
 
2-228


1-12-5
 
2-229


1-14-1—1-14-4
 
2-246—2-249


1-15.3
 
2-165


1-16-1
 
2-266


1-16-3
 
2-267


1-17-1, 1-17-2
 
2-1, 2-2


1-18-1 — 1-18-3
 
2-3—2-5


1-19-1—1-19-7
 
2-381—2-387


1-20-1
 
2-401


1-21-1
 
2-402


1-22-1—1-22-7
 
2-281—2-287


1-244—1-244
 
2-306—2-309


1-26-1—1-26-4
 
2-331—2-334


1-26-6—1-26-8
 
2-335—2-337


1-27-1
 
2-29


1-28-1—1-28-3
 
2-356—2-358


1-28-5—1-28-7
 
2-359—2-361


2-1-1—2-1-12
 
2-496—2-507


2-2-1—2-2-4
 
2-526—2-529


2-2-5
 
12-6


2-2-6
 
12-7


2-2-7—2-2-10
 
12-10—12-13


2-2-13
 
2-540


2-3-1—2-3-3
 
2-556—2-558


2-4-1
 
2-576


2-4-2, 2-4-3
 
2-578, 2-579


2-4-4
 
2-577


2-4-5—2-4-8
 
2-580—2-583


2-5-1—2-5-6
 
2-596—2-601


2-6-1, 2-6 2
 
2-621, 2-622


2-7-1, 2-7-2
 
2-636, 2-637


2-9-1—2-9-6
 
2-651—2-656


3-1-1—3-1-15
 
3-2—3-16


3-1-17
 
3-1


3-1A-1—3-1A-3
 
3-61—3-63


3-2-1—3-2-8
 
3-81—3-88


3-2-8A
 
3-89


3-2-9—3-2-14
 
3-90—3-95


3-2-16 —3-2-20
 
3-97—3-101


3-2-22, 3-2-23
 
3-102, 3-103


3-4-1
 
3-176


3-4-2—3-4-11
 
3-178—3-187


3-4-12
 
3-177


3-5-1, 3-5-2
 
5-71, 5-72


3-5-3
 
5-71


 
 
5-73


3-5-4—3-5-20
 
5-74—5-90


3-6-1, 3-6.2
 
5-106, 5-107


3-6-3—3-6-7
 
5-109—5-113


3-6-8
 
5-108


3-6-9, 3-6-10
 
5-114, 5-115


3-7-1—3-7-8
 
5-131—5-138


3-740—3-7-13
 
5-139—5-142


3-8-1—3-8-7
 
5-156—5-162


3-10-1
 
3-241


3-10-2—3-10-12
 
3-243—3-253


3-10-13
 
3-242


3-11-1—3-11-6
 
3-271—3-276


3-11-7
 
3-278


3-11-8
 
3-277


3-14-1—3-14-9
 
3-381—3-389


3-15-1—3-154
 
3-406—3-409


3-15-5
 
3-411


3-15-6
 
3-410


3-15-7—3-15-12
 
3-412—3-417


3-15-15
 
3-418


3.15-18-3-15-32
 
3-419—3-433


3-16-1, 3-16-2
 
3-206, 3-207


3-16-4
 
3-208


3-17-1—3-17-3
 
5-176—5-178


3-18-1, 3-18-2
 
3-61


3-19-1—3-19-3
 
2-421—2-423


3-20-1—3.20-3
 
2-436—2-438


3-21-1
 
3-453


3-21-2
 
3-451


3-21-3—3-21-8
 
3-454—3-459


3-21-9
 
3-452


3-22-1
 
3-523


3-22-2
 
3-521


3-22-3—3-22-7
 
3-524—3-528


3-22.8
 
3-522


3-23-1—3-23-3
 
2-458—2-460


3-23-4
 
2-456


3-23-5—3-23-8
 
2-461—2-464


3-23-9
 
2-457


4-1-1—4-1-4
 
8-31—8-34


4-1-5
 
8-31


4-1-6—4-1-8
 
8-35—8-37


4-1-10, 4-1-11
 
8-39, 8-40


4-1-15—4-1-24
 
8-44—8-53


4-2-1—4-2-5
 
8-67—8-71


4-2-8
 
8-73


4-2-11
 
8-76


4-2-20   
 
8-85


4-3-3—4-3-5
 
8-103—8-105


4-3-7
 
8-107


4-3-9
 
8-109


4-4-1—4-4-6
 
8-121—8-126


4-5-1—4-5-8
 
8-141—8-148


4-6-1, 4-6-2
 
8-411, 8-412


4-7-1
 
8-167


4-7-3
 
8-171


4-7-4
 
8-169


4-7-5
 
8-167


4-7-6
 
8-169


4-7-7
 
8-168


4-7-8—4-7-11
 
8-169


4-7-12
 
8-166


4-7-13
 
8-170


4-7-14
 
8-171


4-7-15
 
8-170


4-7-16
 
8-167


4-8-1
 
8-212


4-8-2
 
8-211


4-8-3
 
8-213


4-8-5
 
8-215


4-8-11
 
8-221


4-8-16
 
8-226


4-9-1—4-9-6
 
8-246—8-251


4-10-1—4-10-6
 
8-266—8-271


5-1-1
 
4-16


5-1-2
 
4-19


5-1-5
 
4-18


5.1-6—5-1-15
 
4-20—4-29


5-1-17
 
4-31


5-2-1—5-2-9
 
4-61—4-69


5-3-1, 5-3-2
 
4-88, 4-89


5.3-3
 
4-86


5-3-10—5-3-12
 
4-90—4-92


5-3-13
 
4-87


5-3-14
 
4-93


5-3-16.2
 
4-94


5-3-17—5-3.19
 
4-100—4-102


5-4-1, 5-4-2
 
4-116, 4-117


5-4-3, 5.4-4
 
4-118, 4-119


5-5-1—5-5-5
 
4-95—4-99


5-6-1—5-6-3
 
4-46—4-48


6-4-1
 
7-2


6-4-2—6-4-6
 
7-3


6-4-7
 
4-116


6-4-8
 
4-118, 4-119


6-4-9
 
4-120


6-4-10, 6-4-11
 
7-6


6-4-12—6-4-14
 
7-7—7-9


6-445
 
7-30


6-4-16
 
7-14


6-4-17
 
7-31


6-4-18—6-4-21
 
7-10—7-13


6-4-22
 
7-15


6-4-23
 
7-32


6-4-24
 
7-49


6-4-25
 
7-45


6-4-26—6-4-28
 
7-33—7-35


6-4-29, 6-4-30
 
7-46, 7-47


6-4-31
 
7-17


6-4.32, 6-4-33
 
7-19, 7-20


6-4-34
 
7-16


6-4-35
 
7-19


6-4-36
 
7-21


64-37
 
7-36


6-4-38
 
7-22


6-4-39
 
7-4


64-40, 6-4-41
 
7-5


6-442, 64-43
 
7-37


6-4-44—6-447
 
7-38—7-41


6-448
 
3-155


6-4-49
 
7-42


6-4-50—6-4-52
 
7-23—7-25


6-4-53, 6-4-54
 
7-43, 7-44


6-4-55
 
7-29


6-4-56
 
7-18


 
 
7-26


6-5-1
 
7-89


6-5-2, 6-5-3
 
7-91, 7-92


6-5-4, 6-5-5
 
7-117, 7-118


6-5-6—6-5-8
 
7-93—7-95


6-5-9, 6-5-10
 
7-98, 7-99


6-5-11
 
7-116


6-5-12—6-5-17
 
7-119—7-124


6-5-18, 6-5-19
 
7-100, 7-101


6-5-20
 
7-125


6-5-21
 
7-86


6-5-22
 
7-97


6-5-23
 
7-126


6-5-24—6-5-26
 
7-86—7-88


6-5-27
 
7-102


6-6-1
 
7-171, 7-172


6-6-2
 
7-172


6-6-3
 
7-173


6-6-4, 6-6-5
 
7-174


6-6-6—6-6-8
 
7-175—7-177


6-7-1—6-7-14
 
6-41—6-54


6-8-1—6-8-3
 
7-48


6-11-1, 6-11-2
 
7-197, 7-198


6-11-3
 
7-199, 7-200


6-11-4
 
7-201


6-11-5
 
7-213


6-11-6—6-11-8
 
7-202—7-204


6-11.9, 6-11-10
 
7-214, 7-215


6-11-11—6-11-13
 
7-205—7-207


6-11-14
 
7-196


 
 
7-208


6-11-14—6-11-16
 
7-196


6-11-15, 6-11-16
 
7-209, 7-210


6-11-17
 
7-226, 7-227


6-11-18-6-11-22
 
7-228—7-232


6-11-23
 
7-216


 
 
7-233


6-11.24
 
7-234


6-11-25, 6-11-26
 
7-211, 7-212


6-11-27
 
7-196


6-12-1—6-12-12
 
7-251—7-262


6-13-1—6-13-9
 
7-282—7-290


6-13-10
 
7-281


6-14-1
 
3-476


6-14-2—6-14-5
 
3-478—3-481


6-14-6
 
3-477


6-14.1-1—6-14.1-5
 
3-501—3-505


6-15-1
 
9-26


Tit. 7, Ch. 4, Table 1
 
5-223


7-1-1
 
5-1


7-2-1—7-2-5
 
5-17—5-21


7-2-7—7-2-27
 
5-22—5-42


7-2-28
 
7-90


7-2-29
 
5-16


7-3-1—7-3-12
 
5-191—5-202


7-4-1, 7-4-2
 
5-221, 5-222


7-4-3—7-4-5
 
5-224—5-226


7-6-1
 
5-241


7-6-2—7-6-11
 
5-243—5-252


7-6-12
 
5-242


7-6-13, 7-6-14
 
5-253, 5-254


8-1-1-8-1-24
 
10-1—10-24


8-1-25
 
10-137


8-1-26—8-1-28
 
10-25—10-27


8.1-29—8-1-31
 
10-28


8.1-32—8-1-35
 
10-29—10-32


8-2-1—8-2-6
 
10-51—10-56


8-3-1—8-3-11
 
10-76—10-86


8-4-1—8-4-5
 
8-286—8-290


8-4-7
 
8-292


8-5-1—8.5-9
 
7-306—7-314


8-6-1—8-6-3
 
7-315


8-7-1—8-7-5
 
7-331—7-335


8-8-1—8-8-12
 
11-51—11-62


8-8-13
 
11-1


8-8-14—8-8-16
 
11-32—11-34


8-8-17—8-8-29
 
11-76—11-88


8-8-30—8-8-40
 
11-106—11-116


8-8-41
 
11-35


8-8-42—8-8-49
 
11-2-11-9


8-8-50, 8-8-51
 
11-63, 11-64


8-8-52
 
11-36


8-8-53
 
11-89


8-8-54
 
11-31


8-8-55
 
11-90


8-8-56
 
11-10


8-8-57
 
11-91


8-8-58—8-8-60
 
11-10—11-12


8-9-1—8-9-7
 
10-106—10-112


8-9-10
 
10-113


8-10-1—8-10-6
 
10-131—10-136


8-11-1—8-11-25
 
3-541—3-565


8-12-1—8-12-11
 
10-151—10-161


9-1-1
 
6-1


 
 
6-4


9-1-2, 9-1-3
 
6-2, 6-3


9-1-5
 
6-5


9-2-1—9-2-5
 
6-21—6-25


10-1-1
 
12-2


10-1-2
 
12-1


10-2-1, 10-2-2
 
12-3, 12-4


10-2-3
 
1-11


10-3-1—10-3-3
 
12-21—12-23


10-4-1, 10-4-2
 
12-36, 12-37


10-5-1, 10-5.2
 
12-39, 12-40


10-7-1—10-7-3
 
12-41—12-43


10-9-1—10-9-3
 
12-86—12-88


10-11-1—10-11-3
 
12-131—12-133


10-12-1—10-12-3
 
12-146—12-148


10-12-4
 
12-149, 12-150


10-12-5—10-12-8
 
12-151—12-154


10-13-1—10-13-3
 
12-166—12-168


10-14-1, 10-14.2
 
12-181, 12-182


10-15-1
 
12-5


10-16-1, 10-16-2
 
12-201, 12-202


10-17-1-10-17-4
 
12-107—12-110


10.17-5
 
12-106


10-17-6—10-17-14
 
12-111—12-119


12-1-1
 
8-344


12-1-2
 
8-346


12-1-3
 
8-341


12-1-4—12-1-8
 
8-347—8-351


12-2-1, 12.2-2
 
8-366, 8-367


12-3-1, 12-3-2
 
8-381, 8-382


12-4-1
 
8-383


12-5-1—12-5-4
 
8-396—8-399


12-6-1
 
8-345


12-6-2
 
8-342


12-6-3
 
8-352—8-354


12-6-4
 

8-343



 
 
 




 



CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
ORDINANCES



   This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances
adopted since the 1972 Code, as supplemented through Ordinance No. 86-1,
which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were
incorporated into the 1972 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some
ordinances which precede January 18, 1973, but which were never included in
the 1972 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances not listed
herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and
permanent nature.



 

Ordinance Number
 
Date
 
Section
 
Section this Code




 
 
7-5-51
 
 
 
8-169


 
 
9-21-61
 
 
 
1-11


 
 
 
 
 
 
12-1


 
 
 
 
 
 
12-5


 
 
 
 
 
 
12-182


 
 
 
 
 
 
12-202


61-12
 
10-5-61
 
 
 
3-208


 
 
 
 
 
 
5-178


62-13
 
8-2-62
 
 
 
12-1


 
 
 
 
 
 
12-21


 
 
 
 
 
 
12-23


64-2
 
1-16-64
 
 
 
2-165


64-4
 
3-5-64
 
 
 
9-293


 
 
8-5-65
 
 
 
8-32


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-39, 8-40


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-68


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-73


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-75


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-104


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-126


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-292


 
 
4-16-66
 
 
 
9-99


 
 
 
 
 
 
9-142


 
 
 
 
 
 
9-153


 
 
 
 
 
 
9-220


67-12
 
11-6-67
 
 
 
8-411, 8-412


68-18
 
10-17-68
 
 
 
2-387


69-15
 
7-2-69
 
 
 
7-174


69-17
 
8-7-69
 
 
 
8-33


69-18
 
8-27-69
 
 
 
2-423


69-19
 
8-27-69
 
 
 
2-438


69-21
 
9-4-69
 
 
 
2-401


69-22
 
9-4-69
 
 
 
2-402


70-2
 
2-19-70
 
 
 
4-69


70-3
 
3-5-70
 
 
 
5-254


70-5
 
3-26-70
 
 
 
2-656


 
 
 
 
 
 
9-27


70-6
 
4-6-70
 
 
 
7-88


70-7
 
7-16-70
 
 
 
6-54


70-10
 
7-16-70
 
 
 
8-32


70-15
 
9-3-70
 
 
 
2-248


70-16
 
9-10-70
 
 
 
10-28


70-23
 
12-3-70
 
 
 
5-16


 
 
 
 
 
 
5-38


71-8
 
5-20-71
 
 
 
4-87


71-12
 
6-24-71
 
 
 
9-3


71-14
 
7-1-71
 
 
 
2-208, 2-229


71-20
 
10-7-71
 
 
 
2-2


71-22
 
10-21.71
 
 
 
9-3


71-23
 
11-4-71
 
 
 
8-45


71-74
 
7-1-1971
 
 
 
2-226


72-13
 
4-6-72
 
 
 
10-136


72-18
 
7-6-72
 
 
 
9-19


72-32
 
11-2-72
 
 
 
12-1


 
 
12-2-72
 
 
 
12-21


73-12
 
3-15-73
 
 
 
2-597


 
 
 
 
 
 
2-599


73-18
 
7-19-73
 
 
 
4-99


73-25
 
9-20-73
 
 
 
10-28


73-29
 
12-20-73
 
 
 
2-266


73-30
 
12-20-73
 
 
 
3-522


74-3
 
2-7-74
 
 
 
8-32


74-4
 
2-7-74
 
 
 
6-22


74-14
 
7-18-74
 
 
 
8-32


74-25
 
10-3-74
 
 
 
9-3


75-3
 
1-2-75
 
 
 
2-39


75-10
 
4-3-75
 
 
 
12-21


 
 
 
 
 
 
12-119


75-14
 
9-4-75
 
 
 
3-477


 
 
 
 
 
 
3-505


 
 
 
 
 
 
7-24


 
 
 
 
 
 
7-196


 
 
 
 
 
 
7-259


 
 
 
 
 
 
7-281


 
 
 
 
 
 
9-12


 
 
 
 
 
 
9-26


 
 
 
 
 
 
9-265


76-6
 
4-1-76
 
 
 
3-452


76-7
 
5-6-76
 
 
 
3-1


 
 
 
 
 
 
3-61(55)


 
 
 
 
 
 
3-61(82)


76-8
 
5-6-76
 
 
 
10-113


76-21
 
12-16-76
 
 
 
2-40


77-8
 
1-20-77
 
 
 
7-25


77-21
 
5-19-77
 
 
 
2-144


77-24
 
5-19-77
 
 
 
2-227


77-29
 
5-19-77
 
 
 
2-361


77-30
 
5-19-77
 
 
 
2-337


77-31
 
5-19-77
 
 
 
2-29


77-40
 
9-1-77
 
 
 
9-294


77-43
 
9-1-77
 
 
 
9-20


77-52
 
9-29-77
 
 
 
8-35


77-55
 
12-1-77
 
 
 
7-314


78-2
 
1-5-78
 
 
 
7-43


78-11
 
3-16-78
 
 
 
7-44


78.12
 
3-16-78
 
 
 
10-29


78-14
 
4-6-78
 
 
 
2-145


 
 
9-7.78
 
 
 
4-19


78.20
 
5-4-78
 
 
 
6-23


78-32
 
8-3-78
 
 
 
12-37


78-33
 
8-3-78
 
 
 
12-40


78-35
 
8-3-78
 
 
 
12-42


78.37
 
8-3.78
 
 
 
12-88


78-39
 
8-3-78
 
 
 
12-131


 
 
 
 
 
 
12-133


78-57
 
10-19-78
 
 
 
3-61(56)


 
 
 
 
 
 
3-85


 
 
 
 
 
 
3-89


79-1
 
1.18-79
 
 
 
9-143


 
 
 
 
 
 
9-154


79-10
 
6-7-79
 
 
 
7-18


79-12
 
7-19-79
 
 
 
8-69


79-14
 
7-19-79
 
 
 
8-169


79-17
 
7-19-79
 
 
 
3-565


79-24
 
10-4-79
 
 
 
12-132


79-25
 
10-4-79
 
 
 
12-1


79-26
 
10-4-79
 
 
 
8-36


79-27
 
10-4-79
 
 
 
7-26


79-33
 
12-6-79
 
 
 
2-287


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-44


79-34
 
12-6-79
 
 
 
12-1


79-35
 
12-6-79
 
 
 
12-4


80-1
 
1-3-80
 
 
 
8-76


80-2
 
1-3-80
 
 
 
8-48


80-3
 
1-3-80
 
 
 
10-30


80-8
 
7-3-80
 
 
 
8-343


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-351


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-367


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-382, 8-383


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-398, 8-399


80-11
 
7-17-80
 
 
 
4-30


80-18
 
9-18-80
 
 
 
2-267


80-20
 
10-2-80
 
 
 
4-48


80-22
 
11-20.80
 
 
 
12-154


80-23
 
11-20-80
 
 
 
12-168


80-24
 
12-2-80
 
 
 
4-93


 
 
12-4-80
 
 
 
4-88


80-25
 
12-4-80
 
 
 
2-60


80-26
 
12-18.80
 
 
 
3-63


81-1
 
1-8-81
 
 
 
2-143


81-2
 
1-8-81
 
 
 
2-146


81-4
 
1-15-81
 
 
 
9-2


81-5
 
2-5-81
 
 
 
8-49


81-7
 
2-5-81
 
 
 
8-33


81-9
 
3-19-81
 
 
 
8-49


81-15
 
6-4-81
 
 
 
11-12


81-16
 
6-18-81
 
 
 
9-8


82-6
 
7-15.82
 
 
 
7-262


82-7
 
8-19-82
 
 
 
8-31


82-8
 
8-19-82
 
 
 
8-167


82-13
 
10-7-82
 
 
 
4-31


82-16
 
12-16-82
 
 
 
8-249


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-251


83-6
 
2-3-83
 
 
 
10-31


83-7
 
5-19-83
 
 
 
2-113


83-8
 
6-16-83
 
 
 
2-507


83-10
 
7-7-83
 
 
 
2-540


 
 
 
 
 
 
12-13


83-11
 
7-7-83
 
 
 
10-28


83-13
 
7-7-83
 
 
 
5-1


83-17
 
7-21-83
 
 
 
7-102


83-18
 
7-21-83
 
 
 
8-167


83-19
 
7-21-83
 
 
 
7-29


83-20
 
8-4-83
 
 
 
8-250


83-28
 
8-18-83
 
 
 
9-21


83-29
 
8-18-83
 
 
 
8-51


83-34
 
9-15-83
 
 
 
8-398


83.36
 
10-20-83
 
 
 
10-32


83-38
 
12-1-83
 
 
 
10-28


84-1
 
1-15-84
 
 
 
6-1


84-2
 
1-5-84
 
 
 
6-5


84-3
 
1-19-84
 
 
 
6-23


84-10
 
4-19-84
 
 
 
8-53


84-22
 
6-21-84
 
 
 
6-2


84-24
 
8-16-84
 
 
 
11-11


84-27
 
9-6-84
 
 
 
12-43


84-30
 
9-20-84
 
 
 
10-28


84-32
 
11-1-84
 
 
 
2-249


85-1
 
2-7-85
 
 
 
8-39


85.2
 
2-7-85
 
 
 
8-271


85-5
 
5 2-85
 
 
 
2-57


85-6
 
5-2-85
 
 
 
2-86


 
 
6-10-85
 
 
 
8-169


85.8
 
6-24-85
 
 
 
8-50


85-10
 
6-24-85
 
 
 
7-177


85-12
 
7-22-85
 
 
 
11-12


85-14
 
8-26-85
 
 
 
2-583


85-15
 
8-26-85
 
 
 
9-22


85-16
 
9-9-85
 
 
 
10-161


85-17
 
9-9-85
 
 
 
10-3


85-18
 
9-23-85
 
 
 
9-23


85-20
 
10-1-85
 
 
 
12-4


85-24
 
12-9-85
 
 
 
3-62


85-25
 
12-23-85
 
 
 
4-29


85-26
 
12-23-85
 
 
 
9-21


86.1
 
1-27-86
 
 
 
2-457


86-6
 
3-10-86
 
 
 
8-103


86-8
 
3.10-86
 
 
 
8-32


86-9
 
3-10-86
 
 
 
8-105


86-13
 
4.14-86
 
 
 
8-268


86-18
 
5-27.86
 
1
 
7-27


86-19
 
6-9-86
 
1
 
9-24


86-20
 
6-9-86
 
1
 
2-602


86-21
 
6-9-86   
 
 
 
5-1


85-25
 
12-23-85
 
 
 
4-29


85-26
 
12.23-85
 
 
 
9-21


86-1
 
1-27-86
 
 
 
2-457


86-6
 
3-10-86
 
 
 
8-103


86-7
 
3 10-86
 
 
 
8-102


86-8
 
3-10-86
 
 
 
8-32


86-9
 
3-10.86
 
 
 
8-105


86-13
 
4-14-86
 
 
 
8-268


86-18
 
5-27-86
 
1
 
7-27


86-19
 
6-9-86
 
1
 
9-24


86-20
 
6-9-86
 
1
 
2-602


86-21
 
6-9-86
 
 
 
5-1


86-25
 
6-23-86
 
1
 
8-269


86-27
 
8-11-86
 
1
 
8-54


86.28
 
8-25-86
 
1
 
9-25


86-30
 
9-22-86
 
 
 
2-6


86-32
 
10-13-86
 
 
 
7-178


86-35
 
11-8-86
 
 
 
8-32


86-39
 
12-15.86
 
1
 
2-403


86-45
 
12-29-86
 
 
 
8-32


87-1
 
1-12-87
 
1, 2
 
3-88, 3-89


87-2
 
2-23-87
 
 
 
3-61(83)


87-3
 
3-9-87
 
 
 
12-131


87-11
 
6-8-87
 
1
 
4-29


87-14
 
6-22-87
 
1-4
 
10-33


87-17
 
7-27-87
 
 
 
9-8


87-20
 
8-10-87
 
1
 
8-251


87-25
 
9-14-87
 
1
 
10-18


87-26
 
9-14-87
 
1
 
6-2


87-27
 
9-14-87
 
1
 
11-117


87-31
 
11-9-87
 
1-5
 
10-87—10-91


87-32
 
11-23-87
 
1
 
3-36—3-40


88-1
 
2-8-88
 
1
 
3-542


88-3
 
2-22-88
 
1
 
8-55


88-5
 
3-28-88
 
1
 
7-122


88-6
 
3-28-88
 
1
 
6-23


88-7
 
4-25.88
 
 
 
2-113


88-8
 
4-25-88
 
 
 
2-60


88-10
 
5-23-88
 
2-5
 
11-65


88-11
 
5-23-88
 
 
 
3-454


88.12
 
5-23-88
 
1
 
5-2


88-17
 
7-25-88
 
1
 
3-64


88-18
 
7-25-88
 
1
 
7-28


88-19
 
7-25-88
 
1
 
1-7.1


88-20
 
8-22-88
 
1
 
2-403


88-22
 
9-12-88
 
 
 
2-456—2-464


88.23
 
9-12-88
 
 
 
11-12


88-25
 
9-12-88
 
1
 
5-1


88-27
 
9-26-88
 
1
 
4-30


88-29
 
10-10-88
 
1
 
3-545


88-30
 
10.10-88
 
 
 
2-7


89-5
 
2-27-89
 
3
 
7-103


89-8
 
5-8-89
 
 
 
9-21(b)


89-9
 
6-12-89
 
1-7
 
Adopting Ordinance, p.vii


89-10
 
6-12-89
 
 
 
11-12(1), (2)


89-11
 
6-12-89
 
1
 
7-29


89-13
 
7-24-89
 
 
 
9-23


89-14
 
7-24-89
 
 
 
9-22


89-15
 
7-24-89
 
1-3
 
11-13


89-17„
 
7-24-89
 
1
 
12-131(a)(9)


90-4
 
3-12-90
 
1
 
9-22(aX2)


90-5
 
3-12-90
 
1
 
9-22(aX1)


90-6
 
4-9-90
 
1-5
 
2-596—2-600


90-8
 
5-14-90
 
1
 
9-3(a)


 
 
 
 
2
 
4-19


90-12
 
8-13-90
 
1
 
3-454


90-13
 
8-13-90
 
1
 
8-57


90-18
 
9-10-90
 
1
 
7-316


90-19
 
10-8-90
 
 
 
Ch. 10, Art. VI


 
 
 
 
 
 
Ch. 10, Art. VII


 
 
 
 
 
 
10-151—10-163


91-1
 
1-14-91
 
4
 
8-90


 
 
 
 
9
 
8-95


91-2
 
1-14-91
 
1
 
8-98


91-3
 
1-14-91
 
1-12
 
11-120—11-131


91-6
 
5-28-91
 
1-4
 
2-660—2-663


91-7
 
6-24-91
 
1-2
 
3-89(3)


91-8
 
5-28-91
 
2
 
2-601-2-607


91-9
 
6-24-91
 
1
 
2-26


91-10
 
6-24-91
 
1
 
9-3(a)


91-11
 
6-24-91
 
1
 
9-51


91-12
 
6-24-91
 
1
 
4-19


91-13
 
6-10-91
 
1
 
8-167


91-14
 
6-10-91
 
1
 
3-63(d)


91-15
 
6-24-91
 
1-3
 
6-23(6),(e),(0


91-16
 
6-24-91
 
1
 
8-32(m)


91-17
 
6-24-91
 
1
 
6-60


91-20
 
7-22-91
 
 
 
11-12(1),(2)


91-21
 
7-22-91
 
1
 
11-118


91-22
 
7-22-91
 
1
 
12-131


91-24
 
7-22-91
 
1
 
4-33


91-25
 
8-12-91
 
1-3
 
5-260—5-262


91-27
 
8-12-91
 
1-5
 
2-246—2-250


91-28
 
9-9-91
 
1
 
10-52, 10-53


 
 
 
 
2
 
10-76


 
 
 
 
3
 
10-112(b)


 
 
 
 
4
 
10-132


91-29
 
9-9-91
 
1
 
8-32(h),(hX1),(hX4)


 
 
 
 
2
 
8-45(b)


 
 
 
 
3
 
8-50(b),(0


 
 
 
 
4
 
8-57(c)


 
 
 
 
5
 
8-69


 
 
 
 
6
 
8-105(e),(j),(m)-(p)


 
 
 
 
7
 
8-167


 
 
 
 
8
 
8-171


 
 
 
 
9
 
8-166


 
 
 
 
10
 
8-167


 
 
 
 
11
 
8-213(b)


 
 
 
 
12
 
8-247(c)


 
 
 
 
13
 
8-251(a)


 
 
 
 
15
 
8-58—8-63


91-30
 
9-9-91
 
1
 
2-185—2-188


91-37   -..-
 
11-11-91
 
1
 
7-48


91-38
 
11-25-91
 
1
 
2-188


91-41
 
12-9-91
 
1
 
3-97


92-2
 
1-13-91
 
 
 
8-341—8-356


92-3
 
2-10-92
 
2
 
2-226


92-8
 
3-9-92
 
 
 
11-12


92-10
 
3-9-92
 
1,2
 
7-50, 7-51


92-11
 
3-9-92
 
1
 
7-53


92-13
 
3-23-92
 
1-4
 
3-82, 3-84, 3-88,3-95


92-14
 
3-23-92
 
1,2
 
3-63


92-15
 
3-23-92
 
1
 
8-45


92-16
 
4-27-92
 
1
 
2-331—2-337


92-17
 
4-27-92
 
1,2
 
2-189, 2-190


92-18
 
3-23-92
 
1,2
 
2-85, 2-86


92-22
 
5-11-92
 
1
 
9-25


92-24
 
6-22-92
 
1
 
8-62


92-25
 
6-22-92
 
1
 
8-64


92-26
 
6-22-92
 
1
 
7-105


92-27
 
6-22-92
 
1
 
3-88


92-38
 
11.9-92
 
1
 
4-103


92-39
 
11-9-92
 
1
 
2-541


92-42
 
11-23-92
 
1
 
8-65


92-43
 
11-23-92
 
1
 
4-103


92-45
 
12-14-92
 
1
 
4-104


92-47
 
12-28-92
 
1
 
8-251


92-48
 
12-28-92
 
1
 
8-45


93-3
 
1-11-93
 
1,2
 
2-41


93-4
 
1-25.93
 
1
 
2-41


93-6
 
2-8-93
 
1
 
8-250


93-7
 
3-22-93
 
1
 
6-23(s)


93-12
 
6-28-93
 
1
 
5-275—5-280


93-13
 
6-28-93
 
1
 
5-263


93-14
 
6-28-93
 
1-6
 
10-33


93-15
 
7-12-93
 
1
 
11-55(c)


93-16
 
7-12-93
 
1
 
8-32(h)


93-18
 
7-26-93
 
1
 
8-215


93-19
 
8-9-93
 
1
 
9-89


93-20
 
8-9-93
 
1
 
9-90


93-21
 
8-9-93
 
1
 
9-75


93-22
 
8-9-93
 
1
 
9-3


93-23
 
8-9.93
 
1
 
9-76


93-24
 
8-23-93
 
1
 
9-4


93-25
 
8-23-93
 
1
 
9-5


93-26
 
8-23-93
 
1
 
9-51


93-27
 
8-23-93
 
1
 
9-92


93-28
 
8-23-93
 
1
 
3-570—3-578


93-29
 
9-13-93
 
1
 
7-177


93-30
 
9-13-93
 
2-4
 
8-32(n),(o),(p)


93-31
 
9-13-93
 
1
 
5-260


93-32
 
9-27-93
 
1,2
 
2-7, 2-26, 8-49(b),


 
 
 
 
 
 
10-106—10-113,


 
 
 
 
 
 
10-151—10-163


93-33
 
9-27-93
 
1
 
8-82.5


93-34
 
9-27-93
 
1
 
4-105


93-36
 
9-27-93
 
1
 
2-542


93-37
 
9-27-93
 
1
 
11-53


93-40
 
10-25-93
 
1-3
 
11-52, 11-53, 11-63


93-44
 
12-13-93
 
1
 
10-34


93-45
 
12-13-93
 
1
 
8-54


93-46
 
12-13-93
 
1
 
9-24


94-5
 
4-20-94
 
1
 
8-400, 8-401, 8-403—8-409


94-6
 
5-23-94
 
1
 
8-32(h)


 
 
 
 
2
 
8-32(a)


94-7
 
6-14-94
 
1-6
 
10-33


94-9
 
6-14-94
 
1-4
 
10-131—10-134


 
 
 
 
5
 
10-136


94-10
 
6-14-94
 
2
 
6-22(b)


 
 
 
 
1
 
6-23


94-11
 
7-14-94
 
1
 
2-543


94-12
 
6-27-94
 
1
 
12-203


94-13
 
6-27-94
 
1
 
3-17


94-16
 
8-24-94
 
 
 
6-71—6-84


94-21
 
10-24-94
 
1
 
8-32(m)


94-22
 
10-24-94
 
1
 
11-78(c)(2)


94-24
 
10-24-94
 
1
 
10-134(a)


94-25
 
11-14-94
 
1
 
7-316


94-29
 
12-27-94
 
1-3
 
3-600—3-602


95-3
 
2-27-95
 
1
 
8-32(q)


95-7
 
4-24-95
 
1,2
 
11-78(c),11-82


95-8
 
5-22-95
 
2-4
 
6-91-6-93


95-9
 
5-22-95
 
1
 
8-31(e)


95-11
 
6-12-95
 
1-5
 
2-670—2-674


95-12
 
6-12-95
 
1-6
 
10-33


95-13
 
6-26-95
 
1
 
9-23


95-14
 
6-26-95
 
1,2
 
4-29


95-15
 
6-26-95
 
1
 
5-292


95-23
 
10-9-95
 
1
 
6-21(d)


95-27
 
11-13-95
 
1
 
3-61(49.5)


95-29
 
11-13-95
 
1
 
8-32(b)(6)


95-30
 
11-27-95
 
1
 
1-7


95-33
 
12-11-95
 
1-7
 
3-610—3-616


95-34
 
12-11-95
 
1
 
12-131(a)(9)


96-3
 
2-12-96
 
1
 
3-2


96-4
 
2-12-96
 
 
 
11-12(1),(2)


96-5
 
2-12-96
 
1
 
10-34


96-6
 
2-12-96
 
 
 
8-341—8-356


96-9
 
3-11-96
 
1
 
6-60


96-11
 
5-13-96
 
2
 
12-46


96-16
 
6-10-96
 
1-6
 
10-33


96-17
 
7-8-96
 
1-4
 
4-34—4-37


96-18
 
7-8-96
 
1
 
3-321


96-19
 
7-8-96
 
1-6
 
3-321—3-326


96-21
 
8-12-96
 
1
 
9-23


96-22
 
8-12-96
 
1
 
8-36(c)


96-23
 
8-12-96
 
1
 
12-47


96-24
 
8-12-96
 
1
 
12-37


 
 
 
 
2
 
12-40


 
 
 
 
3
 
12-42


96-25
 
8-26-96
 
1
 
8-169


96-26
 
9-9-96
 
1-5
 
8-414—8-429


96-27
 
9-9-96
 
1
 
2-60


96-28
 
9-9-96
 
1
 
2-143


96-29
 
9-9-96
 
1
 
2-230


96-30
 
9-9-96
 
2
 
10-147


96-31
 
9-9-96
 
1
 
5-264


96-32
 
9-23-96
 
1
 
2-113(b)


96-33
 
9-23-96
 
1
 
3-105


96-34
 
10-14-96
 
1
 
3-104


96-38
 
11-12-96
 
1-17
 
2-700—2-749


96-42
 
12-9-96
 
1
 
8-400


97-1
 
1-13-97
 
1
 
10-152


97-2
 
1-27-97
 
1-10
 
5-301—5-324


97-3
 
2-10-97
 
1-5
 
5-325—5-339


97-5
 
2-24-97
 
1
 
3-300


97-6
 
3-10-97
 
4
 
3-61, 3-62


97-8
 
3-24-97
 
1
 
6-23(b)


97-9
 
3-24-97
 
1
 
3-65


97-10
 
3-24-97
 
1-12
 
3-650—3-669


97-16
 
3-27-97
 
1-3
 
6-23


97-18
 
6-9-97
 
1
 
2-188


97-20
 
6-9-97
 
1
 
6-79(d)


97-21
 
6-9-97
 
1
 
9-2


 
 
 
 
2
 
9-3(a)


 
 
 
 
3
 
9-8(a), (b)


 
 
 
 
4
 
9-22(b)(1)


97-22
 
6-23-97
 
1,2
 
2-34.1


97-27
 
8-11-97
 
1
 
9-100


97-28
 
9-8-97
 
1
 
5-261


 
 
 
 
2
 
5-262


97-33
 
10-13-97
 
1,2
 
8-31(e)


97-34
 
10-27-97
 
2,3
 
11-140—11-159


97-36
 
11-10-97
 
1
 
6-79(d)


98-2
 
1-12-98
 
1
 
5-270-5-273


98-5
 
2-9-98
 
4
 
11-53


98-6
 
2-9-98
 
1
 
13-1


 
 
 
 
2
 
5-18, 7-17(b), 7-19(a), (b), 7-20, 7-22(b), 7-29(k), 7-97(a)(1), 7-196,
7-201, 7-206(b), 7-234(c), 7-255, 7-262, 8-32(b)(1)— (6), 8-45(b), 8-49(d),
8-50(b), (c), 8-54(d) (1)-(3), (e), 8-55(a), 8-57(a)—(c), 8-59(c), (d),
8-69, 8-105(e), (0, (g),  (j), (k),  (1),  (p), 8-122(b), 8-167, 8-172,
8-213(b), 8-227, 8-247(c), 8-268(d), 8-271, 8-353(1)b, 8-413, 10-5, 10-7,
10-27(b), 10-52, 10-76(a), 10-86, 10-112(b), 11-6, 11-53(1), (2), 12-88(c),
13-1


98-9
 
2-23-98
 
1
 
4-94(e)(11)


98-10
 
3-9-98
 
1
 
8-501-8-516


98-12
 
3-23-98
 
1
 
3-41(a), 3-61, 3-89(1), (2), (4)—(7), 3-573


 
 
 
 
2
 
5-18, 7-17 (b), 7-19(a), (b), 7-20, 7-22(b), 7-29(k), 7-97(a)(1), 7-196,
7-201, 7-206(b), 7-234(c), 7-255, 7-262, 8-32(h)(1)— (h)(6),(n),(o),(q),
8-45(b), 8-49(d), 8-50(b), (c), 8-54(d) (1)-(3), (e), 8-55(a), 8-57(a)-(c),
8-59(c), (d), 8-69, 8-105(e), (f), (g), G), (k), (1), (p), 8-122(b), 8-167,
8-172, 8-213(b), 8-227, 8-247(c), 8-268(d), 8-271, 8-353(1)b, 10-5, 10-7,
10-27(b), 10-52,   10-76(a), 10-86,   10-112(b), 11-6, 11-53(1), (2),
12-88(c), 13-1


98-16
 
4-27-1998
 
2
 
13-1(6)


98-17
 
4-27-1998
 
1,5
 
8-31(e)(6)


98-19
 
5-26-1998
 
1
 
13-1(5)


98-20
 
5-26-1998
 
1
 
6-23(a)


98-25
 
6-22-1998
 
1
 
2-465—2-471


 
 
 
 
2
 
2-472


98-26
 
6-22-1998
 
1
 
8-64


98-27
 
6-22-1998
 
1
 
7-306(c)


98-31
 
7-27-1998
 
1
 
2-465


98-32
 
7-27-1998
 
1
 
5-116


98-33
 
8-10-1998
 
1
 
6-81(a)(1), (a)(2),


 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)(3)a, (bXl)c


 
 
 
 
2
 
6-81(c)


98-34
 
8-10-1998
 
1
 
8-509(aX6)c


 
 
 
 
2
 
8-509(a)(7)


98-35
 
8-10-1998
 
1
 
4-95


 
 
 
 
2,3
 
4-96


98-36
 
8-10-1998
 
1
 
10-152(d)–(f)


98-37
 
9-14-1998
 
1
 
13-1(6)


98-41
 
11-9-1998
 
1
 
3-406-3-418


98-43
 
11-9-1998
 
1
 
12-21, 12-89—12-89.2


98-46
 
12-14-1998
 
1
 
3-88


1999-2
 
2-8-1999
 
1
 
10-4


 
 
 
 
2
 
10-5


1999-5
 
2-22-1999
 
1
 
7-217


99-7
 
3-22-1999
 
1
 
10-114


99-10
 
4-12-1999
 
1
 
3-650—3-669


99-11
 
4-12-1999
 
1
 
6-2


 
 
 
 
2
 
6-21


 
 
 
 
3
 
6-22


 
 
 
 
4
 
6-23


 
 
 
 
5
 
6-24


 
 
 
 
6
 
6-25


99-12
 
4-12-1999
 
1
 
8-32(m)


99-13
 
4-26-1999
 
3
 
2-188


99-14A
 
6-14-1999
 
1
 
4-106


99-18
 
6-28-1999
 
1
 
7-314


1999-19
 
6-28-1999
 
2
 
11-160—11-189


99-21
 
6-28-1999
 
1
 
2-750—2-759


99-22
 
7-12-1999
 
1
 
8-248(e)


99-25
 
7-26-1999
 
1
 
8-248(e)


99-26
 
8-9-1999
 
1-3
 
7-19(b)


99-29
 
8-23-1999
 
1,2
 
9-21(a)(1),(a)(3)


99-38
 
11-8-1999
 
1
 
6-23(b)


99-42
 
11-22-1999
 
1
 
5-1(aX23)


2000-01
 
1-10-2000
 
1
 
2-468


2000-04
 
1-10-2000
 
1
 
3-131(c), 5-225(d)


2000-05
 
1-10-2000
 
1
 
4-94(e)


2000-06
 
1-10-2000
 
1
 
2-711


2000-013
 
2-14-2000
 
 
 
11-12(1), (2)


2000-11
 
2-28-2000
 
1
 
8-169


2000-12
 
2-28-2000
 
1
 
2-473—2-480


2000-13
 
3-13-2000
 
1
 
13-1(6)


2000-14
 
3-13-2000
 
1
 
13-1(6)


2000-15
 
3-13-2000
 
1
 
13-1(6)


2000-17
 
3-27-2000
 
1
 
3-88, 3-89(4), 13-1(6)


2000-19
 
4-10-2000
 
1
 
13-1(6)


2000-20
 
4-10-2000
 
1,2
 
13-1(6)


2000-24
 
5-8-2000
 
1
 
7-314(c),(d)


2000-28
 
6-12-2000
 
 
 
8-50(b), 13-1(3)


2000-30
 
7-10-2000
 
1
 
7-314


2000-31
 
7-10-2000
 
1,2
 
10-28(0,(8)


 
 
 
 
3
 
6-3(a)


 
 
 
 
4
 
6-21(d)


2000-33
 
7-24-2000
 
1
 
8-31(e)


2000-34
 
7-24-2000
 
1
 
2-184(e)


2000-37
 
8-14-2000
 
1
 
6-2


2000-38
 
8-14-2000
 
1
 
13-1(8)


2000-39
 
8-28-2000
 
1
 
2-496—2-507


2000-40
 
8-28-2000
 
1
 
5-292—5-295


2000-54
 
10-9-2000
 
1
 
8-32(h)


2000-56
 
10-23-2000
 
1
 
2-473—2-480


2000-57
 
10-23-2000
 
1
 
4-94(e)


2000-58
 
10-23-2000
 
1
 
8-341—8-353,


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-355—8-357


2001-01
 
1-8-2001
 
 
 
11-12(1), (2)


2001-03
 
2-12-2001
 
1
 
2-474


2001-04
 
2-26-2001
 
1
 
4-94(e)(1)f


2001-05
 
2-26-2001
 
1
 
10-146


 
 
 
 
2
 
2-7(b), 2-26 ,5-271(f), 7-308, 7-310(b), 7-311(b),8-49(c), 10-8, 10-13,
10-14, 10-15, 10-26(a), 10-28(e), 10-76(b), 10-132, 10-133, 10-134(c), (d),
10-137(d), 10-146, 10-147, 10-151(a), 10-153(6), (c), (e), 10-160(a), 10-162,
10-162(1), 11-2, 11-3, 11-4, 11-76, 11-109, 11-110(a), (b), 11-113, 11-161,
11-162, 11-163(a), 11-164(a), (b)(1), (bX2), 11-175(aX1)a, (aX3)b


2001-07
 
3-26-2001
 
1
 
5-290


 
 
 
 
2
 
5-295


2001-08
 
3-26-2001
 
1
 
8-342


2001-09
 
3.26-2001
 
1
 
8-169


2001-12
 
4-9-2001
 
1
 
10-115


01-13
 
4-9-2001
 
1
 
3-670


 
 
 
 
2
 
3-671


2001-14
 
4-23-2001
 
1
 
8-35


2001-15
 
4-23-2001
 
1
 
10-54


2001-16
 
5-14-2001
 
1
 
6-2


2001-17
 
5-14-2001
 
1
 
3-610, 3-613, 3-615,


 
 
 
 
 
 
3-616, 3-617, 3-618


2001-19
 
5-14-2001
 
1
 
8-58


 
 
 
 
 
 
8-62


2001-20
 
5-14-2001
 
2
 
12-47


2001-21
 
5-29-2001
 
1
 
10-3


2001-23
 
5-29-2001
 
1
 
9-2


2001-28
 
7-23-2001
 
1
 
7-317


2001-29
 
7-23-2001
 
1
 
3-106


2001-31
 
9-10-2001
 
1
 
4-30(e), 4-30.1


2001-33
 
9-24-2001
 
1
 
9-1—9-194


2001-36
 
10-8-2001
 
1
 
12-41


2001-37
 
9-24-2001
 
1
 
3-650—3-660


2001-39
 
11-12-2001
 
1
 
12-169—12-175


2002-07
 
3-25-2002
 
2
 
8-57


 
 
 
 
1
 
13-1(3)


2002-15
 
5-28-2002
 
2
 
8-521, 8-529—8-532, 8-534—8-537, 8-539—8-589


2002-16
 
5-28-2002
 
1
 
3-680—3-683


2002-18
 
5-28-2002
 
1
 
3-5


 
 
 
 
2
 
3-1


 
 
 
 
3
 
3-13


2002-22
 
6-24-2002
 
3
 
13-1(8)


 
 
 
 
1
 
8-32(q)


2002-23
 
7-8-2002
 
1
 
6-94


2002-25
 
7-8-2002
 
1,2
 
4-94(e)(1)h


2002-30
 
7-22-2002
 
1
 
3-88


 
 
 
 
2
 
3-105


2002-31
 
7-22-2002
 
1
 
8-252


2002-32
 
7-22-2002
 
1
 
2-60, 2-113,


 
 
 
 
 
 
2-143(a), 2-146, 2-230


2002-38
 
8-26-2002
 
1
 
3-671


2002-40
 
9-9-2002
 
 
 
9-42


 
 
 
 
1
 
9-2


 
 
 
 
2
 
9-3


 
 
 
 
3
 
9-4


 
 
 
 
4
 
9-7(a)(1)–(4), (8),


 
 
 
 
 
 
(11), (12)


2002-41
 
9-9-2002
 
2
 
3-683


2002-43
 
9-23-2002
 
1
 
2-760, 2-761, 2-762


2003-04
 
2-24-2003
 
1
 
8-33(b)


2003-07
 
3-24-2003
 
1
 
2-381


2003-09
 
4-14-2003
 
1
 
8-508(b)(3)


2003-11
 
4-14-2003
 
1
 
9-98


2003-12
 
4-14-2003
 
2
 
2-191, 2-192


2003-17
 
5-27-2003
 
1
 
8-503


2003-19
 
5-27-2003
 
1
 
12-132, 12-153(8),


 
 
 
 
 
 
12-167


2003-20
 
5-27-2003
 
1
 
8-31(e)


2003-22
 
6-23-2003
 
2
 
12-131(6)


2003-27
 
7-28-2003
 
2
 
6-101


2003-33
 
8-25-2003
 
1
 
13-1


 
 
 
 
2
 
5-261


 
 
 
 
3
 
13-1


2003-36
 
9-22-2003
 
1
 
9-2


2003-41
 
12-22-2003
 
2
 
8-32(n), 13-1


 
 
 
 
3
 
8-32(o),(p), 13-1


2003-45
 
12-22-2003
 
1
 
2-94


2004-04
 
3-8-2004
 
2,3,4
 
11-14


2004-5
 
3-22-2004
 
1
 
5-261


 
 
 
 
2
 
5-262, 13-1


 
 
 
 
3
 
5-260(b), 13-1


2004-08
 
4-12-2004
 
2
 
12-183


2004-10
 
4-26-2004
 
1
 
9-4


2004-11
 
4-26-2004
 
1
 
7-48


 
 
 
 
2
 
7-49


2004-12
 
5-10-2004
 
1
 
2-750—2-755


2004-17
 
8-9-2004
 
2
 
11-11.1


2004-18
 
8-9-2004
 
2
 
4-94(d)


 
 
 
 
3
 
4-94(e)


 
 
 
 
4
 
4-96


 
 
 
 
5
 
4-94(e)1h


2004-24
 
10-25-2004
 
2
 
12-24


 
 
 
 
3
 
12-41


 
 
 
 
4
 
12-43


2004-25
 
11-8-2004
 
1
 
8-169


 
 
 
 
2
 
8-170


 
 
 
 
3
 
8-172


2004-27
 
11-8-2004
 
2
 
8-32(n)


2004-28
 
11-8-2004
 
1
 
5-38


2005-01
 
1-10-2005
 
2
 
2-60, 2-113(b), 2-143, 2-145, 2-187, 2-230, 3-105


 
 
 
 
3
 
2-95


 
 
 
 
4
 
2-140


 
 
 
 
5
 
2-141


 
 
 
 
6
 
2-164


 
 
 
 
8
 
2-403


 
 
 
 
9
 
2-421, 2-422, 2-423


 
 
 
 
10
 
2-436, 2-437, 2-438


 
 
 
 
11
 
2-456—2-464


 
 
 
 
12
 
2-465—2-472


 
 
 
 
13
 
11-140-11-150


2005-03
 
1-24-2005
 
2
 
3-88


2005-06
 
2-14-2005
 
2,3,4
 
6-101


2005-07
 
2-14-2005
 
2
 
4-94(e)(2)d


 
 
 
 
3
 
4-94(e)(1)f


 
 
 
 
4
 
4-94(e)(3)


 
 
 
 
5
 
4-94(g)


2005-10
 
5-9-2005
 
2,4
 
8-272


2005-13
 
5-23-2005
 
2
 
12-24


 
 
 
 
4
 
12-181


2005-15
 
6-13-2005
 
1-6
 
10-33


2005-16
 
8-8-2005
 
2
 
4-30.1


2005-22
 
10-24-2005
 
1
 
Ch. 1, Art. XII


 
 
 
 
2
 
12-89.1, 12-89.2


 
 
 
 
3
 
13-1


2005-23
 
11-14-2005
 
2
 
3-88


2005-24
 
11-14-2005
 
1
 
8-31(e)


2005-25
 
11-28-2005
 
2
 
11-13


2006-01
 
1-9-2006
 
2
 
4-94


2006-02
 
1-9-2006
 
1
 
8-32(j)


 
 
 
 
2
 
8-50(b), (c)


 
 
 
 
3
 
8-105(m), 13-1


 
 
 
 
4
 
8-508(b)(3)


 
 
 
 
5
 
10-51(b), 10-52


 
 
 
 
6
 
11-78(c)(1), (c)(2)


 
 
 
 
7
 
13-1


2006-04
 
2-13-2006
 
1,2
 
5-261


 
 
 
 
3, 4
 
5-262


 
 
 
 
5
 
13-1


2006-05
 
2-13-2006
 
1
 
Ch. 2, Art. XVII, Div. 2


2006-06
 
3-13-2006
 
2
 
3-414(10)


 
 
 
 
3
 
4-94(e)(4)


 
 
 
 
4
 
12-89.2


2006-19
 
10-23-2006
 
2,3,4,5
 
11-14


2006-22
 
11-27-2006
 
2
 
4-94


2007-04
 
2-26-2007
 
1
 
5-227


2007-07
 
6-11-2007
 
1
 
2-94


2007-09
 
7-23-2007
 
2
 
7-87, 7-96, 7-97, 7-103, 7-121,7-125


2007-12
 
8-27-2007
 
2
 
12-37, 12-40, 12-42


2007-13
 
9-10-2007
 
1
 
6-6


2007-17
 
9-24-2007
 
1
 
2-26


2007-20
 
7-23-2007
 
1
 
2-61, 2-62


2007-21
 
10-9-2007
 
2
 
4-94


2007-23
 
10-8-2007
 
3
 
12-131


2007-24
 
10-9-2007
 
2
 
8-354


 
 
 
 
3
 
13-1


2007-25
 
10-9-2007
 
2
 
3-414


2007-27
 
—
 
2
 
1-17


2007-28
 
11-12-2007
 
2
 
8-354


 
 
 
 
3
 
13-1


2007-29
 
11-12-2007
 
1
 
3-13


 
 
 
 
2
 
13-1


2008-03
 
2-11-2008
 
2
 
3-88


 
 
 
 
3
 
3-89


 
 
 
 
4
 
3-95


 
 
 
 
5
 
3-97


 
 
 
 
6
 
3-101


 
 
 
 
7
 
13-1


2008-04
 
2-11-2008
 
2
 
8-400


2008-05
 
2-11-2008
 
1
 
13-1


2008-10
 
3-10-2008
 
3, 4
 
5-43


 
 
 
 
5
 
13-1


2008-11
 
3-10-2008
 
2
 
3-566


2008-12
 
3-10-2008
 
2
 
3-568


2008-13
 
3-10-2008
 
2
 
3-567


2008-14
 
3-24-2008
 
1
 
6-6


2008-17
 
4-14-2008
 
1
 
9-32


2008-21
 
5-27-2008
 
1
 
13-1


2008-23
 
5-27-2008
 
2
 
Ch. 8, Art. III, 8-166—8-172


 
 
 
 
3
 
13-1


2008-26
 
4-28-08
 
1
 
2-583


2008-28
 
8-11-2008
 
2, 3
 
Ch. 8, Art. IX, 8-341—8-357


 
 
 
 
4
 
13-1


2008-31
 
10-27-2008
 
2
 
Ch. 6, Art. VI, 6-105


 
 
 
 
3
 
Ch. 6, Art. VI, 6-106


 
 
 
 
4
 
Ch. 6, Art. VI, 6-107


 
 
 
 
5
 
Ch. 6, Art. VI, 6-108


 
 
 
 
6
 
Ch. 6, Art. VI, 6-109


 
 
 
 
8
 
Ch. 6, Art. VI, 6-111


 
 
 
 
9
 
Ch. 6, Art. VI, 6-112


 
 
 
 
10
 
Ch. 6, Art. VI, 6-113


 
 
 
 
11
 
Ch. 6, Art. VI, 6-114


 
 
 
 
12
 
Ch. 6, Art. VI, 6-115


 
 
 
 
13
 
Ch. 6, Art. VI, 6-116


 
 
 
 
15
 
Ch. 6, Art. VI, 6-118


2009-01B
 
2-9-2009
 
2
 
7-24


2009-02
 
2-9-2009
 
2
 
11-89


 
 
 
 
3
 
11-92


2009-05
 
3-9-2009
 
2
 
3-6


 
 
 
 
3
 
3-7


 
 
 
 
4
 
3-12


 
 
 
 
5
 
3-18


 
 
 
 
6
 
3-36


 
 
 
 
7
 
3-38


 
 
 
 
8
 
3-63


 
 
 
 
9
 
13-1


2009-06
 
3-9-2009
 
2
 
3-414


 
 
 
 
3
 
12-89.2


2009-11
 
5-26-2009
 
2
 
2-750—2-755


2009-13
 
6-1-2009
 
2
 
2-26


 
 
 
 
3
 
2-42, 2-43


2009-14
 
6-22-2009
 
1
 
2-201—2-206


 
 
 
 
3
 
2-474, 2-475, 2-477, 2-478


 
 
 
 
4
 
5-263


 
 
 
 
5
 
6-72


 
 
 
 
6
 
11-12


 
 
 
 
7
 
11-55, 11-56


2009-15
 
6-22-2009
 
1
 
1-14


 
 
 
 
2
 
2-34, 2-34.1, 2-38


 
 
 
 
4
 
2-282


 
 
 
 
5
 
2-543


 
 
 
 
6
 
2-583


 
 
 
 
7
 
2-705, 2-711


 
 
 
 
8
 
3-2, 3-4—3-7, 3-9, 3-15, 3-17


 
 
 
 
9
 
3-41


 
 
 
 
10
 
3-63


 
 
 
 
11
 
3-90


 
 
 
 
14
 
3-183—3-185


 
 
 
 
15
 
3-322—3-324


 
 
 
 
16
 
3-384


 
 
 
 
17
 
3-412, 3-416


 
 
 
 
18
 
3-454


 
 
 
 
19
 
3-562, 3-564


 
 
 
 
20
 
3-572, 3-574


 
 
 
 
21
 
3-601


 
 
 
 
22
 
3-612, 3-616


 
 
 
 
24
 
5-73


 
 
 
 
25
 
5-108


 
 
 
 
26
 
5-160


 
 
 
 
27
 
5-202


 
 
 
 
28
 
5-244, 5-245


 
 
 
 
29
 
5-260


 
 
 
 
30
 
6-5


 
 
 
 
31
 
6-22—6-25


 
 
 
 
32
 
7-121


 
 
 
 
33
 
7-175


 
 
 
 
34
 
8-45, 8-48, 8-55


 
 
 
 
35
 
8-104


 
 
 
 
38
 
8-341


 
 
 
 
39
 
8-408


 
 
 
 
40
 
8-423


 
 
 
 
41
 
9-5


 
 
 
 
42
 
9-160


 
 
 
 
43
 
9-191


 
 
 
 
44
 
10-9, 10-33


 
 
 
 
45
 
10-56


 
 
 
 
46
 
10-76, 10-85, 10-8610-89, 10-90


 
 
 
 
47
 
10-133, 10-135—10-137


 
 
 
 
48
 
10-152


 
 
 
 
49
 
11-8, 11-10


 
 
 
 
50
 
11-36


 
 
 
 
51
 
11-63


 
 
 
 
52
 
11-125, 11-126, 11-128


 
 
 
 
53
 
13-1


2009-17
 
6-22-2009
 
2
 
6-5


 
 
 
 
3, 4
 
6-79


 
 
 
 
7
 
6-94


2009-18
 
7-27-2009
 
2
 
2-26


2009-19
 
7-27-2009
 
1
 
2-145


2009-20
 
8-10-2009
 
1
 
4-89—4-92


 
 
 
 
2
 
4-107


2009-21
 
9-28-2009
 
2
 
5-1


2009-22
 
10-26-2009
 
1
 
7-18


2009-23
 
10-26-2009
 
1
 
3-88


 
 
 
 
2
 
13-1


2009-24
 
11-9-2009
 
2
 
2-26


 
 
 
 
3
 
2-800


2009-25
 
11-23-2009
 
2
 
1-4


2009-26
 
11-23-2009
 
2
 
2-95


2009-27
 
11-23-2009
 
2
 
3-2


 
 
 
 
3
 
3-4


 
 
 
 
4
 
3-5


 
 
 
 
5
 
3-6


 
 
 
 
6
 
3-7


 
 
 
 
7
 
3-9


 
 
 
 
8
 
3-11


 
 
 
 
9
 
3-13, 3-18


 
 
 
 
10
 
3-17


 
 
 
 
11
 
3-41


 
 
 
 
12
 
3-63


 
 
 
 
13
 
13-1


2009-28
 
11-23-2009
 
2
 
8-45


 
 
 
 
3
 
8-168


2009-29
 
11-23-2009
 
2
 
5-1


 
 
 
 
3
 
5-2


 
 
 
 
4
 
6-41


2010-01
 
1-11-2010
 
2
 
8-32


 
 
 
 
3
 
13-1


2010-02
 
2-8-2010
 
2
 
2-711


2010-03
 
2-18-2010
 
2
 
7-24


2010-04
 
2-22-2010
 
3
 
12-24


2010-09
 
6-28-2010
 
2, 3
 
10-33


2010-11
 
7-12-2010
 
2
 
9-2


2010-12
 
7-12-2010
 
2
 
5-271


2010-17
 
8-23-2010
 
2—7
 
5-43


2010-18
 
8-23-2010
 
2
 
2-85


 
 
 
 
3
 
2-86


2010-19
 
9-27-2010
 
2
 
13-1


2010-24
 
11-22-2010
 
2
 
2-86


2010-26
 
12-14-2010
 
2
 
5-260


2010-27
 
12-14-2010
 
2
 
6-79


2010-30
 
12-27-2010
 
2
 
8-171


2011-09
 
5-9-2011
 
2
 
2-85


 
 
 
 
3
 
2-86


2011-10
 
6-27-2011
 
2, 3
 
10-33


2011-13
 
9-12-2011
 
2
 
13-1


2011-14
 
9-12-2011
 
2
 
6-81


2011-15
 
9-12-2011
 
2
 
6-105, 6-106, 6-108, 6-110—6-115, 6-117, 6-118


2011-16
 
10-17-2011
 
2
 
5-43


2012-01
 
1-9-2012
 
2
 
6-21


 
 
 
 
3
 
6-23


2012-02
 
1-9-2012
 
2
 
3-690—3-703


 
 
 
 
3
 
13-1


2012-03
 
1-9-2012
 
3
 
2-26


2012-09
 
3-12-2012
 
1
 
6-105—6-118


2012-14
 
5-29-2012
 
1
 
9-55


2012-15
 
6-18-2012
 
1
 
2-226—2-230


 
 
 
 
3
 
2-136


 
 
 
 
4
 
2-136, 2-140, 2-141, 2-143—2-145


 
 
 
 
5
 
2-143


 
 
 
 
6
 
2-226


 
 
 
 
7
 
2-230


 
 
 
 
8
 
2-227


2012-16
 
6-11-2012
 
1
 
3-99


 
 
 
 
2
 
3-107


 
 
 
 
3
 
7-46


 
 
 
 
4
 
9-118


2012-17
 
6-25-2012
 
1—6
 
10-33


2012-19
 
7-23-2012
 
1
 
6-105


 
 
 
 
2
 
6-110


 
 
 
 
3
 
6-111


 
 
 
 
4
 
6-113


2012-20
 
8-13-2012
 
1
 
8-400—8-409, 8-411—8-416


2012-21
 
8-13-2012
 
1, 2
 
13-1


2012-22
 
8-13-2012
 
1
 
3-89


 
 
 
 
2
 
3-101


2012-24
 
9-24-2012
 
1
 
1-7


 
 
 
 
2
 
2-7


 
 
 
 
3
 
2-41


 
 
 
 
4
 
2-282


 
 
 
 
5
 
2-283


 
 
 
 
6
 
2-284


 
 
 
 
7
 
2-285


 
 
 
 
8
 
2-286


 
 
 
 
9
 
2-287


 
 
 
 
11
 
2-530


 
 
 
 
12
 
2-621


 
 
 
 
13
 
2-636


 
 
 
 
14
 
2-700


 
 
 
 
15
 
2-711


 
 
 
 
16
 
3-41


 
 
 
 
17
 
3-42


 
 
 
 
18
 
3-64


 
 
 
 
19
 
3-93


 
 
 
 
20
 
3-94


 
 
 
 
21
 
3-95


 
 
 
 
22
 
3-98


 
 
 
 
23
 
3-99


 
 
 
 
24
 
3-100


 
 
 
 
25
 
3-101


 
 
 
 
26
 
3-102


 
 
 
 
27
 
8-167


 
 
 
 
28
 
12-6—12-14


2012-25
 
9-24-2012
 
1
 
3-121—3-131, 3-151—3-160


 
 
 
 
2
 
8-105


 
 
 
 
3
 
11-53


 
 
 
 
4
 
13-1


2012-26
 
9-24-2012
 
1
 
5-61—5-63


2013-01
 
2-11-2013
 
2
 
3-653


 
 
 
 
1
 
8-31


 
 
 
 
3
 
13-1


2013-03
 
3-25-2013
 
1
 
8-508


 
 
 
 
2
 
8-509


2013-04
 
3-25-2013
 
1
 
2-457


 
 
 
 
2
 
8-42


 
 
 
 
3
 
8-166


 
 
 
 
4
 
8-169


 
 
 
 
6
 
12-87


 
 
 
 
7
 
12-88


2013-05
 
4-22-2013
 
1
 
6-1


2013-08
 
6-10-2013
 
1
 
3-88


 
 
 
 
2
 
3-89


 
 
 
 
3
 
13-1


2013-09
 
6-10-2013
 
1
 
8-402


2013-12
 
7-8-2013
 
1
 
13-1


2013-13
 
7-22-2013
 
1
 
3-684—3-689


2013-14
 
9-9-2013
 
1
 
3-14, 3-15


2013-15
 
10-14-2013
 
1
 
2-526—2-530, 2-541


2013-16
 
10-14-2013
 
1
 
2-675—2-681


2013-18
 
11-11-2013
 
1
 
3-651—3-669


2014-01
 
1-27-2014
 
1
 
12-1


 
 
 
 
2
 
12-15


 
 
 
 
3
 
12-149


 
 
 
 
4
 
12-211—12-216


2014-07
 
5-12-2014
 
1
 
3-88


 
 
 
 
2
 
3-89


2014-09
 
8-11-2014
 
1
 
5-260


 
 
 
 
2
 
13-1


2014-10
 
8-11-2014
 
1
 
5-260


 
 
 
 
2
 
13-1


2014-11
 
8-25-2014
 
1
 
3-66


 
 
 
 
2
 
3-99


2014-13
 
10-13-2014
 
1
 
3-83


2014-14
 
10-14-2014
 
1
 
3-88


2014-15
 
10-13-2014
 
1
 
3-296—3-318


2014-16
 
10-13-2014
 
1
 
10-34


2014-17
 
10-13-2014
 
1
 
12-7


 
 
 
 
2
 
12-8


 
 
 
 
3
 
12-9


 
 
 
 
4
 
12-10


 
 
 
 
5
 
12-14


2014-18
 
10-13-2014
 
1
 
8-306—8-321


2014-19
 
10-13-2014
 
1
 
13-1


2014-20
 
10-13-2014
 
1
 
8-32


 
 
 
 
2
 
10-52


 
 
 
 
3
 
10-76


 
 
 
 
4
 
10-112


 
 
 
 
5
 
13-1


2015-01
 
1-26-2015
 
1
 
6-120—6-124


2015-04
 
3-9-2015
 
1
 
7-314


2015-07
 
3-31-2015
 
1
 
12-90


 
 
 
 
2
 
12-212


 
 
 
 
3
 
12-215


2015-12
 
6-22-2015
 
1—6
 
10-33


2015-13
 
7-8-2015
 
1
 
2-85


 
 
 
 
2
 
2-86


2015-15
 
9-28-2015
 
1
 
2-678


 
 
 
 
2
 
2-679


 
 
 
 
3
 
2-680


 
 
 
 
4
 
2-681


2015-16
 
9-28-2015
 
1
 
7-54


 
 
 
 
2
 
8-98


2016-15
 
4-25-2016
 
1
 
12-1—12-15, 12-21—12-24, 12-36—12-44.9, 12-46—12-48, 12-86—12-90,
12-106—12-120, 12-131—12-134, 12-146—12-154, 12-166—12-175,
12-181—12-183, 12-201—12-203, 12-211—12-216


2016-16
 
5-9-2016
 
1
 
3-88


2016-17
 
5-9-2016
 
1
 
7-218


2016-20
 
5-23-2016
 
2
 
8-31—8-37, 8-39—8-42, 8-44—8-65, 8-67—8-71, 8-73, 8-76, 8-82, 8-85,
8-87, 8-90, 8-95, 8-98, 8-103—8-105, 8-107, 8-109, 8-121—8-126,
8-141—8-148, 8-166—8-172, 8-211—8-213, 8-215, 8-221, 8-226, 8-227,
8-246—8-252, 8-266—8-272, 8-286—8-290, 8-292, 8-306—8-321,
8-341—8-357, 8-400, 8-401, 8-403—8-409, 8-411—8-416, 8-421—8-425,
8-501—8-516, 8-521, 8-522, 8-524, 8-529—8-532, 8-534—8-537, 8-539,
8-581—8-589


 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE



   This table shows the location within this code, either in the text or
notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters.



 

Illinois Compiled Statutes Chapter
 
Section
 
Section This Code




5
 
50/1
 
5-1


 
 
70/1 et seq.
 
1-4


 
 
 
 
1-5


 
 
70/1.31
 
1-11


 
 
100/10-40
 
3-575


 
 
120/1 et seq.
 
2-94


 
 
315/3
 
2-750


 
 
465/3b
 
2-2


10
 
5/1-1 et seq.
 
2-3


 
 
 
 
2-56


 
 
5/1-3
 
2-750


 
 
5/2A-1 et seq.
 
2-3


 
 
5/9-1.4
 
2-750


 
 
5/9-3
 
2-750


 
 
5/11-1 et seq.
 
2-4


20
 
2305/2 et seq.
 
Ch. 5, Art. II


 
 
2630/3.2
 
3-481


 
 
2905/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 4, Art. IV


 
 
3105/1 (Art.I)
 
8-48


 
 
3105/1 et seq.
 
4-94


 
 
3110/1.1 et seq.
 
8-48


 
 
3305/4(b)
 
2-501


 
 
3305/4(d)
 
2-499


 
 
3305/7
 
2-501


 
 
3305/8
 
2-499


 
 
3305/10
 
2-496(a)


 
 
3305/10(j)
 
2-504


 
 
3305/20
 
2-505


30
 
20/1
 
Ch. 2, Art. VI


 
 
235/6
 
2-184


 
 
555/1 et seq.
 
2-38


35
 
 
 
Ch. 2, Art. XVI


 
 
105/1 et seq.
 
3-2


 
 
120/1 et seq.
 
3-2


 
 
145/2
 
2-457


 
 
205/19.7
 
3-480


 
 
510/1 et seq.
 
3-125


 
 
635/1 et seq.
 
11-161


40
 
Art. 3
 
2-656(b)


 
 
5/3-101 et seq.
 
Ch. 9


 
 
5/3-101–5/3-149
 
9-9


 
 
5/3-128 et seq.
 
Ch. 2, Art. XVII, Div. 9


 
 
5/3-130
 
2-655


 
 
5/4-101 et seq.
 
Ch. 4, Art. II, Div. 2


 
 
 
 
4-46


 
 
5/4-101–5/4-142
 
4-46


 
 
5/4-121
 
4-48


 
 
5/7-132
 
2-6


50
 
45/1 et seq.
 
3-567


 
 
105/3 et seq.
 
2-84


 
 
205/1 et seq.
 
2-89


 
 
220/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 4


 
 
 
 
4-88


 
 
 
 
Ch. 5, Art. III, Div, 7


 
 
705/1
 
9-55


 
 
705/1 et seq.
 
9-55


 
 
705/2
 
9-55


 
 
740/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 4


 
 
 
 
4-31


 
 
745/1 et seq.
 
4-68


 
 
750/1
 
Ch. 11, Art. IV


 
 
750/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 2, Art. XVII, Div. 10


55
 
5/3-3013
 
3-250


 
 
 
 
3-479


 
 
5/3-3016
 
3-250


 
 
 
 
3-479


60
 
1/30-140
 
3-300


65
 
5/1-1-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 2


 
 
5/1-1-2
 
1-4


 
 
5/1-2-1
 
8-341


 
 
5/1-2-1 et seq.
 
1-7


 
 
5/1-2-1.1
 
12-44.4


 
 
5/1-2-3
 
1-1


 
 
5/1-2-4
 
2-138


 
 
5/1-2-5
 
2-138


 
 
5/1-2-6
 
1-2


 
 
5/1-2-7
 
1-7


 
 
5/1-2-9.1
 
2-705


 
 
5/1-2-11
 
2-705


 
 
5/1-2.2-1 et seq.
 
1-17


 
 
5/1-2.2-45
 
1-17


 
 
5/1-3-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 4


 
 
 
 
4-88


 
 
 
 
Ch. 8


 
 
5/1-3-2
 
8-341


 
 
5/2-3-8
 
Ch. 2


 
 
5/3.1-10-5
 
Ch. 2, Art. V


 
 
 
 
2-56


 
 
 
 
2-112


 
 
 
 
2-526


 
 
 
 
2-583(9)


 
 
5/3.1-10-25
 
2-29


 
 
 
 
2-56


 
 
5/3.1-10-35
 
2-35


 
 
5/3.1-10-50
 
2-77


 
 
 
 
2-115


 
 
5/3.1-15-5
 
2-112


 
 
5/3.1-15-5 et seq.
 
Ch. 2, Art. II


 
 
 
 
2-56


 
 
5/3.1-15-10
 
2-112


 
 
5/3.1-30-5
 
2-115


 
 
 
 
2-528


 
 
5/3.1-30-5 et seq.
 
Ch. 2, Art II


 
 
5/3.1-35-5
 
Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3


 
 
 
 
2-113


 
 
 
 
2-116


 
 
5/3.1-35-20
 
2-37


 
 
5/3.1-35-30
 
2-118


 
 
5/3.1-35-35
 
2-114


 
 
5/3.1-35-40
 
Ch. 2, Art. VI


 
 
 
 
2-181


 
 
5/3.1-35-45
 
2-181(b)


 
 
5/3.1-35-50
 
2-184


 
 
5/3.1-35-90
 
2-136


 
 
 
 
2-137


 
 
5/3.1-35-95
 
2-144


 
 
5/3.1-35-120 et seq.
 
2-227


 
 
5/3.1-35-125
 
2-228


 
 
5/3.1-35-135
 
2-227


 
 
5/3.1-40-40
 
2-83


 
 
5/3.1-40-45
 
2-117


 
 
5/3.1-40-50
 
2-117


 
 
5/3.1-45-5
 
Ch. 2


 
 
 
 
Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3


 
 
5/3.1-55-15
 
2-27


 
 
5/7-4-1
 
Ch. 5


 
 
5/7-4-4
 
5-243


 
 
5/8-2-9
 
2-140


 
 
5/8-2-9.1–8-2-9.10
 
2-191


 
 
5/8-9-2
 
2-38


 
 
5/8-11-1.1 et seq.
 
2-403, 2-421, 2-436


 
 
5/8-11-2–8-11-4
 
2-456


 
 
5/8-11-4
 
Ch. 6, Art. II


 
 
 
 
6-21


 
 
Art. 9, Ch. 24
 
2-637


 
 
5/9
 
Ch. 10


 
 
 
 
Ch. 11


 
 
5/9-2-7
 
Ch. 2, Art. XVII, Div. 8


 
 
5/9-3-4
 
Ch. 2, Art. XII


 
 
5/10-2.1-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 2, Art. XVII, Div. 5


 
 
5/10-2.1-4
 
9-2


 
 
5/10-2.1-5
 
Ch. 4, Art. III


 
 
5/10-2.1-6
 
2-583(3)


 
 
 
 
Ch. 4, Art. III


 
 
5/10-2.1-8
 
2-583(5)


 
 
 
 
Ch. 4, Art. III


 
 
5/10-2.1-9
 
2-583(1)


 
 
5/10-2.1-14
 
2-583(4)


 
 
5/10-2.1-15
 
2-583(5)


 
 
5/10-2.1-16
 
2-583(7)


 
 
5/10-2.1-17
 
2-583(8)


 
 
Art. 11, Div. 6 et seq.
 
Ch. 4


 
 
Art. 11, Div. 72 et seq.
 
Ch. 7, Art. VII


 
 
5/11-1-1
 
Ch. 7


 
 
 
 
7-103


 
 
5/11-1-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 9


 
 
5/11-1-3
 
2-401


 
 
5/11-1-8
 
7-27


 
 
5/11-5-1
 
7-46


 
 
5/11-5-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 7


 
 
5/11-5-2
 
7-45


 
 
 
 
7-94


 
 
5/11-5-3
 
7-45


 
 
5/11-5-6
 
7-98


 
 
 
 
7-103


 
 
5/11-7-1
 
2-402


 
 
5/11-7-3
 
2-402


 
 
5/11-8-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 8


 
 
5/11-10-1 et seq.
 
4-18


 
 
5/11-11-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 8


 
 
5/11-12-4
 
2-526


 
 
5/11-12-12
 
8-341


 
 
5/11-13-3
 
2-526


 
 
5/11-13-3
 
12-6


 
 
5/11-13-4
 
12-6


 
 
5/11-13-5
 
12-6


 
 
 
 
12-7


 
 
 
 
12-10


 
 
5/11-13-6
 
12-7


 
 
5/11-13-7
 
12-8


 
 
5/11-13-10
 
12-10


 
 
5/11-13-12
 
12-7


 
 
5/11-13-13
 
12-12


 
 
5/11-13-14
 
12-13


 
 
5/11-16
 
Ch. 5


 
 
5/11-16-1
 
Ch. 2, Art. XVI, Div. 7


 
 
5/11-17-13
 
11-58


 
 
5/11-19-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 3, Art. XII


 
 
 
 
Ch. 5, Art. VI


 
 
5/11-19-2
 
5-241


 
 
 
 
5-254


 
 
5/11-19.1-11
 
Ch. 5, Art. IV


 
 
5/11-20-1
 
Ch. 5, Art. III, Div. 3


 
 
5/11-20-2
 
Ch. 5, Art. III


 
 
5/11-20-3
 
5-77


 
 
5/11-20-5
 
Ch. 5, Art. II


 
 
 
 
Ch. 8, Art. II, Div. 3


 
 
5/11-20-6
 
Ch. 7, Art. III


 
 
5/11-20-7
 
Ch. 7, Art. III


 
 
 
 
7-175


 
 
5/11-20-9
 
Ch. 7, Art. II


 
 
 
 
7-103


 
 
5/11-20-11
 
7-315


 
 
5/11-20-12
 
7-315


 
 
5/11-20-13
 
Ch. 7, Art. III


 
 
 
 
7-175


 
 
 
 
7-176


 
 
5/11-30-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 8


 
 
 
 
Ch. 12


 
 
5/11-30-2
 
8-341


 
 
5/11-30-8
 
8-341


 
 
 
 
Ch. 10, Art. II


 
 
5/11-31-1 et seq.
 
1-17


 
 
 
 
Ch. 8, Art. II, Div. 6


 
 
 
 
Ch. 12


 
 
5/11-31-2
 
8-341


 
 
5/11-31.1-1
 
8-31


 
 
5/11-31.1-1 et seq.
 
2-713


 
 
5/11-31.1-2
 
2-703


 
 
5/11-37-1 et seq.
 
2-558


 
 
5/11-37-2
 
Ch. 2, Art. XVII, Div. 4


 
 
5/11-37-4
 
2-558


 
 
5/11-40-1
 
Ch. 7, Art. II


 
 
5/11-40-3
 
Ch. 6, Art. III


 
 
5/11-42-1
 
Ch. 3


 
 
5/11-42-1
 
Ch. 3, Art. V


 
 
5/11-42-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 3


 
 
5/11-42-2
 
3-124


 
 
5/11-42-3
 
Ch. 3, Art. IX


 
 
 
 
3-274


 
 
5/11-42-4
 
Ch. 3, Art. XI


 
 
5/11-42-5
 
Ch. 3, Art. V


 
 
 
 
Ch. 5, Art. III


 
 
5/11-42-6
 
Ch. 3, Art. XI


 
 
5/11-42-8
 
Ch. 3, Art. VI


 
 
 
 
Ch. 3, Art. VII


 
 
 
 
Ch. 3, Art. XIII


 
 
5/11-42-8a
 
Ch. 3, Art. XIII


 
 
5/11-42-8b
 
Ch. 3, Art. XIII


 
 
5/11-42-9
 
5-1


 
 
5/11-52
 
3-130


 
 
5/11-55-1
 
3-125


 
 
5/11-55-2
 
3-125


 
 
5/11-60-1
 
Ch. 3


 
 
5/11-60-2
 
Ch. 3


 
 
 
 
5-1


 
 
5/11-80-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 10


 
 
5/11-80-7
 
5-1


 
 
 
 
Ch. 10, Art. V


 
 
5/11-80-13
 
Ch. 10, Art. III


 
 
 
 
Ch. 10, Art. V


 
 
5/11-80-14 et seq.
 
Ch. 8, Art. III


 
 
5/11-84-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 10, Art. III


 
 
5/11-84-4
 
10-90


 
 
5/11-84-5
 
10-90


 
 
5/11-117 et seq.
 
Ch. 11


 
 
5/11-124 et seq.
 
Ch. 11


 
 
6/11-12-6
 
12-11


 
 
6/11-20-5
 
8-66


70
 
705/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 4


 
 
905/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 5


105
 
5/1-1 et seq.
 
3-406


205
 
510/0.01 et seq.
 
3-692


 
 
510/1 et seq.
 
3-273


 
 
 
 
3-698


210
 
50/1 et seq.
 
4-30


 
 
115/1
 
Ch. 3, Art. XIII


220
 
 
 
Ch. 11


 
 
5/21-201(v)
 
3-566


 
 
5/21-301(c)
 
3-567


 
 
5/21-401
 
3-566


 
 
 
 
3-567


 
 
521-401(b)(6)
 
3-567


 
 
5/21-801
 
3-567


 
 
5/21-801(b)
 
3-567


 
 
5/21-801(c)(1)(vi)
 
3-567


 
 
5/21-801(d)
 
3-567


 
 
5/70-501
 
3-568


 
 
5/70-501(r)(1)
 
3-568


 
 
5/70-501(s)
 
3-568


 
 
50/1 et seq.
 
3-566


 
 
 
 
11-175


 
 
65/4
 
3-566


 
 
 
 
11-164


225
 
10/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 3, Art. VIII


 
 
10/15
 
3-251


 
 
85/1
 
7-285


 
 
115/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 3, Art. XVII


 
 
 
 
Ch. 7, Art. II


 
 
320/36
 
Ch. 8, Art. II, Div. 3


 
 
325/1 et seq.
 
8-342


 
 
330/1 et seq.
 
8-342


 
 
440/1 et seq.
 
8-170


 
 
445/1 et seq.
 
7-298-407


 
 
446/1 et seq.
 
3-602


 
 
470/45
 
5-141


 
 
610.1.1 et seq.
 
11-92


230
 
5/3
 
2-474


 
 
15/0.01 et seq.
 
3-66


 
 
15/1
 
2-474


 
 
15/7
 
3-66


 
 
40/1 et seq.
 
3-107


235
 
5/1-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 3, Art. IV


 
 
 
 
3-684


 
 
5/1-3 et seq.
 
3-81


 
 
5/4-1
 
Ch. 3, Art. IV


 
 
5/4-2
 
3-104


 
 
5/4-2 et seq.
 
3-103


 
 
5/4-4
 
3-103


 
 
5/5-2
 
3-86


 
 
5/6-14
 
3-101


 
 
5/7-5
 
3-103


405
 
5/1-116
 
4-68


410
 
25/1 et seq.
 
8-46


 
 
40/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 7, Art. II


 
 
54/1 et seq.
 
5-43


 
 
85/1 et seq.
 
3-478


 
 
85/4
 
Ch. 3, Art. XV


 
 
535/11
 
5-20


 
 
535/12
 
5-20


 
 
535/14
 
5-20


 
 
620
 
5-62


 
 
620/1 et seq.
 
3-94


 
 
 
 
5-33


 
 
620/2.29
 
5-156


 
 
625
 
5-62


 
 
635/1 et seq.
 
5-191


 
 
 
 
5-197


 
 
 
 
5-199


 
 
 
 
5-243


 
 
635/3
 
5-191


 
 
650
 
5-62


 
 
650/1
 
5-133


 
 
650/1 et seq.
 
5-34


 
 
650/2
 
5-85


 
 
650/3
 
5-134


 
 
650/5
 
5-79


 
 
 
 
5-81


 
 
650/8
 
5-139


 
 
650/9
 
5-89


 
 
 
 
5-136


 
 
650/10
 
5-76


415
 
5/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 3, Art. XII


 
 
 
 
Ch. 4


 
 
 
 
Ch. 5


 
 
5/3 et seq.
 
5-241


 
 
 
 
5-254


 
 
5/3.14
 
4-103


 
 
5/8 et seq.
 
Ch. 5, Art. IV


 
 
5/9
 
5-222


 
 
5/9.4
 
Ch. 5, Art. IV


 
 
5/11 et seq.
 
5-243


 
 
5/12
 
5-244


 
 
5/20 et seq.
 
Ch. 5, Art. V


 
 
5/21.1
 
5-247


 
 
5/22.6
 
Ch. 5, Art. V


 
 
5/22.8
 
Ch. 5, Art. V


 
 
5122.17
 
Ch. 5, Art. V


 
 
95/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 3, Art. IX


 
 
95/2
 
3-271


 
 
105/1
 
7-22


 
 
105/7
 
Ch. 6, Art. III


425
 
25/9
 
3-122


 
 
 
 
3-127


 
 
30/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 4, Art. III, Div. 2


 
 
 
 
Ch. 4, Art. IV, Div. 2


 
 
30/2
 
4-116


 
 
30/24
 
Ch. 4, Art. IV, Div. 2


430
 
65/1.1
 
7-2


 
 
85/2-2
 
3-122


 
 
 
 
3-123


 
 
 
 
3-126


505
 
90/15
 
7-310


510
 
 
 
Ch. 7, Art. II


 
 
5/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 7, Art. II, Div. 2


 
 
5/2.11
 
7-116


 
 
5/8
 
7-103


 
 
5/8.1 et seq.
 
7-124


 
 
5/12
 
7-101


 
 
5/13
 
7-100


 
 
50/1 et seq.
 
7-93


 
 
70/1 et seq.
 
7-91


 
 
70/3.01
 
7-98


520
 
 
 
Ch. 7, Art. H


 
 
5/2.33a
 
7-102


605
 
5/1-101 et seq.
 
3-566


 
 
5/2-104
 
Ch. 10


 
 
5/7
 
Ch. 10


615
 
5/5 et seq.
 
8-342


 
 
 
 
8-347


 
 
5/18g
 
8-341


625
 
5/1 et seq.
 
6-6


 
 
5/1-100 et seq.
 
Ch. 6


 
 
 
 
6-1


 
 
 
 
6-105


 
 
 
 
7-3


 
 
5/1-100–5/20-402
 
6-1


 
 
5/1-117.7
 
6-101(b)(1)c


 
 
5/1-118
 
13-1


 
 
5/1-132
 
6-105


 
 
5/1-182
 
6-1


 
 
 
 
7-197


 
 
5/1-201
 
1-4


 
 
5/1-217
 
6-21(d)


 
 
 
 
10-28


 
 
5/2-121
 
Ch. 6, Art. II


 
 
 
 
Ch. 6, Art. III


 
 
 
 
6-21


 
 
5/3-100 et seq.
 
7-198


 
 
5/3-120
 
3-432


 
 
5/3-412(e)
 
Ch. 3, Art. XI


 
 
5/3-611
 
Ch. 3, Art. XI


 
 
5/4-100
 
6-41


 
 
5/4-201 et seq.
 
Ch. 6, Art. III


 
 
5/4-203
 
6-44-6-48


 
 
5/4-204
 
6-44-6-48


 
 
5/4-205
 
6-46


 
 
5/4-208
 
6-49


 
 
 
 
6-50


 
 
5/4-209
 
6-49


 
 
 
 
6-50


 
 
5/6-101
 
6-6


 
 
5/6-303
 
6-6


 
 
5/6-306.5
 
6-72


 
 
 
 
6-75


 
 
 
 
6-115


 
 
5/6-601
 
Ch. 6


 
 
5/7-601
 
6-6


 
 
5/7-602
 
6-6


 
 
5/11-204
 
6-6


 
 
5/11-207 et seq.
 
Ch. 6


 
 
5/11-208(a)(1)
 
6-2


 
 
5/11-208(a)(3)
 
7-23


 
 
5/11-306
 
6-105


 
 
5/11-306(c)
 
6-105


 
 
5/11-1301.3
 
6-122


 
 
5/11-1301.3(a)
 
6-79


705
 
205/1 et seq.
 
2-307


 
 
5/24-2
 
6-6


 
 
 
 
7-3


 
 
5/24-3.1
 
6-6


 
 
5/24-3.3
 
6-6


 
 
5/24-6
 
7-5


 
 
5/25-1
 
3-130, 3-684


 
 
 
 
6-6


 
 
5/26-1
 
Ch. 4, 3-684


 
 
 
 
6-6


 
 
 
 
7-45


 
 
5/26-1(a)(2)
 
7-19


 
 
5/28-1
 
3-684


 
 
5/28-7
 
7-25


 
 
5/31-8
 
Ch. 9


 
 
5/36-1 et seq.
 
6-6


 
 
5/37-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 7


 
 
 
 
7-25


 
 
345/1
 
Ch. 3, Art. IX


 
 
 
 
3-274


 
 
345/2
 
Ch. 3, Art. IX


 
 
375/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 3


 
 
 
 
7-259


 
 
505/1
 
7-213


 
 
530/1
 
Ch. 3, Art. V


 
 
 
 
7-43


 
 
550/4
 
6-6


 
 
550/5
 
6-6


 
 
550/5.1
 
6-6


 
 
550/5.2
 
6-6


 
 
550/8
 
6-6


 
 
 
 
7-44


 
 
570/401
 
6-6


 
 
570/401.1
 
6-6


 
 
570/402
 
6-6


 
 
575/258
 
7-93


 
 
600/1 et seq.
 
7-44


 
 
600/3.5
 
6-6


 
 
630/1
 
5-1


 
 
685/1 et seq.
 
7-44


 
 
690/1 et seq.
 
7-289


 
 
690/2
 
7-290


720
 
3/9-1 et seq.
 
3-684


 
 
5/1-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 7


 
 
 
 
7-1


 
 
 
 
8-407


 
 
5/5-4
 
Ch. 3


 
 
5/10-1 et seq.
 
3-684


 
 
5/11-6
 
6-6


 
 
5/11-9
 
3-129


 
 
 
 
3-684


 
 
 
 
7-31


 
 
5/11-14 et seq.
 
3-684


 
 
 
 
7-7


 
 
 
 
6-6


 
 
5/11-14.1
 
6-6


 
 
5/11-15
 
6-6


 
 
5/11-15.1
 
6-6


 
 
5/11-16
 
3-684


 
 
5/11-17
 
3-684


 
 
5/11-18
 
6-6


 
 
5/11-18.1
 
6-6


 
 
5/11-20
 
3-129, 3-684


 
 
 
 
7-10


 
 
5/11-20.1
 
3-684


 
 
5/11-21
 
3-684


 
 
 
 
7-12


 
 
5/12-1 et seq.
 
3-684


 
 
5/12-1
 
6-6


 
 
 
 
7-38


 
 
5/12-2
 
6-6


 
 
5/12-3
 
7-39


 
 
5/12-4
 
6-6


 
 
5/12-4.2
 
6-6


 
 
5/12-4.3
 
6-6


 
 
5/12-4.6
 
6-6


 
 
5/12-5.1
 
3-684


 
 
5/12-15 et seq.
 
3-684


 
 
5/15-6
 
3-275


 
 
5/16-1
 
3-275


 
 
 
 
7-40


 
 
5/16-2
 
7-41


 
 
5/16-5 et seq.
 
Ch. 3


 
 
5/16A-3
 
6-6


 
 
5/17-2
 
7-42


 
 
5/18-1
 
6-6


 
 
5/18-2
 
6-6


 
 
5/19-1
 
6-6


 
 
5/19-3
 
6-6


 
 
5/20-1
 
6-6


 
 
5/20-1.1
 
6-6


 
 
5/20-2 et seq.
 
3-684


 
 
5/20-2
 
6-6


 
 
5/21-1 et seq.
 
3-684


 
 
5/24-1 et seq.
 
3-684


 
 
5/24-1
 
6-6


 
 
 
 
7-3


 
 
 
 
7-5


 
 
5/24-1.1
 
7-3


 
 
5/31-1 et seq.
 
3-684


 
 
5/11-208.3
 
6-72


 
 
 
 
6-74


 
 
 
 
6-84


 
 
 
 
6-105


 
 
 
 
6-108


 
 
 
 
6-109


 
 
 
 
6-113


 
 
 
 
6-115


 
 
5/11-208.3(f)
 
6-75


 
 
5/11-208.6
 
6-105


 
 
 
 
6-109


 
 
 
 
6-110


 
 
5/11-301
 
8-290


 
 
5/11-306
 
6-105


 
 
5/11-311
 
10-17


 
 
5/11-501
 
6-6


 
 
5/11-503
 
6-6


 
 
5/11-504
 
6-6


 
 
5/11-1306
 
6-74


 
 
 
 
6-113


 
 
5/11-1424
 
7-198


 
 
5/12-603
 
6-94


 
 
5/12.603.1
 
6-94


 
 
5/12-707
 
7-198


 
 
5/12-807.1
 
7-199


 
 
5/12-808
 
7-200


 
 
5/13 et seq.
 
6-6


 
 
5/15-109.1
 
7-253


 
 
5/15-316
 
6-3


 
 
5/16-101
 
Ch. 6


 
 
5/16-104 et seq.
 
Ch. 6


 
 
5/20-204
 
6-1


 
 
550/1 et seq.
 
3-684


 
 
570/100 et seq.
 
3-684


 
 
570/401 et seq.
 
3-684


725
 
5/100-1 et seq.
 
12-66


 
 
5/107-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 9


 
 
5/114-9
 
9-187


 
 
150/1 et seq.
 
6-6


735
 
5/1-101 et seq.
 
2-705


 
 
 
 
12-44.4


 
 
5/2-201 et seq.
 
3-601


 
 
 
 
12-44.4


 
 
5/2-203
 
6-84


 
 
 
 
2-713


 
 
5/3-101 et seq.
 
6-81


 
 
 
 
6-82


 
 
 
 
12-12


 
 
5/11-103 et seq.
 
2-120


 
 
5/15-1101 et seq.
 
7-176


 
 
110/3-101 et seq.
 
12-8


740
 
 
 
7-46


 
 
105/1 et seq.
 
5-1


 
 
 
 
7-8


 
 
150/1
 
Ch. 8


745
 
10/1-101
 
2-40


 
 
10/2-302
 
2-40


765
 
160
 
8-521, 12-44


 
 
205/2
 
8-350


 
 
605
 
8-521, 12-44


 
 
605/1
 
Ch. 12, Art. II, Div. 3


 
 
605/30
 
12-44.6


 
 
 
 
8-534


 
 
1030/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 9


 
 
1030/3
 
9-172


770
 
60/9 et seq.
 
7-176


775
 
30/3
 
5-1


815
 
325/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 3, Art. IX


 
 
350/1 et seq.
 
Ch. 3


820
 
130/1 et seq.
 
10-33


 
 
205/7
 
3-124


 
 
205/8.1 et seq.
 
Ch. 3, Art. V


 
 
 
 
 




 


