6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 1/460
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Lisle, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 2019-4818, passed April 15, 2019.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE VILLAGE CODE
OF THE VILLAGE OF LISLE, ILLINOIS
BE IT ORDAINED by the president and board of trustees of the village of Lisle, DuPage County, Illinois, an Illinois municipal corporation, as follows:
Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the village code of the village of Lisle, Illinois, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., under
the direction of the governing body of the village, containing all ordinances of a general nature in effect at the time of such codification, shall be accepted in
all courts without question as the official code and law of the village as enacted by the president and board of trustees.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement
service, provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or
deleting provisions of the official village code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies. Hereafter,
each such new provision shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance and the insertion of the proper replacement pages in the copies of the
code, three (3) copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the village clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all
times that said office is regularly open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official village code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and
the fact that some of the provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said official village code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances,
franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of
the village code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the official village code.
Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the village to be
misrepresented thereby.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of the village code of the village of Lisle, Illinois.
Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. Ordinances of a general nature
adopted subsequent to preparation of the village code of Lisle,Illinois by Sterling Codifiers, Inc. up to and including the date of adoption of this ordinance
and not forwarded for inclusion in said code to Sterling Codifiers, Inc. shall remain in full force and effect. Three (3) copies attached to said code shall be
maintained in the office of the village clerk certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly open and
shall, as soon as may be practicable, be codified in the manner specified in section 2 hereof.
Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval in accordance with
law, as printed and published in pamphlet form by order of the president and board of trustees.
Section 7: The validity or invalidity of any section, paragraph, clause, provision, term, phrase, sentence, segment or word of this ordinance shall in no
way affect the validity or invalidity of any other section, clause, provision, term, phrase, sentence, segment or word of this ordinance. In the event any such
section, paragraph, clause, provision, term, sentence, segment or word is held to be unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of remaining portions of this ordinance or any part hereof. The corporate authorities
hereby declared that they would have passed each section, paragraph, clause, provision, term, sentence, segment or word hereof, irrespective of the fact
that any one or more of the sections, paragraphs, clauses, provisions, terms, sentences, segments or words, subsections or phrases are declared
unconstitutional, invalid, ineffective or void.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by ordinance enacted by the corporate authorities, this code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official village code.
This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the LISLE VILLAGE CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the board of trustees and shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 2/460
be kept up to date as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the village attorney, acting for said village board of trustees. Any
reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title
heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any legal
document. (1979 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this state
as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. (1979 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such amendments
or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers by the business office manager and the said ordinance material shall be prepared
for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual
copy of the village code. (1979 Code; amd. Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
1-1-4: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code the following rules shall be observed:
(A) Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud any person.
(B) Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section of this code prohibit the commission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person
shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth. (1979 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized
by the corporate authorities. The business office manager shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in
the office of the business office manager. Any person having in his custody an official copy of this code shall make every effort to maintain this code in an
up to date and efficient manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to
him through the office of the business office manager. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the village and shall be returned to the office of the business office manager when directed so to do by order of the corporate
authorities. (1979 Code; amd. Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), from which are
excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries, and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing
the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the village; and all special ordinances. (1979 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1979 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force atthe time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 3/460
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the
same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the village herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption
of this code. (1979 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this
code, or any part thereof. The corporate authorities hereby declare that they would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase hereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1979 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not
be applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be
repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the village has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such changes to the village's ordinances are not meant to amend the
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1979 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the board of trustees of the village of Lisle.
CODE: The village code of Lisle, and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: The county of DuPage, state of Illinois.
DOWNTOWN AREA: Shall include all property located generally within the following boundaries: Beginning at the southeast corner of Division Street and
Center Street and following a line going westerly along the south border of Division Streetand continuing along the south lot lines of the property located
on the south side of Lisle Place to Illinois Route 53; then south along the east side of Route 53 to the south lot line of the property located at 4930 Lincoln
Avenue (Route 53) extended to the east side of Route 53; then westerly along the south lot line of 4930 Lincoln Avenue (Route 53) to the DuPage River;
then north along the DuPage River to the Burlington Railroad right-of-way; then northeast along the southern edge of the Burlington Railroad right-of-way
to the southeast corner of the Burlington Railroad right-of-way and Route 53; then north along the east side of Route 53 to the northeast corner of Route
53 and Southport Avenue; then easterly along the north side of Southport Avenue to the western lot lines of the properties located on the west side of Main
Street with addresses of 4600, 4602, 4604 and 4606 Main Street; then north along the western lot lines of said properties to Lacey Avenue; then easterly
along the south side of Lacey Avenue to the eastern lot lines of property located on the east side of Main Street with addresses of 4601, 4603, 4605 and
4607 Main Street; then south along the eastern lot lines of said properties located on the east side of Main Street to the north side of Southport Avenue;
then westerly to the northeast corner of Southport Avenue and Lacey Avenue; then southeasterly on the east side of Lacey Avenue to the southern lot line
of the property located at 4622 Lacey Avenue as extended to the east side of Lacey Avenue; then west along the south lot line of property located at 4622
Lacey Avenue to the eastern lot line of property located at 979 Ogden Avenue; then south following approximately the east lot line of property located at
979 Ogden Avenue as extended and along the east boundary of the commuter parking lot to the south lot line of the Burlington Railroad right-of-way; then
southwesterly to the northeast corner of Center Avenue and Front Street; then south along the east side of Center Avenue to the southeast corner of
Center Avenue and Division Street.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
village of Lisle".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the village for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the village shall begin on May 1 and end on April 30 of each year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 4/460
ILLINOIS REVISED STATUTES/SMITH-HURD ANNOTATED STATUTES: As of January 1, 1993, any reference to either the "Illinois Revised Statutes" or
the "Smith-Hurd Annotated Statutes" within this code shall mean the "Illinois Compiled Statutes", and any reference to a particular provision of either the
"Illinois Revised Statutes" or the "Smith-Hurd Annotated Statutes" shall mean the corresponding provision of the "Illinois Compiled Statutes".
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist whichbring the act or omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
NEGLIGENT (NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE OR NEGLIGENTLY): Imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable consequences of the act or
omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the village
of Lisle".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which
any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
SMITH-HURD ANNOTATED STATUTES/ILLINOIS REVISED STATUTES: Seedefinition of Illinois Revised Statutes/Smith-Hurd Annotated Statutes.
STATE: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the state of Illinois.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
VILLAGE: The village of Lisle, DuPage County, state of Illinois.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The president of the village may be referred to as "mayor" or "president" of the village1.
WHOLESALER, WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or
things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the
omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: The terms "written" or "in writing" may include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the
written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such
person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. (Ord. 146, 2-5-1963; amd. 1979 Code; Ord. 93-2370, 3-15-1993; Ord. 2002-3434, 11-18-2002)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1979 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 5/460
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for any one offense, excepting any
specific section of this code wherein the maximum fine is limited to a different amount, and said person may be confined in the village or county jail for a
period of not more than six (6) months1. (Ord. 95-2690, 10-16-1995)
1-4-2: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any license previously issued to him by the village may be revoked by a court of
competent jurisdiction or by the board of trustees. (1979 Code)
1-4-3: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action is of a continuing
nature, is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under
which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (1979 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
To the fullest extent permitted by the constitution of the state of Illinois of 1970 and all other applicable laws, each of the following officials, employees,
agents or representatives of the village:
President;
Each member of the village board (i.e., each trustee);
Village manager and each assistant or acting village manager;
Village clerk and each deputy or acting village clerk or recording secretary;
Village collector;
Village engineer who acts in the capacity of a salaried employee in a position so created and designated by the corporate authorities;
Finance director;
Chief of police;
Building and zoning commissioner;
Superintendent of sewer and water department;
Superintendent of street department;
Purchasing/personnel manager;
Community service officer;
Plumbing inspector;
Each member of any board or commission of the village established pursuant to applicable law or by ordinance or resolution of the village; (Ord. 715,
10-18-1977; amd. Ord. 82-1027, 1-5-1982; Ord. 84-1252, 12-3-1984; Ord. 86-1502, 12-1-1986, eff. 1-6-1987)
shall be indemnified, defended and held harmless by the village from and against all liabilities, expenses ofinvestigation, judgments and amounts paid in
settlement which may be imposed upon, come due, or which are reasonably incurred or paid by such official, employee, agent or representative in
connection with or resulting from any claim made against him or her or any action, suit, proceeding or investigation in which he or she may be involved, by
reason of his or her being or having been such official, or such employee, or such agent or representative of the village, whether or not he or she
continues to be such official, employee, agent or representative at the time of such claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation provided, however, that
the foregoing indemnity shall not extend to any of the following:
(A) Any liability or cost with respect to any matter as to which such official or employee is finally adjudged to be guilty of bad faith, or actual malice, or wilful
and wanton misconduct in the performance of his duties as such official, employee, agent or representative;
(B) Any payment, expense or cost arising out of a settlement of any claim, action, suit or proceeding, unless: 1) such settlement shall be approved by the
court having jurisdiction over such claim, action, suit or proceeding, with express knowledge of the existence of the indemnification provided hereby, or
2) such settlement shall have been made upon the written opinion of independent legal counsel selected by the village corporate authorities, to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 6/460
effect that there is no reasonable ground for any finding of bad faith, or of actual malice, or wilful and wanton misconduct on the part of such official,
employee, agent or representative and that the anticipated cost of such settlement will not substantially exceed the estimated cost and expense of
defending such claim, action, suit or proceeding to a final conclusion;
(C) Any liability or judgment payable to the village itself;
(D) The cost of independent legal representation in any such action, suit or proceeding if the village offers or otherwise indicates its willingness to provide
an adequate legal defense with respect to such claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation.
The foregoing rights of indemnification shall be in addition to any other rights to which such official or employee may otherwise be entitled as a matter
of law. The indemnified persons aforesaid shall have the right to counsel of their choice in the event counsel retained by the village is unable or
declines representation for any reason or the circumstances necessitate the employment of independent counsel. (Ord. 715, 10-18-1977)
1-4-5: COLLECTION OF FINES, FEES AND OTHER SUMS:
All fines, fees, charges, interest or other sums due to thevillage shall be debts owed to the village and shall be collectible as such. If any such sums are not
paid within thirty (30) days after the date of any invoice sent by the village, the village may charge interest at a rate as established by the annual fee
ordinance on all past due amounts. (Ord. 96-2721, 1-2-1996)
Footnote 1: 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.
Chapter 5
PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1-5-1: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD:
(A) Regular Meetings:
1. The regular meetings of the corporate authorities of the village shall be held at the village hall on each and every first and third Monday of every
calendar month, except when the date for such meeting may fall on a public holiday, in which case the meeting shall be held on an alternate date as
determined by the corporate authorities. All regular meetings of the corporate authorities shall convene at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. unless otherwise
ordered by said corporate authorities. (Ord. 2011-4389, 6-6-2011)
2. Annual notice of the time and place of the regular meetings of the corporate authorities or any formally created advisory groups shall be posted in
the village hall and sent to any registered news media.
3. Notice of any permanent change in the meeting date of the corporate authorities, committees, subcommittees or advisory groups will be published in
a newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days before such change. Notice of such change will also be posted in the village hall and sent to
any registered news media.
(B) Reconvened Meetings:
1. Any reconvened meeting may be held for the purpose of completing the unfinished business of a regular meeting at such time or times as may be
determined by the corporate authorities.
2. No notice of a reconvened meeting will be given if the original meeting is open to the public and is to be reconvened within twenty four (24) hours; or
if an announcement of the time and place of the reconvened meeting is made at the original meeting and there is no change in the agenda. (Ord. 86-
1483, 10-6-1986)
3. If the reconvened meeting does not meet the above requirements then notice of the time and place and an agenda of such meeting will be posted at
the village hall and given to any registered news media at least forty eight (48) hours before the reconvened meeting.
(C) Rescheduled Meeting: Notice of the time and place and an agenda of any rescheduled meeting will be posted at the village hall and sent to any
registered news media at least forty eight (48) hours before the rescheduled meeting. (Ord. 2011-4389, 6-6-2011)
(D) Special And Emergency Meetings:
1. Special meetings of the corporate authorities may be called by the president or any three (3) members of the board of trustees by submitting to the
village clerk or village manager a written or oral request for such special meeting stating the time, place, nature and subject matter of such meeting.
Emergency meetings may also be called in the same manner. (Ord. 86-1483, 10-6-1986)
2. Notice of the time and place and an agenda of the special meeting shall be sent to the president and board of trustees, posted at the village hall and
furnished to any registered news media at least forty eight (48) hours before the special meeting. Notice of the time and place of an emergency
meeting will be given to the president and board of trustees, to any registered media and by posting such notice at the village hall as soon as
practicable, but in any event prior to the holding of such meeting. (Ord. 2011-4389, 6-6-2011)
3. The provisions hereof requiring notice to the president and board of trustees may be waived should all members of said board and the president be
present at such emergency or special meeting; provided however, that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the holding of a meeting by
unanimous consent of the president and board of trustees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 7/460
(E) Minutes Of Meetings:
1. Written minutes of all executive committee meetings shall be taken. Such minutes will include the date, time and place of such meeting; the
members of the public body recorded as either present or absent; and a general description of all matters proposed, discussed, or decided, and a
record of any votes taken.
2. The minutes of meetings open to the public shall be available for public inspection within seven (7) days of the approval of such minutes by the
Corporate Authorities.
3. The minutes of meetings closed to the public will be available only after the Corporate Authorities determine that it is no longer necessary to protect
the public interest or the privacy of the individual by keeping them confidential.
(F) Open Meetings: Meetings of the Corporate Authorities of every kind and nature shall be open to the public, except where specifically exempted by
State law1.
(G) Robert's Rules Of Order: "Robert's Rules of Order", latest edition, shall govern the deliberations and proceedings of the Corporate Authorities, but shall
in no way affect the validity or invalidity of actions taken at any meeting of the Corporate Authorities. (Ord. 86-1483, 10-6-1986)
(H) Smoking Prohibited: Henceforth, it shall be unlawful for any person to use or ignite any smoking materials such as, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars,
pipes and other smoking paraphernalia which give off by combustion, smoke of any kind or nature whatsoever in or about rooms and hallways
adjoining rooms wherein regular and special meetings or public hearings of the Corporate Authorities, Plan Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals
are being conducted. It shall be the duty of the Village Manager to cause to be printed and to post in conspicuous places, within and about rooms
wherein such meetings are normally conducted, adequate "No Smoking" signs indicating the existence of this regulation, the fact that smoking is
prohibited and warning as to the nature of the possible penalty for violation of this provision.
Any person found to have violated the provisions of this subsection shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each violation. (Ord.
89-1785, 1-3-1989)
(I) Public Participation: Public participation at Village meetings is encouraged. A period of time at each meeting of the Village Board shall be made
available for public comments. Public participation is subject to the following rules:
1. Comments related to a specific agenda item shall occur during discussion of the item rather than the time allotted for public comment, provided that
comment is allowed during the time of discussion of the item or in the course of a duly convened public hearing. If no public comment will be allowed
during the specific agenda item discussion, then individuals will be allowed to speak about the item during the time allotted for public comment.
2. For speakers desiring to use audio or visual equipment in connection with a presentation, arrangements for such use must be made with the Village
Manager's Office in advance of the meeting.
3. In the interest of promoting the efficient conduct of public business, speakers should refrain from repeating their own testimony and comments, and
should refrain from repeating testimony and comments that have previously been provided to the Village Board by other individuals.
4. Time allotted to public comment may be used to present questions to the Village Board; however, responses to questions will be addressed after the
meeting has concluded.
5. A person shall be permitted to speak once upon being recognized by the Chairperson. The person shall stand (if possible) at the designated podium,
and state his/her name prior to making comments.
6. Individual comments are limited to five (5) minutes per person, unless the Mayor reduces the allotted time if numerous people wish to speak. If
individuals are attending the meeting as a group, a spokesperson for the group should be appointed to speak to avoid repetitive comments. Speaker
time limits may be enforced by the Mayor.
7. Each speaker must maintain civility and cannot disrupt an orderly meeting by using obscene or threatening language or gestures. Statements made
to the Village Board shall be directed to entire Village Board and not any one member of the Village Board. Any person who poses a threat to public
safety will be removed from the meeting.
8. Any person shall be permitted to address the Village Board at any time via mail to Village Board, c/o Village Manager's Office, 925 Burlington
Avenue, Lisle, IL 60532-1838, or by email correspondence to the Village Manager's Office. (Ord. 2018-4796, 10-15-2018)
1-5-2: PRESIDENT AS MAYOR:
The President of the Village may be referred to as Mayor of the Village, and whenever reference in this Code or in any ordinance of the Village refers to
the Mayor, such term shall also mean the President of the Village. (Ord. 158, 12-17-1963)
1-5-3: COMPENSATION OF PRESIDENT AND TRUSTEES:
(A) President: The compensation of the President of the Village is hereby fixed in the amount of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per month, which does not
include the additional sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month which shall be paid the President for his services rendered as Liquor
Commissioner.
(B) Trustees: The compensation of each member of the Board of Trustees of the Village shall be a fixed amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
month.
Increases or decreases in salaries shall not take effect during the present term of the President and each member of the Board of Trustees, but shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 8/460
take effect from and after the expiration of the respective terms of the President and present members of the Board of Trustees, and shall apply only to
their successors in office, individually, following the passage and approval hereof. (Ord. 95-2712, 12-4-1995)
1-5-4: TIME OF TAKING OFFICE:
The terms of elected Village officers shall commence at the first regular or special meeting of the Corporate Authorities during the month of May following
the proclamation of the results of the regular Municipal election at which the officers were elected and the Village's receipt of said proclamation from the
County. Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all Municipal officers, whether elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe the oath or
affirmation required by the Illinois Constitution. The subscribed oath or affirmation shall be filed in the Office of the Municipal Clerk. Municipal officers shall
hold office until their successors are elected and have qualified. (Ord. 2007-4106, 4-2-2007)
Chapter 6
VILLAGE MANAGER
1-6-1: OFFICE CREATED, APPOINTMENT:
(A) Office Created: There is hereby created the office of village manager, an executive office of the village. Said village manager shall be appointed by the
president, by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, and said employment shall be subject to the terms and conditions of an
employment agreement entered into between said appointee and the corporate authorities, the terms of said agreement to take precedence over any
other provisions contained in this code to the contrary. The village manager shall be the direct representative of the corporate authorities in the
transaction of all village business and in all matters concerning the citizens of the village. (Ord. 577, 5-20-1975; amd. 1979 Code)
(B) Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the village manager shall take the oath of office required of the village officials as provided by
statute, and shall give a bond in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for the faithful performance of the duties of the office. (Ord. 92-2303,
8-17-1992)
1-6-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
(A) It shall be the duty and responsibility of the village manager to supervise and coordinate the work of all the departments of the village government and
to report directly to the president and board of trustees.
(B) As a representative of the corporate authorities of the village, the village manager shall have the power to direct or to stop any local improvement or
public work being undertaken by the village if direction is required or if the work is being carried out in an improper manner. The village manager is to
receive all complaints, suggestions, requests, applications, petitions and other correspondence or communications directed to the corporate authorities
and wherever possible to adjust matters which do not require direct action of the corporate authorities. The village manager is responsible for the
maintenance and upkeep of the village office complex and all village owned real estate.
(C) The village manager shall have the responsibility for the hiring and discharge of all village employees other than thoseunder the board of fire and
police commissioners or other tenure of office laws. (Ord. 577, 5-20-1975)
(D) As custodian of all funds of the village, the village manager shall have the following duties:
1. The village manager shall have custody of all village funds, which funds shall be deposited in such depository or depositories as are specified from
time to time by the board, and shall perform such other duties as may be required by statute or ordinance.
2. The village manager shall not recognize nor pay any claim except upon a warrant or cash order drawn upon the village manager, signed by the
president and countersigned by the village clerk, and stating the particular fund and the appropriation to which the warrant is chargeable and the
person to whom payable. No money shall be paid by the village manager other than upon such warrants so drawn except as otherwise provided by
ordinance.
All interest on village funds due from depositories or other sources shall be credited to the account of the village.
3. The village manager shall keep such books and accounts as may be required by the village board.
4. The village manager shall render monthly reports showing the state of the treasury at the termination of each month; and such other reports as may
be required by ordinance, statute or the village board. (Ord. 86-1502, 12-1-1986, eff. 1-7-1987)
(E) The village manager shall be responsible for the overall management of budget expenditures for the budget year, keeping expenditures within budget
as from time to time amended and as provided for in applicable state statutes. In addition, the village manager shall have the overall responsibility for
all matters involving budgetary issues including, but not limited to, the overseeing of the budget preparation, budget amendments, budget changes,
expenditures, revenues, etc. (Ord. 99-3118, 5-17-1999)
1-6-3: ABSENCE, REMOVAL OF VILLAGE MANAGER:
In the case of the continued absence or disability of the village manager, the president, by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, may
designate a qualified administrative officer of the village to perform the duties of the manager during such absence or disability.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 9/460
The village manager may, at any time, be removed from office by the president by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. (Ord. 577, 5-
20-1975)
1-6-4: ASSISTANTS:
The village manager may designate such number of qualified administrative officials of the village as assistants, to aid said manager in the performance of
his duties and responsibilities. Each such assistant shall have specific duties and responsibilities delegated to him by the village manager, upon approval
of the corporate authorities. (1979 Code)
Chapter 7
VILLAGE OFFICERS
1-7-1: VILLAGE CLERK AND DEPUTY CLERK:
(A) Village Clerk: The village clerk shall be compensated for attendance at the meetings of the president and board of trustees, both regular and special,
and other duties as required by statute. The base annual compensation of said clerk shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) payable bimonthly. (Ord.
89-1826, 4-3-1989)
(B) Deputy Clerk: The village clerk, when authorized by the corporate authorities, may appoint two (2) deputy clerks who need not be residents of the
village. The deputy clerk shall have the power and duty to execute all documents required by law to be executed by the village clerk, and affix the seal
of the clerk thereto whenever required. In signing any document, the deputy clerks shall sign the name of the village clerk followed by the word "By"
and the deputy clerk's own name and the words "Deputy Clerk". The powers and duties described in this subsection shall be exercised only in the
absence of the village clerk from the place where the village clerk's office is maintained, and only when either: 1) written direction has been given by
the village clerk to such deputy to exercise such power, or 2) the corporate authorities have determined by resolution that the village clerk is temporarily
or permanently incapacitated to perform such functions. When duly authorized as provided in this subsection, the signature affixed by any such deputy
clerk in the manner provided in this subsection on any document, including, without limitation, to contracts, bonds, or other obligations of the village,
such documents shall have the same effect as if the documents so executed had been signed by the village clerk in person. In the event of a planned
absence by the deputy clerk, for any time not to exceed a total of six (6) months within any twelve (12) month period, or an unplanned absence where
the deputy clerk is expected to return within six (6) months, the village clerk is authorized to appoint an interim deputy clerk. The appointment of the
interim deputy clerk expires on the predetermined date upon which the deputy clerk will return to work from the intended absence or upon the date of
the clerk's return to work from an unplanned absence. (Ord.2005-3971, 12-5-2005)
(C) Duties: Any duties of the village clerk which are referenced in this code, and are not mandated by Illinois statutes to be performed by the village clerk
shall be performed by a designee of the village manager. (Ord. 89-1826, 4-3-1989)
(D) Publication Of Ordinances: The village clerk is hereby authorized to publish all ordinances in book or pamphlet form, or such other form which is
permitted or required pursuant to applicable law. (Ord. 93-2441, 11-1-1993)
1-7-2: VILLAGE PROSECUTOR:
(A) Creation, Appointment: There is hereby created the office of village prosecutor. The village prosecutor, village attorney and other attorneys
representing the village shall be attorneys admitted by license to practice in the state of Illinois by the supreme court of Illinois. Said attorneys shall be
appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. (Ord. 240, 8-1-1967; amd. 1979 Code)
(B) Oath, Bond Of Office: The village prosecutor shall take the oath of office required by the village officials, as provided by statute, and shall be bonded in
the amount determined by the village board.
(C) Duties: The village prosecutor shall prosecute on behalf of the people of the village any and all suits or actions arising out of the violation of any quasicriminal
ordinance of the village, or for the violation of any ordinance providing for the payment of a fine. The village prosecutor shall keep a docket of
all matters handled by him on behalf of the village, in which docket he shall note all steps taken by him in each matter, and upon expiration of his term
of office, resignation or removal therefrom, he shall forthwith turn over to his successor in office or to the village clerk all such records.
(D) Reports: The village prosecutor shall make a report to the mayor and board of trustees during the year as required by said mayor and board of trustees
and on or before the first Monday in February of each year make a summary report in writing on the cases handled by him during the preceding year.
(Ord. 240, 8-1-1967)
(E) Compensation: The village prosecutor's, the village attorney's and other attorney fees shall be as the corporate authorities shall from time to time
establish by proper action. (1979 Code)
(F) Other Legal Counsel: In addition to any other attorneys authorized by this section, and without regard to the method of selection of such attorneys, the
board of trustees, byaction of a majority of the trustees, shall have the ability to engage the services of legislative counsel, who shall advise the board
of trustees regarding issues involving their legislative duties which may include, but are not limited to, the drafting of ordinances, contract documents,
opinions on the powers of the legislative branch, analysis of the validity of actions taken by the village, review of litigation issues and providing other
advice on matters within the purview of the legislative branch of municipal government. (Ord. 99-3158, 11-1-1999)
1-7-3: COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 10/460
(A) Creation; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of community service officer of the village, who shall be appointed by the village manager,
subject to the approval and consent of the mayor and board of trustees.
(B) Oath Of Office: The community service officer shall take the oath of office required of village officials, as provided by statute.
(C) Bond: The community service officer shall be bonded in the amount determined by the village board.
(D) Duties: The community service officer shall enforce the village regulatory ordinances, including, but not limited to, those involving parking, motor
vehicle licensing and control, animal control, junk, garbage and weed control, and building and zoning ordinances, as directed by the chief of police. He
shall perform investigations, issue citations, answer complaints, impound stray, vicious and biting animals, make arrangements for the care or
destruction of such animals; maintain records and formulate data and shall take all other reasonable and lawful action to effect compliance with said
village ordinances; and shall perform other related and necessary duties as directed by the chief of police.
(E) Reports: The community service officer shall make a monthly summary report in writing to the chief of police on the matters handled by him during
each preceding month.
(F) Control: The community service officer shall be an employee of the village and shall not be subject to control of the board of fire and police
commissioners of the village.
(G) Transportation: The community service officer shall be furnished with transportation by the village during working hours when and if such transportation
is available.
(H) Compensation: The community service officer shall receive a salary as established by the mayor and board of trustees. (Ord. 622, 3-2-1976; amd. Ord.
84-1252, 12-3-1984)
1-7-4: BUILDING AND ZONING COMMISSIONER:
(A) Creation, Appointment: There is hereby created the office of building and zoning commissioner of the village, who shall be appointed by the village
manager.
(B) Oath, Bond Of Office: The building and zoning commissioner shall take the oath of office required of the village officials as provided by statute, and
shall be bonded in the amount determined by the village board.
(C) Duties: The building and zoning commissioner shall enforce the village building code and zoning ordinance; receive applications for and issue building
permits and occupancy certificates; conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to determine compliance with the ordinances of the
village; issue complaints to be served on violators and shall perform such other duties as from time to time designated by the president and board of
trustees.
(D) Reports: The building and zoning commissioner shall make a report to the president and board of trustees and/or village manager during the year as
required by said president and board, and on or before the first Monday in February of each year, he shall make a summary report in writing on the
matters handled by him during the preceding year.
(E) Compensation: The salary of the building and zoning commissioner shall be as established from time to time by the mayor and board of trustees. (Ord.
84-1203, 5-7-1984; amd. Ord. 84-1252, 12-3-1984)
1-7-5: PLUMBING INSPECTOR:
There is hereby established the position of plumbing inspector for the village, who shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the board of
trustees, and who shall perform the duties and functions as set forth by the job title classification description policy, as adopted from time to time by the
corporate authorities1. (Ord. 412, 3-7-1972)
1-7-6: SUPERINTENDENT OF SEWER AND WATER DEPARTMENT:
(A) Office Created: There is hereby created the position of superintendent of sewer and water department, which position shall be held by the assistant
building inspector. (Ord. 327, 11-4-1969; amd. Ord. 1252, 12-3-1984)
(B) Duties: The duties of said superintendent shall be as follows:
1. To investigate all complaints regarding sanitary sewer service;
2. To set up a regular maintenance program consisting of inspection of all manholes within the system at least twice annually;
3. To arrange for temporary and/or emergency repairs using authorized contractors at stated rates. Any repairs in excess of a probable expenditure
amount, as established by the village, must be reported to the chairman of the sewer committee prior to approval of said repairs to be made;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 11/460
4. To inspect all sanitary and storm sewers prior to backfill in order to ensure proper pitch and that proper materials are being used;
5. To spot check the village periodically to determine if proper rates are being collected;
6. To file a monthly report with the chairman of the sewer committee; and
7. Any other duties as from time to time become apparent and require attention. (Ord. 327, 11-4-1969)
(C) Compensation: The compensation of the superintendent shall be as set forth by action of the corporate authorities as from time to time taken. (1979
Code)
1-7-7: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
(A) Creation, Appointment: There is hereby created the office of building inspector, who shall be appointed by the village manager.
(B) Duties: The building inspector shall be authorized to enforce all village regulatory ordinances, including, but not limited to, those involving parking,
motor vehicle licensing and control, animal control, junk, garbage and weed control and building and zoning ordinances. In connection therewith, the
building inspector shall be authorized to perform investigations, issue citations, answer complaints, and impound stray, vicious and biting animals,
make arrangements for the care or destruction of such animals, maintain records and formulate data and shall take all other reasonable and lawful
action to effect compliance with said village ordinances. Further, the building inspector shall conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of
land to determine compliance with the ordinances of the village, issue complaints to be served on violators and shall perform such other duties as from
time to time designated by the president and board of trustees.
(C) Compensation: The compensation of the building inspectorshall be as set forth by action of the corporate authorities, as from time to time taken. (Ord.
85-1308, 7-1-1985)
1-7-8: BOND REQUIRED:
The following shall be considered officials of the village and shall take the oath of office required of village officials and give a bond for the faithful
performance of the duties of the office, as provided by statute. The required bonds shall be in the following amounts:
Village president $ 10,000.00
Village manager 1,000,000.00
Village clerk 10,000.00
Deputy village clerk 5,000.00
Finance director 100,000.00
Village prosecutor 5,000.00
Building and zoning commissioner 50,000.00
Planning commissioner 5,000.00
Zoning board of appeals member 5,000.00
Chief of police 50,000.00
Board of fire and police commissioner 50,000.00
Police pension board 100,000.00
Community service officer 5,000.00
Superintendent of sewer and water department 5,000.00
Village engineer 5,000.00
Plumbing inspector 5,000.00
Building inspector 5,000.00
Budget officer 50,000.00
(Ord. 92-2303, 8-17-1992)
Chapter 8
VILLAGE BUDGET PROCEDURES
1-8-1: BUDGET PROCEDURE ADOPTED:
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.1 through 5/8-2-9.10 is hereby adopted as the budgetary procedure for the village. (Ord. 79-837, 2-27-1979)
1-8-2: MUNICIPAL BUDGET OFFICER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 12/460
(A) Appointment: There is hereby established the office of budget officer of the village. The budget officer shall be designated by the mayor, with the
approval of the corporate authorities.
The budget officer shall take oath and shall, before entering upon the duties of the office of budget officer, execute a bond with the security of a penal
sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). Said bond shall be in a form and from a surety acceptable to the village attorney. (Ord. 99-3117, 5-17-1999)
(B) Powers And Duties: The budget officer shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Permit and encourage the use of efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management procedures;
2. Compile an annual budget in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.3, and any amendments thereto;
3. Examine all books and records of all municipal departments, commissions and boards which relate to monies received by the village, its
departments, commissions and boards and paid out by the village, its departments, commissions and boards, debts and accounts receivable,
amounts owed by or to the village and its departments, commissions and boards;
4. Obtain such additional information from the village, its departments, commissions and boards as may be useful to the budget officer for purposes of
compiling a municipal budget, such information to be furnished by the village, its departments, commissions and boards in the form required by the
budget officer. Any department, commission or board whichrefuses to make such information available as is requested of it by the budget officer shall
not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget for the village until such department, commission or board shall comply in full
with the request of the budget officer;
5. Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no expenditures are made by the village, its departments, commissions and boards
except those as authorized by the village budget; (Ord. 336, 3-17-1970)
6. Revise the annual budget, including the power to delete, add to, change or create subclasses within object classes budgeted previously and to
transfer sums from one line item to another, so long as the total fund expenses for that fund do not change. (Ord. 86-1442, 7-21-1986)
1-8-3: PREPARATION OF BUDGET:
The budget officer shall compile a budget, such budget to contain estimates of revenues available to the village for the fiscal year for which the budget is
drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the village and all of its departments, commissions and boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure
recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal management practices. The budget shall contain actual or
estimated revenues and expenditures for the two (2) years immediately preceding the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared. Each budget shall show
the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure shall be made. (Ord. 336, 3-17-1970)
1-8-4: ANNUAL BUDGET:
During the last quarter of each fiscal year, as required by statute1, the president and board of trustees shall enact a budget in which shall be itemized all
anticipated expenditures to be met during the coming year other than those payable from bond issues and all anticipated revenues to be received or
accrued during the coming year.
Passage of the annual budget by the president and board of trustees as herein provided shall be deemed passage of the annual appropriation ordinance
as required by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9. (Ord. 336, 3-17-1970)
Chapter 8A
VILLAGE FINANCES
1-8A-1: VILLAGE FUNDS:
All village funds are to be placed in banks and savings and loan institutions, U.S. governmental securities or other institutions as from time to time set forth
by ordinance adopted by the mayor and board of trustees, and may be invested pursuant to the provisions of state law.
All warrants drawn on the municipal treasury shall be signed by the president and countersigned by the village clerk, said warrants stating the particular
fund and the appropriation to which the warrant is chargeable and the person to whom same is payable. (Ord. 39, 4-15-1958; amd. 1979 Code)
1-8A-2: RETURNED CHECKS SERVICE CHARGE:
Any person who pays or attempts to pay any bill, fine, charge or fee of the village by the submission of any check which is subsequently returned to the
village unpaid by reason of insufficient funds or by reason of a stop order on said check, shall be liable to the village for a service charge as established by
the annual fee ordinance for each and every check so returned. Said service charge shall be paid before the bill, fine, charge or fee for which said check
was returned, is considered paid. Provided further, that any person who pays or attempts to pay any bill, fine, charge or fee of the village by means of any
check which is subsequently returned unpaid to the village by reason of a nonexistent or closed account shall be fined for each and every such offense a
sum as established by the annual fee ordinance. In the event one or more checks of any person are so returned, such person may be issued a written
notice of the provisions of this section and no further payment shall be accepted from such person except in the form of cash, certified check, cashier's
check or money order drawn to the order of the village. (Ord. 2016-4678, 10-3-2016)
Chapter 9
PROCEDURE FOR PURCHASING AND LETTING PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 13/460
1-9-1: PURCHASING AND LETTING OF CONTRACTS:
Except as is otherwise provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-9-1 of the Illinois municipal code, any work or other public improvement which is not to
be paid for in whole or in part by any special assessment or special taxation shall be constructed either: a) by a contract let to the lowest responsible
bidder after advertising for bids in the manner set forth in the village authorized purchasing procedures, except that any such contract may be entered into
by the proper officers without advertising for bids if authorized by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all of the trustees then holding office or b) if authorized by a
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the trustees then holding office. The officer as designated by the board of trustees shall superintend and cause to be carried out
the construction of the work or other public improvement and shall employ exclusively for the performance of all manual labor thereon, laborers and
artisans whom the village shall pay by the day or hour; and all material of the value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and upward used in the
construction of the work or other public improvement shall be purchased by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner set forth in the
village authorized purchasing procedures. (Ord. 89-1993, 10-2-1989)
1-9-2: AWARD OF CONTRACTS:
Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-9-1 of the Illinois municipal code. In
determining "lowest responsible bidder", in addition to price, the board of trustees shall consider:
(A) The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required;
(B) Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
(C) The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder;
(D) The quality of performance of previous contracts orservices;
(E) The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service;
(F) The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;
(G) The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies, or contractual services to the particular use required;
(H) The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract;
(I) The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. (Ord. 84-1173, 1-3-1984)
1-9-3: PERFORMANCE BOND:
The board of trustees may require a performance bond before entering a contract in an amount they deem appropriate to ensure fulfillment of said
contract. (Ord. 84-1173, 1-3-1984)
Chapter 10
ELECTIONS
1-10-1: CONDUCT OF VILLAGE ELECTIONS:
All elections conducted within the village shall be conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Illinois municipal code1 and the Illinois
election code2 as are now or may hereafter be, from time to time, amended. (Ord. 81-992, 6-2-1981)
Chapter 11
ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND
1-11-1: VILLAGE PARTICIPATION:
The village does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois municipal retirement fund, effective January 1, 1972, and the village clerk is hereby directed to
promptly file a certified copy of these provisions with the board of trustees of said Illinois municipal retirement fund. (Ord. 403, 12-28-1971)
Chapter 12
ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 14/460
1-12-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The village desires to encourage the orderly development of land through the use of annexation agreements, and as a means of accomplishing this
objective, hereby establishes the following procedures for hearing and considering petitions for seeking such agreement in supplement to the applicable
statutory provisions in such cases made and provided, and this chapter shall be read in conjunction with and shall be deemed to promote the applicable
statutes pertaining to such proceedings1. (Ord. 674, 1-18-1977)
This chapter is enacted to facilitate the implementation and use of the provisions of state law regarding annexation agreements and applies with respect to
internal administration only, as the statutory sections shall control to the extent of any inconsistency with these code provisions. (1979 Code)
1-12-2: INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS:
Any one or more of the owners of record of land in any territory which may be annexed to the village may initiate annexation proceedings by filing with the
village clerk a proposed annexation agreement. (Ord. 78-775, 6-6-1978)
Contract purchasers who may wish to obtain annexation must join in with the record owner in a petition for annexation. (1979 Code)
1-12-3: PROCESSING OF PROPOSED AGREEMENT:
Within ten (10) days after the filing of the petition, the clerk shall transmit a copy of the proposed agreement to thevillage board. Within twenty (20) days
thereafter, the board of trustees shall determine whether the petition warrants further consideration. If it is determined to further consider the petition, the
board of trustees will thereupon designate a time and place for a public hearing on the proposed agreement and shall authorize publication of notice of
said hearing, as provided by law. At all times during the proceedings, a copy of the petition and proposed agreement shall be kept on file with the village
clerk for public inspection. (Ord. 78-775, 6-6-1978)
1-12-4: PUBLIC HEARING:
The corporate authorities shall fix a time for and hold a public hearing upon the proposed annexation agreement or amendment, and shall give notice of
the proposed agreement or amendment not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the day fixed for the hearing. The notice shall be
published at least once in one or more newspapers published in the village or, if no newspaper is published therein, then in one or more newspapers with
a general circulation within the village. The annexation agreement or amendment, if approved, shall be executed by the mayor and attested to by the clerk
of the village, only after such hearing and upon the adoption of a resolution or ordinance directing such execution. In the event that a proposed annexation
agreement provides for an amendment to any ordinance relating to PUDs, subdivision controls, zoning, special uses, the official village plan, building,
housing or related restrictions, then and in that event the public hearing shall be held as if the real property subject to the proposed annexation agreement
currently existed within the corporate boundaries of the village of Lisle. (Ord. 84-1225, 8-20-1984)
1-12-5: ACTION BY BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
Within thirty (30) days after the hearing, or within such additional time as may be designated by the corporate authorities, the corporate authorities shall act
to accept, reject or modify the proposed agreement. Provided, however, the failure of the corporate authorities to act within said thirty (30) day period shall
not be deemed approval or acceptance of said agreement. The execution of any such agreement shall be authorized by an ordinance or resolution passed
as may be required by law by a vote of not less than two-thirds (2/3) of the corporate authorities then holding office. (Ord. 85-1299, 5-20-1985)
1-12-6: AMENDMENTS:
A petition for an amendment to any existing annexation agreement shall be heard and considered in the same manner as and is provided for original
agreements. (Ord. 78-775,6-6-1978)
1-12-7: FEES:
Whereas it is recognized that certain publication and other costs and expenses will be incurred by the village in connection with the required proceedings,
as hereinbefore described, including legal expenses and, in some instances, expenses for the hiring of experts to advise the village; therefore, any
proposed annexation agreement or any amendment thereto shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the annual fee ordinance. Fifty percent
(50%) of the fee shall be refunded if no public hearing is held. Provided further, that fifty percent (50%) of the fee shall be nonrefundable. In addition, the
compensation for such experts as the village may retain and any legal expenses incurred in connection with the consideration of the proposed agreement,
negotiation of the agreement, and any and all reasonable sums paid by the village for professional advice or representation, in connection with such
annexation procedures, including, but not limited to, legal, engineering and other expert or professional advice relative to the proposed annexation or
annexation petition and agreement, shall be borne by and reimbursed to the village by the person or persons filing the proposed annexation agreement
and shall be paid immediately upon the village incurring any such costs, expense or fee at the rates which may, from time to time, be in effect in the village
and which rates are acknowledged to be reasonable by said person or persons through the filing of said agreement. The filing of the proposed annexation
agreement shall be deemed to constitute an agreement to pay such compensation and expenses as incurred2. (Ord. 78-775, 6-6-1978)
1-12-8: DEDICATION OF PUBLIC LANDS; PAYMENT OF FEES IN LIEU THEREOF:
The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof required by section 5-14-8 of this code shall also be required as a condition to the annexation
of any land to the village and provisions therefor shall be incorporated in any preannexation agreement governing such land. (Ord. 674, 1-18-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 15/460
1-12-9: ANNEXATION IN WOODRIDGE ESTATES:
(A) Effective June 1, 2004, or as soon thereafter as village water is available to properties in the unincorporated territory known as Woodridge Estates,
pursuant to 70 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3720/0.01, the owners of all properties in the territory shall be notified of his or her right to applyto the village
for connection pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-1-8; provided that receipt of village water shall not be conditioned on submission of a
petition for annexation.
(B) From and after June 1, 2004, or such other date on which village water is available to properties within the unincorporated territory known as
Woodridge Estates, pursuant to 70 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3720/0.01, any property within said territory which: 1) changes ownership, 2) is receiving
municipal water, and 3) is contiguous to the village, directly or through other property subject to annexation, may be annexed to the village by
ordinance of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 2004-3826, 4-19-2004)
Chapter 13
REAL ESTATE DISCLOSURES
1-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
AGENT: A person authorized to act for another person or corporation.
APPLICANT: One who applies for any benefits on behalf of himself or some other entity.
BENEFICIAL INTEREST: Any interest in a land trust.
BENEFICIARY: Any person, corporation, or other entity having a beneficial interest in a land trust.
CORPORATION: A body of persons authorized by law to act together as a single person, and, for the purpose of this chapter, includes any association,
joint stock company, syndicate or partnership.
LAND TRUST: An express agreement whereby the legal and equitable title to real estate is held by a trustee for the benefit of beneficiaries who have the
exclusive right to manage and control said real estate.
LESSEE: One who has an interest in real estate by virtue of a lease.
NOMINEE: One designated to act for another, with limited authority.
OPTION HOLDER: One having the right to purchase real estate upon compliance with conditions named in a contract.
STOCKHOLDER: One owning certificates of stock in a corporation or membership in an association, joint stock company, syndicate, or partnership. (Ord.
460, 4-3-1973; amd. Ord. 497, 2-5-1974)
1-13-2: APPLICATIONS; REQUIREMENTS:
Any application to the village board of trustees or any village boards and commissions for authorization, benefit, license, permit, variation, zoning
amendment, planned unit development orfor any annexation relating to real estate shall be signed by the owner, lessee, option holder, agent or nominee
of either.
(A) If the application is made by a person other than the fee owner, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner that the person signing the
application has authority to make the application; and the application shall disclose the full names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant
and owner.
(B) If the applicant or the owner is a corporation, the application shall disclose the names and addresses of the officers, directors, registered agent, and
those shareholders or members owning in excess of five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock or interest in the corporation.
(C) If the applicant is a trustee, the full name, address, telephone number, and the extent of the interest of each beneficiary must be disclosed.
(D) If the applicant is a beneficiary, nominee, or option holder, the application must disclose the name, address and telephone number of those persons or
entities for whom he is acting, and if it is a corporation, the provisions of subsection (B) of this section shall be complied with. (Ord. 460, 4-3-1973; amd.
Ord. 497, 2-5-1974)
(E) In all applications the applicant shall present proof of ownership or interest in the affected property (i.e., deed, title commitment, title insurance policy,
lease, contract). Applications being considered which have been initiated by the village shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. (Ord.
96-2812, 9-3-1996)
1-13-3: VIOLATIONS, PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 16/460
Any person making a false or incomplete statement in the application shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a penalty as set out under section 1-
4-1 of this title.
After a statement is determined to be falsified, missing or incorrect, a written notice of the omission or falsification shall be sent to the applicant; each day
that elapses until the date the required information is furnished or corrected shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 460, 4-3-1973; amd. Ord. 497, 2-5-
1974)
Chapter 14
RECOVERY OF PROFESSIONAL FEES
1-14-1: REIMBURSEMENT OF FEES:
In the event that it is necessary for the village to retain the services of a professional, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, planners,
architects, surveyors, traffic or drainage experts, or other consultants, in connection with any petitioner's request for the village to consider or otherwise
take action upon any zoning change, special use, planned unit development, variation from village code, subdivision or other improvement or development
upon real property, then the petitioner and the owner of the property shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of such professional fees and
reimbursement shall be made to the village within thirty (30) days of receipt of an invoice for same. In addition, any expenses incurred, including, but not
limited to, mailing and copying, as a result of any such request, application, or development application shall be reimbursed to the village in the same
manner. Further, any professional fees incurred as a direct or indirect result of a party requesting a professional opinion or otherwise requesting relief or
assistance from the village, whether or not related to real property, shall be reimbursed in accordance with this section if, in the discretion of the village, a
professional opinion is desired. (Ord. 89-1799, 2-6-1989)
Failure to reimburse the village in accordance with this subsection may, in the village's discretion, result in the refusal of any board, committee or other
governing body to consider or take action upon any further requests from a petitioner or owner who has failed to pay in full all amounts due under this
section. Further, the village may deny any application for a grading, building or other permit if such amounts have not been paid in full and the village may
elect to file a lien against any real property associated with such a petitioner's request. Interest in the amount of a percentage, as established by the
village, per month shall accrue on all sums outstanding for thirty (30) days or more.
When any professional services contemplated by this section are rendered by the village staff, including any staff engineers, or services performed by the
assistant village manager, then, the party making the request shall reimburse the village for its costs incurred by providing the professional services of the
village staff, at the rate as established by the annual fee ordinance.
The village manager or his designee, is hereby authorized toassign requests for professional services to village staff or to consultants as the village
manager deems appropriate. (Ord. 85-1366, 12-2-1985)
Chapter 15
VILLAGE PERSONNEL POLICIES
1-15-1: JOB TITLES, CLASSIFICATIONS AND DESCRIPTIONS:
Job titles, classification and description for certain village employees shall be as set forth in that certain document entitled "Job Title, Classifications And
Descriptions", dated on or about May 1 and updated annually, said document hereby made a part of this code by reference, and said document being on
file at all times in the village offices for public inspection. (Ord. 2007-4135, 8-20-2007)
1-15-2: SALARY AND HOURLY WAGE SCHEDULES:
Minimum and maximum salaries and hourly wages for certain village employees shall be as set forth in that certain document entitled "Departmental
Position Designation And Salary Structure", dated on or about May 1 and updated annually, said document hereby made a part of this code by reference,
and said document being on file at all times in the village offices for public inspection. (Ord. 2007-4135, 8-20-2007)
Chapter 16
PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
1-16-1: WAGE RATES FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS:
To the extent and as required by "an act regulating wages of laborers, mechanics and other workmen employed in any public works by the state, county,
city or any public body or any political subdivision or by any one under contract for public works", approved June 26, 1941, as amended1, the general
prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and the workmen engaged in the construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction
of the village is hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the DuPage County area, as determined by the
department of labor of the state as of June 2, 1980, a copy of that determination being incorporated herein by reference. The definition of any terms
appearing in this chapter which are also used in the aforesaid act shall be the same as in said act.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general prevailing rate of wages, as herein ascertained, to any work or employment except
public works construction of this village to the extent required by the aforesaid act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 17/460
The village clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any interested party in the main office of the village this determination of such
prevailing rate of wage, and said clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or
association of employees who have filed, or file, their names and addresses, requesting copies of any determination stating the particular rates, and the
particular class of workmen whose wages will be affected by such rates, and shall promptly file a certified copy of this chapter with both the secretary of
state and the department of labor of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 80-938, 7-1-1980)
Chapter 17
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
1-17-1: RULES AND PROCEDURES:
(A) The village of Lisle shall provide access to public records as required by the Illinois freedom of information act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1 et
seq., as amended.
(B) All requests for inspection or copies of public records must be submitted in writing in accordance with the village of Lisle freedom of information act
policy, which policy is available for inspection at the village of Lisle business office. (Ord. 2010-4295, 1-4-2010, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2010)
Chapter 18
EMPLOYEE ETHICS
1-18-1: REGULATIONS:
(A) The regulations of section 5-151 and article 102 of the state officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq. (hereinafter
referred to as the "act" in this section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of this governmental entity
to the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
(B) The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited under the act, by any officer or any employee is hereby prohibited.
(C) The offering or making of gifts prohibited by the act, to an officer or employee is hereby prohibited.
(D) The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by any officer or employee is hereby prohibited.
(E) For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
(F) The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar violations of
the act.
(G) This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing enactment which regulates the conduct of officers and employees. To the
extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall prevail in
accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a).
(H) Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and shall
be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes its
provisions optional for adoption shall not be incorporated into this section by reference without formalaction by this governmental entity.
(I) If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois supreme
court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action if the
act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme court.
(J) If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not address the
remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this section
relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by this governmental entity. (Ord. 2005-3895, 2-21-
2005)
Chapter 19
ELIGIBILITY UNDER THE PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT
1-19-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method of determining the eligibility of an employee for the benefits enumerated under the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 18/460
public safety employee benefits act1. All benefits provided to employees pursuant to the public safety employee benefits act ("act") will be consistent with
the act. (Ord. 2016-4676, 9-12-2016)
1-19-2: APPLICATION FOR PSEBA BENEFITS:
A PSEBA benefit application form prepared by the village shall be the standard form required for PSEBA benefit applicants (hereafter the "applicant") to
utilize to request benefits under PSEBA. The form shall be completed and executed by the requesting applicant and delivered to the village manager. The
applicant shall provide, along with the application, any medical records regarding the injury, any decision by a governing public safety pension board and
supporting documentation related to such pension board decision, any decision by the Illinois workers' compensation commission, and any additional
pertinent documentation that the applicant wants to have considered or that is requested by the village. (Ord. 2016-4676, 9-12-2016)
1-19-3: APPLICATION REVIEW PROCESS:
(A) Upon receipt of a fully completed and executed PSEBA benefit application, the village manager shall review the application and supporting
documentation, and if necessary complete additional fact finding and/or investigation.
(B) The village manager shall make a written recommendation, including reasons for the recommendation, to the village board within forty five (45)
calendar days after the later of the following:
1. The submission of the relevant documentation; or
2. The completion of the such additional fact finding or investigation as deemed necessary or appropriate by the village manager.
(C) The village manager's written recommendation shall state whether:
1. The applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA; or
2. A hearing should be convened in order to determine whether or not the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA and shall inform the applicant,
in writing, of the decision and the reasons for the decision.
(D) If the village manager recommends that the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA, the recommendation shall be presented to the village board
at the next regularly scheduled village board meeting (subject to notice provision of the open meetings act).
(E) The village board shall make a determination that:
1. The applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA; or
2. An administrative hearing should be convened in order to determine whether or not the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. (Ord. 2016-
4676, 9-12-2016)
1-19-4: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
If the village board determines that a hearing should be convened, the system of the administrative hearing shall be comprised of a hearing officer whose
power and authority and limitations are as follows:
(A) Power Of The Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall have all of the powers granted to him under common law relative to the conduct of an
administrative hearing including the power to:
1. Preside over all village hearings involving the public safety employee benefits act2;
2. Administer oaths;
3. Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of eligibility under the public safety employee benefits act3;
4. Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
5. Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence;
6. Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits in evidence introduced at the hearing;
7. Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the hearing, the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include a written
finding of fact, decision and order.
(B) Appointment Of The Hearing Officer: The mayor with the consent of the board of trustees is hereby authorized to appoint a person to hold the position
of a hearing officer for each and every individual hearing that shall come before this village. In making said selection, the mayor shall consider all
pertinent information, including, at a minimum:
1. The candidate's ability to comply with the job description as set forth herein;
2. Background and performance data made available to the mayor on file with the village or otherwise obtained by the village;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 19/460
3. The candidate must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years and have knowledge of and experience
in employment and labor law, general civil procedure, the rules of evidence, and administrative practice. (Ord. 2016-4676, 9-12-2016)
1-19-5: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
An administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate and determine whether the subject public safety employee is eligible for benefits under the public
safety employee benefits act4. If the employee is found eligible, the employee benefits shall be consistent with the act.
(A) Time And Date: Hearings shall be held on the date, time and place as established by the village with appropriate notice served upon the public safety
employee.
(B) Record: All hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by said certified court reporter.
(C) Procedures: The village and the petitioning public safety employee shall be entitled to representation by counsel at said hearing and may present
witnesses, may present testimony and documents, may cross examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the
appearance of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant documents.
(D) Evidence: The rules of evidence as set forth in the Illinois code of civil procedure shall apply.
(E) Final Determination: The determination by the hearing officer of whether the petitioning public safety employee is eligible for the benefits under the
public safety employee benefits act5 shall constitute a final determination for the purpose of judicial review under the common law writ of certiorari.
(Ord. 2016-4676, 9-12-2016)
1-19-6: PSEBA BENEFITS GRANTED:
If the applicant is determined to be eligible for PSEBA benefits, the applicant will be eligible to receive continued health coverage consistent with PSEBA
under the village's basic group health insurance plan. The basic group plan shall be the least expensive plan offered by the village employees at the time
the PSEBA benefits are awarded.
If an applicant becomes eligible to receive health insurance benefits from another source, including, but not limited to, medicare, the applicant's PSEBA
coverage may be reduced or eliminated as determined by the village consistent with PSEBA. The village reserves the right on an annual basis to have the
applicant provide an affidavit affirming continued eligibility for PSEBA benefits. (Ord. 2016-4676, 9-12-2016)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-1-1: CREATED:
A planning and zoning commission for the village is hereby created under the authority of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1-1
et seq. (Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-2: MEMBERS:
The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven (7) members, one of whom shall be the chairman and the said seven (7) members of said
planning and zoning commission shall be appointed by the president, subject to confirmation by the corporate authorities. Members of the planning and
zoning commission shall reside within the village or within the territory contiguous with the village. The chairman of the planning and zoning commission
shall be designated by the president, subject to confirmation by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-3: TERMS OF MEMBERS:
Members appointed by the president, confirmed by the corporate authorities, shall serve the following terms: two (2) shall be appointed for a term of one
year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years and the remaining three (3) for a term of three (3) years. The members so appointed shall, after the expiration of
their first term, if they are reappointed, be appointed for a period of three (3) years. All vacancies occurring in the planning and zoning commission shall be
filled by appointment of the president, subject to confirmation of the corporate authorities, for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as
original appointments. (Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-4: PROCEEDINGS:
Meetings of the planning and zoning commission shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the planning and zoning commission
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 20/460
may determine. Such chairman or, in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The presence of at
least four (4) members of the planning and zoning commission shall be necessary to constitute a quorum.
The planning and zoning commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its own proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions.
Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each case of a requested variation or appeal, and the reasons for approving or denying such variation
or appeal shall be specified.
All records of proceedings, findings, determinations and actions of the planning and zoning commission shall be filed immediately in the office of the
planning and zoning commission and shall be a public record. All meetings of the planning and zoning commission shall be open to the public. (Ord. 2003-
3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-5: OFFICERS; COMPENSATION:
As soon as possible after the original appointment of members of said planning and zoning commission or upon the appointment of a new member for the
remainder of an unexpired term, the president shall designate a chairman of the planning and zoning commission subject to confirmation by the corporate
authorities. Said commission may have a secretary, a staff or both, and such other officers as may in their judgment be necessary. All members and all
officers of said planning and zoning commission shall serve without compensation with the exception of the secretary, who may receive such
compensation as may be fixed from time to time by the corporate authorities and as may be provided for in the annual appropriation ordinance. The
members of the planning and zoning commission, by their chairman, shall from time to time make recommendations to the village board of trustees with
respect to compensation for the secretary of said commission. If the planning and zoning commission deems it advisable to obtain technical or legal advice
or other professional services, it may do so, but it first must obtain from the village board of trustees prior approval and authority to incur any expense and
said expense, before incurred, must have been provided for in the annual appropriation ordinance or budget as amended and as passed by the village
board of trustees. The corporate authorities may appropriate or budget such sums as they may deem proper for the maintenance and operation of said
planning and zoning commission and/or planning department which may hereafter be created, including the salaries of all paid members and employees;
development of a planning program; preparation of regulations, projects and programs pertinent to the development, redevelopment and renewal of the
municipality and such surrounding territory over which the municipality exercises subdivision jurisdiction; the preparation and revision of the official map
and the exercise of such powers germane to the purposes for which it was created, as may be conferred upon the planning and zoning commission or
planning department by ordinance. (Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-6: PLANNING DEPARTMENT:
The corporate authorities may, by ordinance, establish a planning department. (Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-7: HEARINGS; APPEALS; NOTICES:
Appeals to the planning and zoning commission may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the village
affected by a decision of the building commissioner and/or zoning inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the
planning and zoning commission by general rule, by filing with the building commissioner and with the planning and zoning commission a notice of appeal,
specifying the grounds thereof. The building commissioner shall forthwith transmit to the planning and zoning commission all of the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken. (Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-8: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS:
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building commissioner certifies to the planning and zoning
commission after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the planning and zoning
commission, or by a court of record, on application or notice to the building commissioner on due cause shown.
The planning and zoning commission shall fix a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal, shall give due notice thereof to the parties in
interest, and shall render a decision within a reasonable time.
Any person may appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. (Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-9: POWERS OF COMMISSION:
Said planning and zoning commission shall, in addition to all other powers provided by law, have the following powers:
(A) To prepare and recommend to the board of trustees of the village a comprehensive plan of public improvements looking to the present and future
development of the village, which plan shall be known as the official plan of Lisle. Such plan shall include reasonable requirements in reference to
streets, alleys and public grounds, unsubdivided lands within the corporate limits of the village and in contiguous territory outside of and distant not
more than one and one-half (11/2) miles from such limits and not included in any city, village or incorporated town. Said requirements to be effective
whenever such land shall be subdivided after the adoption of such plan.
(B) To prepare and recommend to the board of trustees from time to time such changes in the plan as may be deemed necessary by the board of trustees
or by the planning and zoning commission; provided, however, that such change will not affect the general principles of the plan as adopted.
(C) To prepare and recommend to the board of trustees from time to time general plans for specific improvements in accordance with such official plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 21/460
(D) To give aid to the officials of the village charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further making of
such improvements and generally promote the realization of the official plan.
(E) To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by law and as may be conferred by the corporate authorities of the village.
(F) The power to perform the duties that are set out in the zoning regulations of the village, being in particular title 5, chapter 19 of this code. (Ord. 2003-
3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-10: PRELIMINARY APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLATS1:
All plats of subdivision shall be submitted initially to the planning and zoning commission for preliminary approval. The application for approval shall show
location and width of proposed streets and public ways; shall indicate proposed location of sewers and storm drains; proposed dedication of public
grounds, if any; lot sizes; proposed easements for public utilities; and proposed methods of sewage and waste disposal; but need not contain
specifications for proposed improvements.
The planning and zoning commission shall approve or disapprove the application for preliminary approval within ninety (90) days of the date of application
or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent. If such
plat is disapproved, then within ninety (90) days the planning and zoning commission shall furnish to the applicant a statement, in writing, setting forth the
reason for disapproval and specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat failed to conform to the ordinances including official map. If
the plat is approved, the corporate authorities shall accept or reject said plat within thirty (30) days after its next regular stated meeting following the action
of the planning and zoning commission. Preliminary approval shall not qualify a plat for recording.
Application for approval of the plat shall be made not later than one year after preliminary approval has been granted. The application must be supported
by such drawings, specifications and bond as may be necessary to demonstrate compliance with all requirements of applicable statutes and such
regulations as the corporate authorities may provide by ordinance under law.
The applicant may elect to have final approval of the geographic part or parts of the plat that received preliminary approval and may delay application for
approval of other parts until a later date or dates beyond one year with the approval of the corporate authorities; provided that all facilities required to serve
the part or parts for which the final approval is sought have been provided. In such case only, such part or parts of the plat as have received final approval
shall be recorded.
When a person submitting a plat of subdivision or resubdivision for final approval has supplied all drawings, maps and other documents required by the
municipal ordinances to be furnished in support thereof, and if all such material meets all municipal requirements, the corporate authorities shall approve
the proposed plat within sixty (60) days from the date of filing the last required document or other paper or within sixty (60) days from the date of filing
application for final approval of the plat, whichever date is later. The applicant and the corporate authorities may mutually agree to extend the sixty (60)
day period.
Any person seeking approval of a subdivision or resubdivision map or plat shall post a good and sufficient bond with the village clerk and a penal sum
sufficient to cover the estimate made by the village engineer, or other authorized person, of expenditures including, but not limited to, reasonable
inspection fees to be borne by the applicant, necessary to conform to the requirements established and conditions upon completion of said requirements in
a reasonable time. The form of bond shall be a form from time to time prescribed by the corporate authorities as will be the required surety to be approved
by the corporate authorities; provided that the village may permit the deposit of cash or other security acceptable to the corporate authorities, to complete
the improvements required in lieu of bond, and further provided, that no bond or securities shall be required to be filed until the corporate authorities have
approved the plat in all other respects and have notified the applicant of such approval.
If the preliminary or final plat is approved, the village clerk shall attach a certified copy of the order or resolution of approval to a copy of the plat. If the
proposed plat is disapproved, the order or resolution shall state the reasons for disapproval, specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed
plat fails to conform to the official map. A copy of the order or resolution shall be filed in the offices of the village clerk. (Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-
2003)
2-1-11: PREEXISTING PLATS OR MAPS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any official plat or map adopted and in force prior to the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2003-3451,
4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
2-1-12: REFERENCES TO COMMISSION:
Any reference within this code to either the plan commission or the zoning board of appeals shall hereafter be seen as a reference to this combined
planning and zoning commission and any power or responsibility delegated to either individual body shall henceforth be the power or responsibility of this
combined commission. (Ord. 2005-3906, 3-21-2005)
2-1-13: EX OFFICIO STUDENT PARTICIPATION:
(A) In order to encourage civic responsibility and to provide hands on learning experiences, the high school student representative position(s) is
established for the planning and zoning commission.
(B) Student representatives shall be Lisle residents and open to all high school grade levels with preference being given to qualified seniors.
(C) Student representatives shall be expected to attend one meeting per month as regularly scheduled.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 22/460
(D) Student representatives shall serve a one year term consistent with the term of the school year.
(E) Student representatives who engage in improper behavior or are absent from two (2) or more consecutive meetings without notifying the village
planner may be removed from the commission by the chairman of the planning and zoning commission at the recommendation of the village planner.
(F) Student representatives shall not vote, nor are they to be considered a member of the commission as it relates to vote counts or quorum requirements.
(Ord. 2017-4705, 2-6-2017)
Chapter 2
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS1
(Rep. by Ord. 2003-3451, 4-7-2003, eff. 5-1-2003)
Chapter 3
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
2-3-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established the board of local improvements for the village, which board shall consist of the village president and all the members of the
village board of trustees. (Ord. 137, 10-2-1962)
2-3-2: GENERAL DUTIES:
The said board of local improvements shall have the powers and perform the duties assigned to it by state law or by ordinance of the village1. (Ord. 137,
10-2-1962)
Chapter 4
SAFETY REVIEW BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 83-1162, 11-15-1983)
Chapter 5
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 2007-4135, 8-20-2007)
Chapter 6
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
2-6-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created a board of fire and police commissioners consisting of three (3) members, whose terms of office shall be three (3) years and until
their respective successors are appointed and have qualified.
The members of said board shall possess qualifications required by state law, and shall take the oath or affirmation of office set forth in section 2-6-4 of
this chapter, and said members shall be subject to removal from office as provided by state law. (Ord. 188, 7-6-1965; amd. 1979 Code)
2-6-2: OFFICERS OF BOARD, DUTIES:
Such board may designate one of its own members to act as secretary. The secretary shall keep the minutes of the board's proceedings, the original of
which is to remain on file and secure in the village hall so as to avoid being taken away from the village's possession or from being lost, and the secretary
shall be custodian of all papers pertaining to the business of the board, shall keep a record of all examinations held, and shall perform such other duties as
the board shall prescribe. (Ord. 188, 7-6-1965; amd. 1979 Code)
2-6-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF BOARD:
Such board of fire and police commissioners shall appoint all officers and members of the police department of the village, except the chief of police, which
appointment shall be made by the mayor with the consent of the board of trustees. All appointments made by the board of fire and police commissioners
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 23/460
shall be from the rank next below that to which the appointment shall be made, other than that of the lowest rank.
Such board of fire and police commissioners shall make such rules and make such appointments and removals except those herein reserved to the village
president and board of trustees, and shall have such other and further powers as are provided by statute. (Ord. 188, 7-6-1965; amd. 1979 Code)
2-6-4: OATH AND BOND OF COMMISSIONERS:
The member commissioners of the police board of the village shall be considered officers of the village and shall file an oath and a fidelity bond in the
amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) prior to their entry into and qualification for the office of police commissioner of the village. The village clerk
shall prepare an oath to be signed on appointment, but prior to taking office of each police commissioner of the village, and the village shall pay, from
monies budgeted or appropriated, the premium on any fidelity bond necessary to be taken out under state law and this section in connection with the
appointment of police commissioners of the village. (Ord. 697, 6-21-1977)
Chapter 7
POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
2-7-1: BOARD OF TRUSTEES; DESIGNATION:
There is hereby created a board to be known as the BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE POLICE PENSION FUND, such board to be composed of five (5)
members1. The members appointed by the mayor shall be residents of the village, but those elected from the regular police force, by active members and
the fifth member to be elected by and from among the beneficiaries, as hereinafter provided, need not be residents of the village. (Ord. 194, 10-7-1965;
amd. 1979 Code)
2-7-2: SELECTION OF MEMBERS:
Two (2) members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor of the village, the third and fourth members of said board shall be elected from the regular
police force by the active members thereof, and the fifth member shall be elected by and from among the beneficiaries, if any, of the fund.
Following their appointment, the members so appointed shall provide for an election of two (2) board members to be elected from the regular police force
by the active members thereof and for the election of a board member from among the beneficiaries, if any, of the fund. The election shall be held under
the Australian ballot system, at such place or places within the village and under such other regulations as shall be prescribed by the appointed members
of the board. The first election following the creation of the board shall take place as soon after the appointed members take office as is possible and those
members elected shall serve until the second Tuesday of the second May after such election. Thereafter, such members shall be elected for a term of two
(2) years, beginning on the second Tuesday of the first May after such election.
Upon the death, resignation or inability to act of any member of the board elected under this section, his successor shall be elected for the unexpired term
at a special election, to becalled by the board and conducted in the same manner as the regular biennial election.
All members of the regular police force shall be entitled to vote only for the police force members of the board. All beneficiaries of legal age shall be
entitled to vote only for the member chosen from among the beneficiaries. No person shall be entitled to cast more than one ballot at such election. (Ord.
194, 10-7-1965)
2-7-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
One of the board members appointed by the mayor shall serve until the second Tuesday in May following his appointment. The other board member
appointed by the mayor shall serve until the second Tuesday of the second May following his appointment. The successors to any of the appointed
members of the board shall serve for two (2) years each or until their successors are appointed and qualified. (Ord. 194, 10-7-1965)
2-7-4: BOARD MEETINGS:
The board shall hold regular quarterly meetings on the second Tuesday of July, October, January and April annually, and special meetings as called by the
president of the board.
At the first meeting following the election of the first board members, and thereafter at the regular July meeting, the board shall select from its members a
president, vice president, secretary and assistant secretary. The initial officers so selected shall serve until the regular July meeting and thereafter the term
of office shall be for a period of one year and until his respective successor is elected and qualified.
The vice president of the board shall perform the duties of president during any vacancy in that office, or during such time as the president is absent from
the village or for any other reason is disqualified or by reason of illness or other causes is unable to perform his duties.
The assistant secretary shall act for the secretary whenever necessary to discharge the functions of such office. (Ord. 194, 10-7-1965)
2-7-5: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD:
The board shall have the powers and duties stated in 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-132 to 5/3-140, and as hereafter altered or amended, in addition to
the other powers and duties granted it in said chapter. (Ord. 194, 10-7-1965)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 24/460
Chapter 8
FLOOD INFORMATION COMMITTEE
2-8-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
A flood information committee for the village is created for the purpose of developing a program for public information as part of the village's community
rating system (CRS) program. A program for public information, as defined by CRS, is an ongoing local effort to identify, prepare, implement, and monitor
a range of public information activities that meet specific local needs as they relate to flood protection, flood insurance, floodplain mapping, and other flood
related issues. The CRS program is a voluntary incentive program that recognizes communities for implementing floodplain management practices that
exceed the federal minimum requirements of the national flood insurance program to provide protection from flooding. (Ord. 2016-4635, 3-7-2016)
2-8-2: MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT:
(A) The committee will consist of at least five (5), but no more than nine (9), members. The mayor, with consent of the village board of trustees, will appoint
the members as follows: three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years and up to four (4) members for a term of two (2) years.
Thereafter, the term of each member of the commission shall be two (2) years, unless such appointment is to fill the unexpired term created by a
vacancy, occasioned by removal, resignation or death. All vacancies occurring in the flood information committee shall be filled by appointment of the
mayor, subject to confirmation of the village board of trustees, for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed.
(B) The village stormwater manager and village communications director are hereby appointed to the committee, as nonvoting members. Each new or
acting stormwater manager or communications director will automatically assume the place of his or her predecessor on the committee.
(C) Membership to the committee will be appointed in the following order of priority:
1. Qualified floodplain residents who are registered electors of the village who have lived in the FEMA special flood hazard area (SFHA) for at least one
year prior to the date of appointment;
2. Qualified floodplain landowners who are at least eighteen (18) years of age and have owned property in the SFHA for at least one year prior to the
date of appointment;
3. Village of Lisle residents; and
4. Community stakeholders who are representatives of a school district, a park district, or a library district serving village residents, not for profit
community organizations serving village residents, and village businesses. (Ord. 2016-4635, 3-7-2016)
2-8-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
(A) The duties of the committee will be:
1. To prepare and recommend, for consideration and adoption by the board of trustees, a program for public information that meets the requirements of
the CRS program.
2. To annually monitor and evaluate the program for public information for efficacy.
3. To recommend modifications to the program for public information to the village board of trustees from time to time.
(B) The stormwater manager will serve as coordinator for the committee and prepare materials for distribution and conduct such other business of the
committee as may be assigned by the committee from time to time. The communications director will serve as secretary and keep meeting minutes and
conduct such other business of the committee as may be assigned by the committee from time to time. (Ord. 2016-4635, 3-7-2016)
2-8-4: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
The mayor may remove any member of the committee whenever, in the mayor's sole and absolute discretion, the best interests of the village are served
thereby. Committee members who are absent from two (2) or more consecutive meetings without notifying the stormwater manager may be removed from
the committee by the mayor at the recommendation of the stormwater manager. (Ord. 2016-4635, 3-7-2016)
2-8-5: RECORDS AND PUBLIC INSPECTION:
The committee will operate in accordance with the requirements of the open meetings act and keep a written record of its proceedings that will be open to
public inspection during regular business hours of the village clerk's office and subject to the freedom of information act. (Ord. 2016-4635, 3-7-2016)
2-8-6: ANNUAL REPORT REQUIRED:
The committee will submit an annual written report to the mayor and the board of trustees no later than September 15 of each year. The report will
evaluate the implementation of the program for public information and provide recommendations for modifications to the program for public information for
the following year. (Ord. 2016-4635, 3-7-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 25/460
Chapter 9
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
2-9-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Lisle emergency management agency (Lisle EMA) to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage resulting from
the explosion of atomic or other means from without or by means of sabotage or by other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood, earthquake,
telecommunications failure, or other natural or technological causes, in accordance with the Illinois emergency management act1 ("the act").
The EMA shall consist of the coordinator and such additional members as may be selected by the coordinator. (Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-1997)
2-9-2: COORDINATOR:
The coordinator of the EMA shall be appointed by the village president without the need for consent by the village board, as may be from time to time
necessary. The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training, and operation of the EMA, subject to the direction
and control of the mayor and board of trustees as provided by the act. (Ord. 2001-3291, 3-5-2001)
2-9-3: CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT:
The principal executive officer ("PEO") of the village is the village president. The "PEO", or the emergency interim successor, is the only individual who can
officially declare a disaster in the village. The "PEO" or the emergency interim successor is the ultimate authority in the village during any declared
disaster,but relies directly on information and advice from the coordinator and the village manager.
In the event that the "PEO" is unavailable, the powers of office shall be exercised, and duties shall be discharged by the designated emergency interim
successors in the order specified. The emergency interim successors shall exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to which designated
until such time as a vacancy which may exist shall be filled in accordance with statutes to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of office.
Emergency interim successors in the following order of succession are hereby designated for the "PEO" as follows:
Village board:
(A) Senior trustee.
(B) Next most senior trustee.
(C) Most senior trustee available.
In cases in which two (2) or more trustees have served the same length of time, seniority of those trustees will be determined as follows: The most
senior trustee will be the trustee who received the greatest number of votes in the election in which the trustees who are tied for seniority were first
elected to the village board. If two (2) or more trustees who are tied for seniority have served intermittent terms on the board, the vote count used to
determine seniority shall be from the election from which the trustee was elected to this current and consecutive length of service. Trustees will be
ranked for seniority purposes by the total numbers of votes received by each individual trustee from highest number to lowest number. Seniority will
continue to be assigned by vote totals from the above designated election to the village board.
All emergency interim successors shall exercise the powers and discharge the duties of an office until a successor is appointed or elected and qualified
as may be provided by the constitution, statutes, charters, and ordinances or until the lawful incumbent is able to resume the exercise of the power and
discharge the duties of office.
All vital records shall be maintained and protected by the coordinator for use in reestablishing governmental operations after the emergency is declared
over. (Ord. 2002-3365, 1-7-2002)
2-9-4: FUNCTIONS:
The EMA shall coordinate emergency management functions within the territorial limits of the village as are prescribed in and by the state emergency
operations plan, and programs, orders, rules, and regulations as may be promulgated by the Illinois emergencymanagement agency and, in addition, shall
conduct such functions outside of those territorial limits as may be required under mutual aid agreements and compacts as provided in the act. (Ord. 97-
2866, 4-7-1997)
2-9-5: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the EMA may be designated as member of a mobile support team created by the director of the state EMA as provided by law.
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated as provided by the act.
Personnel of a mobile support team, while on duty pursuant to such a call or while engaged in regularly scheduled training exercises, whether within or
without the state, shall either:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 26/460
(A) If they are paid employees of the village, have the powers, duties, rights, privileges, and immunities, and receive the compensation incidental to their
employment;
(B) If they are not employees of the village, be entitled to at least one dollar ($1.00) per year compensation from the state. (Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-1997)
2-9-6: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The coordinator may, in collaboration with other public agencies within his immediate vicinity, develop or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements
with other political subdivisions within this state for reciprocal disaster response and recovery assistance in case a disaster is too great to be dealt with
unassisted. The mutual aid shall not, however, be effective unless and until approved by each of the political subdivisions. The arrangements shall be
consistent with the state emergency operations plan and state emergency management program, and in the event of a disaster, it shall be the duty of each
emergency management agency to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of the mutual aid arrangements. (Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-1997)
2-9-7: LOCAL DISASTER DECLARATION:
A local disaster may be declared only by the "PEO" of the village, or his emergency interim successor. It shall not be continued or renewed for a period in
excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the governing board of the village. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or
terminating a local disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the village clerk.
The effect of a declaration of a local disaster is to activatethe emergency operations plan of that village and to authorize the furnishing of aid and
assistance thereunder. (Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-1997)
2-9-8: EMERGENCY ACTION:
A proclamation of a disaster by the governor shall activate the state emergency operations plan and the village's emergency operations plan, and it shall
be authority for the deployment and use of any forces that the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, and materials and
facilities assembled, stockpiled, or arranged to be made available under the act or any other provision of law relating to disasters. (Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-
1997)
2-9-9: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The state treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to training
members of the EMA as prescribed by the state director of EMA; compensation for service and expenses of members of a mobile support team while
serving outside the village in response to a call by the governor or state director of the EMA, as provided by law; and any other reimbursement made by
the state incident to EMA activities as provided by law. (Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-1997)
2-9-10: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
In carrying out the provisions of the act, the village may enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to place it in a position effectively to combat
the disaster; to protect the health and safety of persons; to protect property; and to provide emergency assistance to victims of those disasters. If a
disaster occurs, the village may exercise powers vested under the act in the light of exigencies of the disaster and, excepting mandatory constitutional
requirements, without regard to the procedures and formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work; entering into
contracts, incurring of obligations; the employment of temporary works; the rental of equipment; the purchase of supplies and materials; and the
appropriation, expenditure, and disposition of public funds and property. (Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-1997)
2-9-11: OATH:
Each person whether compensated or noncompensated, who is appointed to serve in any capacity in the Illinois emergency management agency or the
village emergency management agency, shall, before entering upon his duties, take an oath, in writing, before the coordinator or before other persons
authorized to administer oaths in this state, which oath shall be filed withthe coordinator and which oath shall be substantially as follows:
I, , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support, defend, and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic;
that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I
am about to enter. I do further affirm that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Lisle EMA
organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence.
(Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-1997)
2-9-12: OFFICE:
The village president and board of trustees are authorized to designate space in a village building, or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the village
president and the board of trustees for the village EMA as its office. (Ord. 97-2866, 4-7-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 27/460
Chapter 10
RESERVED
(Ord. 2002-3376, 2-18-2002)
Chapter 11
LISLE IN TOUCH COMMISSION
2-11-1: CREATED:
There shall be and is hereby created an advisory commission known as the Lisle in touch commission for the purpose of developing and implementing
programs intended to educate and raise the awareness of Lisle area residents concerning ways to raise a generation of drug free youth to break the cycle
of substance abuse in the community. (Ord. 91-2146, 5-6-1991)
2-11-2: APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS:
(A) The commission shall consist of eleven (11) members, each of which shall be appointed by the board of trustees. Of the eleven (11) members, five (5)
of the members, who shall be voting members of the commission, shall be as follows: one member shall be an elected official of the village; one
member shall be employed by or be an elected official of the Lisle School District 202; one member shall be a member of the Lisle police department;
one member shall be employed by or be an elected official of the Lisle park district; and one member shall be a resident who lives within the village
planning jurisdiction. Of the remaining six (6) members, who shall be nonvoting ex officio members of the commission, there shall be one member who
shall be under the age of eighteen (18) years and attend a public or private religious school, institution or system located within the village planning
jurisdiction, the remaining five (5) members shall be representatives of local community service organizations (Lions Club, Rotary Club, Jaycees,
Kiwanis Club, etc.); the health service industry; youth services or community outreach organization; or residents who live within the village planning
jurisdiction.
(B) 1. Of the five (5) voting members, the term of appointment for the member who is an elected official of the village, the member who is employed by or
an elected official of the Lisle School District 202, and the member who is a resident who lives within the village planning jurisdiction shall be from
November 5, 2001, through April 30, 2002. The term of appointment for the member who is a member of the Lisle police department and the member
who is employed by or an elected official of the Lisle park district shall be from November 5, 2001, through April 30, 2003. Thereafter, the term of each
voting member of the commission shall be two (2) years, unless such appointment is to fill the unexpired term created by a vacancy. Notwithstanding
theforegoing, all appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed.
2. Of the six (6) nonvoting ex officio members, the term of appointment for the member who is under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be from
November 5, 2001, through April 30, 2002. Of the remaining five (5) nonvoting ex officio members, the term of appointment for two (2) members shall
be from November 5, 2001, through April 30, 2002, and three (3) members shall be appointed for a term from November 5, 2001, through April 30,
2003. Thereafter, the term of the member under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be one year and the term of each other nonvoting ex officio
member of the commission shall be two (2) years, unless such appointment is to fill the unexpired term created by a vacancy. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, all appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed.
(C) The voting members of the commission appointed as set forth herein shall elect from among themselves a chairman and a vice chairman to preside
over the commission meetings and to direct the business of the commission. (Ord. 2001-3354, 10-15-2001)
(D) A recording secretary shall be furnished by the village to record the minutes of each meeting and to furnish clerical and record keeping support to the
commission. (Ord. 91-2220, 11-18-1991)
(E) The member who is an elected official of the village shall be the liaison between the village board and the commission. The member who is a member
of the Lisle police department shall be the liaison between the village staff and the commission. (Ord. 99-3130, 7-6-1999)
(F) A quorum necessary in order to conduct business of the commission shall be defined as any three (3) voting members of the commission. (Ord. 2001-
3354, 10-15-2001)
2-11-3: DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
(A) The commission shall be an advisory commission only and shall meet as necessary to manage the business of the commission, and to discuss and
make recommendations to the board of trustees to effectuate the purposes and goals of the commission. To the extent approved by the board of
trustees, the commission shall implement programs discussed and recommended.
(B) All contractual obligations, expenditures, solicitations and collection of funds shall be entered into or made only with the express consent of the board
of trustees. (Ord. 91-2146, 5-6-1991)
Chapter 12
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
2-12-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 28/460
There is hereby established a commission which shall be known as the Village of Lisle Economic Development Commission for the purpose of
encouraging industrial development, commercial business, retail and other supporting services which will provide job opportunities, broaden the tax base,
and improve the quality of living in the Village. The Economic Development Commission (commission) shall develop a plan for proper economic
development of the Village and shall coordinate its activities with appropriate local and regional organizations. Said commission shall make its findings and
recommendations to the Mayor and Board of Trustees in the manner prescribed herein. (Ord. 2019-4806, 2-4-2019)
2-12-2: MEMBERS:
The commission shall consist of nine (9) members. The Mayor, with the consent of the Village Board of Trustees, will appoint the members as follows:
three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, three (3) members for a term of two (2) years, and three (3) members for a term of one
year. Thereafter, the term of each member of the commission shall be three (3) years, unless such appointment is to fill the unexpired term created by a
vacancy, occasioned by removal, resignation or death. The Mayor may also appoint, with the consent of the Village Board of Trustees, up to two (2) ex
officio members from the Board of Trustees, to serve two (2) year appointments. All vacancies occurring in the Economic Development Commission shall
be filled by appointment of the Mayor, subject to confirmation of the Village Board of Trustees, for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner
as original appointments. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed. (Ord. 2019-4806, 2-4-2019)
2-12-3: MEMBER QUALIFICATIONS:
(A) Members shall:
1. Reside within the corporate limits of the Village; or
2. Be an employee, officer, manager or owner of a business which has one or more business locations within the corporate limits of the Village; or
3. Otherwise have a significant economic stake in the Village.
(B) A member shall have experience or expertise in one or more of the following areas:
1. Commercial or industrial real estate development;
2. Real estate brokerage;
3. Financial institutions;
4. Manufacturing or industrial activity;
5. Retail sales;
6. Large business (greater than 50 employees) within the Village;
7. Small business (50 employees or less) within the Village;
8. Business development;
9. Experience in legal or other aspects of business operations, expansion, retention or attraction such as involvement in economic incentives, business
districts or other public/private business agreements.
(C) In the event a member of the commission no longer meets the qualifications of subsection (A) of this section, that member may continue to serve on
the commission if the Board, upon recommendation by the Mayor, determines that the member's previous experience with the commission or the
member's experience or expertise as noted in subsection (B) of this section, would remain a benefit to the commission. (Ord. 2019-4806, 2-4-2019)
2-12-4: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
The Mayor may remove any member of the commission whenever the best interests of the Village shall be served thereby. Commissioners who are
absent from two (2) or more consecutive meetings without notifying the Chairperson or Village Manager or his/her designee ahead of time, or without a
valid excuse, may be removed from the commission by the Mayor at the recommendation of the Chairperson. (Ord. 2019-4806, 2-4-2019)
2-12-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The duty of the commission shall be to encourage and facilitate economic growth within the Village. The commission shall function in an advisory capacity
to the Mayor and the Village Board of Trustees on the following goals and objectives. However, unless authorized by the Village Board, the commission
shall not review or make recommendations relative to zoning or the use of specific sites if the zoning or use is or will be subject to review of the Planning
and Zoning Commission, Village Board or other Village agency.
(A) To prepare, develop and recommend to the Village Board a strategic plan, including such amendments as may from time to time be appropriate, to
encourage the location, retention and expansion of businesses within the Village.
(B) To prepare, review and evaluate proposals to encourage the location of new businesses within the Village, and to encourage the retention and
expansion of existing businesses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 29/460
(C) To prepare, review, and develop materials to market or otherwise promote the Village as a desirable location to locate, retain and expand a business.
(D) To review, evaluate and make recommendations to the Village Board concerning the funding and promotion of projects and programs, which
encourage the location, retention and expansion of businesses within the Village.
(E) To identify and evaluate business development or redevelopment opportunities within the Village, identifying parcels whose development or
redevelopment will benefit economic conditions.
(F) Reserved.
(G) Reserved.
(H) Reserved.
(I) To identify other community economic development needs as they arise and devise plans to meet those needs.
(J) To consider and evaluate economic incentive applications regarding the attraction, retention and expansion of business in Lisle at the request and
direction of the Village Board and make recommendations relative to said applications in an advisory capacity.
(K) To provide input and assistance in the development of strategic plans for business areas and commercial areas of the Village such as downtown Lisle,
Ogden Avenue, Route 53 or other Commercial or Business Districts at the request and direction of the Village Board. (Ord. 2019-4806, 2-4-2019)
2-12-6: OFFICERS AND MEETINGS:
(A) A commission Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be selected from among the membership of the commission, every twenty four (24) months.
The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the commission. In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall act as a presider.
(B) The commission shall meet regularly. Special meetings may be called as deemed necessary by the Chairperson.
(C) The commission shall be bound by the ordinance of the Village and comply with all applicable provisions of the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
(D) Robert's Rules of Order shall guide the commission meetings procedures. (Ord. 2019-4806, 2-4-2019)
2-12-7: STAFF ASSIGNED TO THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION:
It shall be the duty of the Village Manager or his/her designee to have the responsibility for administration of the commission and to recommend to the
Village Mayor and Board of Trustees, in conjunction with the commission programs and policies that encourage and promote the retention and expansion
of business within the Village. (Ord. 2019-4806, 2-4-2019)
2-12-8: ANNUAL REPORT:
A report of the Economic Development Commission activities will be made to Village Board annually. (Ord. 2019-4806, 2-4-2019)
2-12-9: VOLUNTEERS:
The commission is authorized to enlist the volunteer services of such other members of the community who will assist in achieving the goals of sound
economic growth, recognizing broad community involvement will assure broad community support. (Ord. 2019-4806, 2-4-2019)
Chapter 13
LISLE TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION
2-13-1: CREATED:
There shall be and is hereby created an advisory commission known as the Lisle technology commission for the purpose of advising the village board of
trustees regarding the use of available technology by village government to provide high quality and cost efficient benefits to the residents and businesses
of the village of Lisle. (Ord. 2001-3324, 7-2-2001)
2-13-2: APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 30/460
(A) The commission shall consist of seven (7) members, each of which shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees. Members shall be appointed as follows: three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of one year; and four (4) members shall be
appointed for a term of two (2) years. Thereafter, the term of a member of the commission shall be two (2) years, unless such appointment is to fill the
unexpired term created by a vacancy. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed.
(B) The members appointed as set forth herein shall elect from among themselves a chairman and a vice chairman to preside over the commission
meetings and to direct the business of the commission. (Ord. 2001-3324, 7-2-2001)
2-13-3: DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
(A) The commission shall be an advisory commission only and shall meet as necessary to manage the business of the commission, and to discuss and
make recommendations to the board of trustees to effectuate the purposes and goals of the commission. To the extent approved by the board of
trustees, the commission shall implement programs discussed and recommended.
(B) All contractual obligations, expenditures, solicitations and collection of funds shall be entered into or made only with the express consent of the board
of trustees. (Ord. 2001-3324, 7-2-2001)
Chapter 14
LISLE TRANSPORTATION ADVISORY COMMISSION
2-14-1: CREATED:
There shall be and is hereby created an advisory commission known as the Lisle transportation advisory commission for the purpose of advising the
village board of trustees regarding transportation related issues, including, but not limited to, traffic, sidewalks, and bike paths. (Ord. 2001-3325, 7-2-2001)
2-14-2: APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS:
(A) The commission shall consist of seven (7) members, each of which shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees. Members shall be appointed as follows: three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of one year; and four (4) members shall be
appointed for a term of two (2) years. Thereafter, the term of a member of the commission shall be two (2) years, unless such appointment is to fill the
unexpired term created by a vacancy. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed.
(B) The members appointed as set forth herein shall elect from among themselves a chairman and a vice chairman to preside over the commission
meetings and to direct the business of the commission. (Ord. 2001-3325, 7-2-2001)
2-14-3: DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
(A) The commission shall be an advisory commission only and shall meet as necessary to manage the business of the commission, and to discuss and
make recommendations to the board of trustees to effectuate the purposes and goals of the commission. To the extent approved by the board of
trustees, the commission shall implement programs discussed and recommended.
(B) All contractual obligations, expenditures, solicitations and collection of funds shall be entered into or made only with the express consent of the board
of trustees. (Ord. 2001-3325, 7-2-2001)
Chapter 15
WEST SUBURBAN MASS TRANSIT DISTRICT
2-15-1: LOCAL MASS TRANSIT DISTRICT:
The village has participated in the creation of the west suburban mass transit district, and shall appoint the necessary members thereof to serve on behalf
of the village. (Ord. 2007-4156, 12-17-2007)
Chapter 16
BICYCLIST AND PEDESTRIAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
2-16-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
A Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory Committee is hereby created for the purposes of promoting and encouraging bicycling and walking through Lisle, for
both recreation and transportation, including the creation of safer routes, capital improvements, amenities, events and programs. (Ord. 2018-4763, 5-7-
2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 31/460
2-16-2: MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT:
(A) The Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory Committee will consist of at least five (5) members, but no more than nine (9) members. The Mayor, with
consent of the Village Board of Trustees, will appoint the members as follows: three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years and
two (2) members for a term of two (2) years. Thereafter, the term of each member of the commission shall be two (2) years, unless such appointment is
to fill the unexpired term created by a vacancy, occasioned by removal, resignation or death. All vacancies occurring in the Bicyclist and Pedestrian
Advisory Committee shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor, subject to confirmation of the Village Board of Trustees, for the remainder of the
unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all appointees shall hold office until their successors are
appointed.
(B) The Village Planner and Public Works Director or their designees shall serve on the Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory Committee as non-voting
members. Each new or acting Village Planner or Public Works Director will automatically assume the place of his or her predecessor on the committee.
(C) A representative appointed by the Lisle Park District shall serve on the Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory Committee as a non-voting member.
(D) Membership to the committee may be appointed from the following:
1. Village of Lisle residents; and
2. Community business owners/managers. (Ord. 2018-4763, 5-7-2018)
2-16-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
(A) The duties of the Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory Committee will be as follows:
1. Plan for bicyclists and pedestrians as part of a Village wide and regional multi-use transportation system;
2. Evaluate and prioritize ways to improve the level of bicycle and pedestrian services, trails, paths, on-street bikeways, and other economically
feasible projects;
3. Identify high-priority projects that improve safety for motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians, while reducing vehicle and bike/pedestrian conflicts;
4. Establish communications with bicycle and pedestrian advocacy groups such as Ride Illinois, Active Transportation Alliance, and other related
community groups;
5. Make recommendations to the Village Board for the planning of bikeway and pedestrian routes; and
6. Perform such other duties and functions as may be requested of it by the Mayor and Village Board. (Ord. 2018-4763, 5-7-2018)
2-16-4: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
The Mayor may remove any member of the Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory Committee whenever, in the Mayor's sole and absolute discretion, the best
interests of the Village is served thereby. (Ord. 2018-4763, 5-7-2018)
2-16-5: RECORDS AND PUBLIC INSPECTION:
The Bicyclist and Pedestrian Advisory Committee will operate in accordance with the requirements of the Open Meetings Act and keep a written record of
its proceedings that will be open to public inspection during regular business hours of the Village Clerk's Office and subject to the Freedom of Information
Act. (Ord. 2018-4763, 5-7-2018)
Title 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSES
3-1-1: LICENSES REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in any of the businesses or occupations enumerated in the village of Lisle annual fee ordinance without first obtaining from the
business office manager, in accordance with the applicable procedures, a license to engage in said business or occupation. (Ord. 2007-4107, 4-16-2007)
3-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSES; ISSUANCE:
Written application for such license shall be made to the business office manager stating the name of the applicant, the place of business, number of
persons to be employed and the kind of business to be carried on and all such other information as may be requested by the application form as amended
from time to time. All licenses shall issue by authority of the president and board of trustees of the village or their designee. Provided, however, that no
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 32/460
business license shall issue to any person engaged in or intending to engage in the operation of a food service establishment and/or retail food store
within the village until and unless evidence of a valid permit issued by the DuPage County health department pursuant to the provisions of this code, as
may be from time to time hereafter amended, regulating and supervising food service and retail food store sanitation, is presented with said application to
the business office manager. Further, it shall be the responsibility of any licensee engaged in or intending to engage in the operation of a food service
establishment and/or retail food store within the village to maintain a valid permit issued by the DuPage County health department, during the entire term
of the village license and issuance of a village license shall not relieve the licensee of such obligation. The failure to maintain a valid permit issued by the
DuPage County health department, as required, shall be grounds for revocation of a village license. (Ord. 2002-3425, 11-4-2002)
3-1-3: FEES PRORATED:
Except as otherwise specified herein or otherwise in this code, when application is made for an annual license after July 1 of any calendar year, applicant
shall give satisfactory evidence that he has not engaged in the business, profession or occupation so licensed prior to July 1 of said year and, in that
event, such fee shall be fifty percent (50%) of the annual fee provided therefor. Fees for licenses issued for peddling foodstuffs1 shall not be prorated.
(Ord. 2002-3425, 11-4-2002)
3-1-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSES:
(A) The mayor, with the approval of the board of trustees, shall have the power to revoke any license granted hereunder for violation by the licensee or his
agents of any village ordinance or state or federal statute, regulation or order relating to the conduct of such business or occupation. Said licenses shall
not be transferable. Upon notice to the licensee of said revocation, said licensee shall have the right to a hearing conducted by the mayor and board of
trustees, upon request, therefor, prior to such revocation.
(B) Annual license fees for all licenses except those issued for Lisle commuter parking lot mobile concessionaire/merchandiser shall be paid to the village
no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on December 15 of the preceding year for which the license is issued. A fee paid after that date shall include
a late fee as established by the annual fee ordinance. After January 16 of the applicable license year, the village shall issue a citation of an ordinance
violation and an additional late fee shall be charged as established by the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 97-2906, 8-4-1997)
3-1-5: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANTS AND/OR PREMISES:
The police or any other official designated by ordinance to make inspection under any licensing or regulatory ordinance or to enforce the same shall have
the right of entry to any licensed place of business for the purpose of enforcement or inspection, and may arrest or cause to be arrested any person who
violates the provisions of this or any license ordinance of the village.
Wherever any licensing or regulatory ordinance provides for inspection by the police chief, such inspection may be performed by said police chief or by his
designated representative. (Ord. 280, 7-20-1968)
3-1-6: LICENSES TO BE POSTED:
Every licensee shall conspicuously post his certificate in the place of business in such place as to be in plain view, and no person shall destroy, alter or
mutilate such certificate or other evidence of license. If the licensee has no regular established place of business, he shall then carry such license upon his
person whenever engaged in his licensed occupation. (Ord. 280, 7-20-1968)
3-1-7: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fees for specific businesses and occupations shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 2005-3937, 6-20-2005)
3-1-8: EXEMPTIONS FOR LOCAL CHARITABLE OR MUNICIPAL ORGANIZATIONS:
Those organizations described in subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall be exempt from the requirements set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
(A) Charitable: A "charitable organization" shall mean and include an organization or institution, whose primary office is within the village, which is
organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit
on the public.
(B) Municipal: A "municipal organization" shall mean a body politic, organized in whole or in part within the village, pursuant to Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(Ord. 82-1047, 6-1-1982)
3-1-9: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
Chapter 2
LIQUOR CONTROL REGULATIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 33/460
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases herein defined are used in this chapter in the same meaning given them in the following
definitions:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOL, POWDERED: Any powder or crystalline substance containing "alcohol", as defined in this section, produced for human consumption.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes "alcohol", "spirits", "wine" and "beer" and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of
denatured alcohol produced in accordance with acts of congress and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of
one percent (0.5%) or less of alcohol by volume.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, port and the like.
CHAMPAGNE: Any "wine", as defined herein, further characterized by effervescence caused by fermentation and consequent generation of carbon
dioxide.
CONVENIENCE STORE: A "grocery store" as defined in this section, equal to or less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
GROCERY STORE: A commercial retail establishment of more than five thousand (5,000) square feet with the majority of the total sales area on the
licensed premises being devoted to the sale of items which may include, but are not limited to, prepackaged foods, fruits, vegetables, meats, dairy
products, baked goods, nonalcoholic beverages, household products, magazines, books, greeting cards, prescription medications, health and beauty
products.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and
consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which
twenty five (25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms where meals are
served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in connection therewith and
such building or buildings, structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.
LICENSED PREMISES: Every building, establishment, structure, place of business or location, whether or not enclosed from the elements, owned or
leased by the licensee, having been designated on the license application as the location for the operation of the licensed business, for which a current
license is in effect.
MANAGER, ASSISTANT MANAGER, PART TIME OR TEMPORARY MANAGER: Any person whose full time, part time or temporary activities include any
of the following: a) overseeing the operation of a liquor establishment; b) ordering, receiving or managing liquor inventory; c) hiring, training or supervising
bartenders, servers or sellers of liquor products; d) paying employees or suppliers; e) responding to customer complaints related to liquor establishment
operations; f) communicating on behalf of the liquor license holder with the Local Liquor Commissioner, Village Business Office Manager, Village Police
Department or other Village agencies and departments. If more than one person performs all or any of the above functions, each such person shall be
deemed a manager, assistant manager or temporary manager.
OFF SITE CATERING BUSINESS: A business which serves food at a location not owned or leased by such business.
PACKAGE STORE: A commercial retail establishment with the primary revenue source for its licensed premises being the sale of alcoholic products in
their original unopened packages.
PERSONAL SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT: Retail establishments whereby the principal business is to provide personal services related to hair care, skin
care, nail care, cosmetics, deep muscle body treatments, facials, and massage. Personal services establishments as defined in this chapter do not include
tattoo establishments.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public as a place where meals are regularly prepared and served,
and where adequate provision is made for sanitary kitchen and dining equipment and a sufficient number of employees to prepare, cook and serve a
reasonable variety of meals for its customers. The mere availability of snack items, prepackaged food items, or cold sandwiches alone shall not be
sufficient to meet this definition, the intent being that meals consisting of more than one course shall be available at all times liquor sales are being
conducted until at least ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. After such time, a reduced menu of appetizers, hors d'oeuvres or other similar foods may be offered. Food
service must be provided continuously until one hour prior to closing.
RETAILER: A person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE OR SELL: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means whatsoever, including, but not limited to, a transaction involving
telephone, mail, facsimile, internet or any other electronic or remote messaging device, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether
principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. The taking of an order for immediate or future remote delivery shall also be deemed a sale.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum,
whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
TASTING: A supervised presentation of alcoholic products to the public at an off premises licensed retailer for the purpose of disseminating product
information and education, with consumption of alcoholic products being an incidental part of the presentation. Tastings must be free of charge.
TAVERN: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where alcoholic liquor is offered for sale to the public
for consumption on the premises or for consumption off the premises when sold to the public in its original package. The service of food or meals is
incidental to the service of alcoholic liquor.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of "alcohol" or "spirits", as defined herein. (Ord. 617, 1-22-1976; amd. Ord. 84-1251, 12-3-1984; Ord. 87-1594, 9-8-1987, eff.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 34/460
1-1-1988; Ord. 96-2761, 4-1-1996; Ord. 97-2885, 6-2-1997; Ord. 98-3006, 6-15-1998; Ord. 2008-4228, 10-6-2008; Ord. 2010-4342, 10-4-2010; Ord. 2011-
4406, 10-3-2011; Ord. 2013-4471, 1-21-2013; Ord. 2016-4651, 5-2-2016; Ord. 2019-4807, 2-4-2019)
3-2-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
(A) Mayor To Act As Commissioner: The Village Mayor shall be the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of this
chapter and of the appropriate provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act1, and may appoint a person or persons to assist him in the exercise of the
powers and the performance of the duties herein provided for such Local Liquor Control Commissioner. Said Commissioner shall receive a salary as
set forth under subsection 1-5-3(A) of this Code.
(B) Powers And Duties: The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall also have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses issued
under the provisions of this chapter:
1. To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke for cause all local licenses issued to persons for premises within the Village.
2. To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of this chapter or of the Illinois Liquor Control Act or any rules or regulations adopted by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or by the
Illinois Liquor Control Commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine said premises of said licensee in connection
therewith.
3. To receive complaint from any citizen that any of the provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto
or any provisions of this chapter have been or are being violated, and to act upon such complaints in the manner provided by said statute and this
chapter.
4. To order, upon the issuance of a written order, the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to
be heard during that period, if the local liquor control commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed
premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community. Except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another
business or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses.
5. To receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the village treasurer.
(C) Agents Of The Commissioner: When in this chapter the local liquor control commissioner shall be referred to, it shall include any committee or agent
appointed by such local liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 617, 1-22-1976)
3-2-3: LICENSE; PURPOSE:
(A) Purpose: It is the policy of the village to limit the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail primarily to the sale in its original package or by restaurants,
recreational facilities or hotels as defined herein. It is not deemed conducive to the promotion of this public policy to allow the sale of alcoholic liquor at
retail for consumption on the premises where such sale is the sole or primary business to be conducted. (Ord. 99-3147, 9-7-1999)
(B) License Required: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the village any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license, or
in violation of the terms of such license.
It shall be unlawful for a person directly or indirectly responsible for any premises to which the public is admitted to give or offer to give any alcoholic
liquor to any person for consumption or to allow a person upon said premises to consume any alcoholic liquor unless said person is licensed to sell
alcoholic liquors on said premises, or is licensed as a market research organization for the purpose of product taste testing of new alcoholic liquors.
(Ord. 2008-4178, 2-4-2008)
3-2-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; REQUISITES:
An applicant for a license from the local liquor control commissioner shall submit an application in writing under oath stating: (Ord. 617, 1-22-1976)
(A) The name, age and address of the applicant, and the name, age and address of every sole owner, general partner, corporate officer, director, manager,
and anyone owning five percent (5%) or more of the aggregate limited partner interest or shares of the applicant business entity or parent of the
business entity. (Ord. 96-2802, 8-5-1996)
(B) The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
(C) The character of business of the applicant; and in case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
(D) The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was issued.
(E) The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time application is made.
(F) The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 35/460
(G) A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a similar other license on premises other than described in this application, and the
disposition of such application.
(H) A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in the Illinois liquor control act.
(I) Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
(J) That applicant will not violate any of the ordinances of the village or of the laws of the state or of the United States in the conduct of his place of
business.
(K) That applicant has not received or borrowed money or anything else of value, and that he will not receive or borrow money or anything else of value
(other than merchandising credit in the ordinary course of business for a period of not to exceed 30 days, as expressly permitted under section A of
235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-1 of the Illinois liquor control act), directly or indirectly from any manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor
representative of any such manufacturer, nor be a part in any way, directly or indirectly, to any violation by a manufacturer, distributor or importing
distributor of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-1 of the Illinois liquor control act. (Ord. 617, 1-22-1976)
(L) That such applicant and the premises are covered by a policy of dramshop insurance issued by a responsible insurance company authorized and
licensed to do business in the state of Illinois insuring such applicant against liability which such applicant may incur under the provisions of 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-21, and specifically designating the village of Lisle as certificate holder. The evidence of the insurance policy shall indicate that
the term of the insurance is of sufficient length to encompass the entire period of the license sought. All applicants shall be required to attach a
certificate of insurance coverage to said application. (Ord. 2010-4342, 10-4-2010)
(M) The classification of the license for which application is made.
(N) 1. The date of incorporation, if an Illinois corporation, or the date of becoming qualified under the Illinois business corporations act, to transact business
in Illinois if a foreign corporation. (Ord. 617, 1-22-1976)
2. All managers of the premises to be operated under such license must file documents entitled "statement of manager", providing information
necessary for the local liquor commissioner's determination. Any and all persons who become managers during the application process or during the
term of the license must also file a "statement of manager". Failure to do so will be grounds for revocation or suspension of the license. (Ord. 87-
1594, 9-8-1987, eff. 1-1-1988)
(O) The commissioner may, within his or her discretion, require any applicant for a new village liquor license, or any applicant for a renewal of a village
liquor license, to be fingerprinted. Should the applicant be a partnership corporation, the commissioner may, within his or her discretion, require the
following to be fingerprinted:
1. The officers, manager or director of the corporation, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate of more than five percent (5%) of
the capital stock of said corporation.
Any general partners or any limited partners of a partnership owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate limited partner interest in such
partnership.
2. All such fingerprinting shall be done by the village police department. Said fingerprints shall be submitted to the appropriate state and/or federal
agencies for processing as available. The cost of fingerprinting shall be recoverable from applicant. (Ord. 96-2802, 8-5-1996)
In addition to the foregoing information, such application shall contain such other and further information as the Illinois liquor control commission and
local liquor control commissioner may by rule or regulation not inconsistent with law prescribe.
If said application is made on behalf of a partnership, firm, association, club or corporation, then the same shall be signed and sworn to by at least
two (2) members of such partnership or the president and secretary of such corporation.
All applications shall be upon forms provided by the local liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 617, 1-22-1976)
3-2-5: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT:
The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for a
renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation has been served in the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be
examined the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof of his information in the performance of his duties,
and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by
the local liquor control commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf. (Ord. 617, 1-22-1976)
3-2-6: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
All liquor licenses shall be of the following classes, none of which shall be issued for any premises from which motor fuel is sold or dispensed:
CLASS
1
Class 1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors to be consumed on the premises designated therein, and the retail
sale of alcoholic liquors only in original packages, unopened, for consumption off the premises, whereby the licensed establishment
operating on the premises meets the definition of a "tavern" as stated in section 3-2-1 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 36/460
CLASS
2.1
Class 2.1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors on the premises designated therein for consumption on said
premises, and the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors in their original packages, unopened, for consumption off the premises whereby the
licensed establishment operating on the premises meets the definition of a "restaurant" as stated in section 3-2-1 of this chapter.
CLASS
2.2
Class 2.2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors on the premises designated therein for consumption on said
premises whereby the licensed establishment operating on the premises meets the definition of a "restaurant" as stated in section 3-2-1 of
this chapter.
CLASS
2.3
Class 2.3 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors on the premises designated therein for consumption on said
premises with a service bar only (no bar seating for patrons), whereby the licensed establishment operating on the premises meets the
definition of a "restaurant" as stated in section 3-2-1 of this chapter.
CLASS
2.4
Class 2.4 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of wine, beers and malt beverages on the premises designated therein for consumption
on said premises whereby the licensed establishment operating on the premises meets the definition of a "restaurant" as stated in section
3-2-1 of this chapter.
CLASS
2.5
Class 2.5 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of wines, beers and malt beverages on the premises designated therein for consumption
on said premises with a service bar only (no bar seating for patrons), whereby the licensed establishment operating on the premises
meets the definition of a "restaurant" as stated in section 3-2-1 of this chapter.
CLASS
3
Class 3 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor on the premises designated therein, for consumption on the premises
only, by incorporated clubs not for pecuniary profit, organized solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale and/or
consumption of alcoholic liquors, which have held a national or state charter of incorporation for a period of at least two (2) full years
previous to the making of the application for such license.
CLASS
4.1
Class 4.1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors in their original, unopened packages, on the premises designated
therein, but not for consumption on said premises, whereby the licensed establishment operating on the premises meets the definition of a
"package store" as stated in section 3-2-1 of this chapter. Tastings may be held in accordance with subsection 3-2-17(E) of this chapter.
CLASS
4.2
Class 4.2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors in their original, unopened packages, on the premises designated
therein, but not for consumption on said premises, whereby the licensed establishment operating on said premises meets the definition of
a "grocery store" as stated in section 3-2-1 of this chapter. The sales area devoted to alcoholic liquor shall be less than thirty percent
(30%) of the total sales area. The display of alcoholic liquors shall be confined to an area as approved by the local liquor commissioner.
Tastings may be held in accordance with subsection 3-2-17(E) of this chapter.
CLASS
4.3
Class 4.3 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors in their original, unopened packages, on the premises designated
therein, but not for consumption on said premises, whereby the licensed establishment operating on said premises meets the definition of
a "convenience store" as stated in section 3-2-1 of this chapter. The sales area devoted to alcoholic liquor shall be less than thirty percent
(30%) of the total sales area. The display of alcoholic liquor shall be confined to an area as approved by the local liquor commissioner.
Tastings may be held in accordance with subsection 3-2-17(E) of this chapter.
CLASS
5.1
Class 5.1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of wine, beer and malt beverages in their original, unopened packages, on the premises
designated therein, but not for consumption on said premises, whereby the licensed establishment operating on the premises meets the
definition of a "package store" as stated in section 3-2-1 of this chapter. Tastings of wine or beer may be held in accordance with
subsection 3-2-17(E) of this chapter.
CLASS
5.2
Class 5.2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of wine, beer and malt beverages in their original, unopened packages, on the premises
designated therein, but not for consumption on said premises, whereby the licensed establishment operating on said premises meets the
definition of a "grocery store" as stated in section 3-2-1 of this chapter. The sales area devoted to wine, beer and malt beverages shall not
exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total sales area. The display of wine, beer and malt beverages shall be confined to an area as
approved by the local liquor commissioner. Tastings of wine or beer may be held in accordance with subsection 3-2-17(E) of this chapter.
CLASS
5.3
Class 5.3 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of wine, beer and malt beverages in their original, unopened packages, on the premises
designated therein, but not for consumption on said premises, whereby the licensed establishment operating on said premises meets the
definition of a "convenience store" as stated in section 3-2-1 of this chapter. The sales area devoted to wine, beer and malt beverages
shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total sales area. The display of wine, beer and malt beverages shall be confined to an area as
approved by the local liquor commissioner. Tastings of wine or beer may be held in accordance with subsection 3-2-17(E) of this chapter.
CLASS
5.4
Class 5.4 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of wine and beer in original packages, unopened, for consumption off the premises, and
the retail sale of wine or beer to be consumed on the premises. (Ord. 2013-4471, 1-21-2013)
CLASS
6.1
Class 6.1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer manufactured on the premises in its original package for consumption off the
premises; and the sale of beer and wine for consumption on the premises. The licensee shall:
(A) Maintain accurate records as to the total gallons of beer manufactured on the premises and sold for consumption off premises, and
provide such records to the local liquor control commissioner or business office manager upon request;
(B) Segregate the portion of the licensed premises dedicated to the manufacturing of beer from the remainder of the premises, restricting
public access to the manufacturing area except during supervised tours;
(C) Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, payment of applicable taxes,
procurement of any required federal brewer's notice, Illinois manufacturer's liquor license, Illinois craft brewer's license, and all other
required licenses and permits concerning manufacture, packaging, storing, sale, and distribution of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 2015-4607,
9-14-2015)
CLASS
6.2
Class 6.2 licenses shall authorize a class 2.2 or class 2.4 licensee to make retail sales of beer manufactured on the premises in its
original package for consumption off the premises; provided that the licensee:
(A) Maintains accurate records as to the total gallons of beer manufactured on the premises and sold for consumption off premises, and
provides such records to the local liquor control commissioner or business office manager upon request;
(B) Segregates the portion of the licensed premises dedicated to the manufacturing of beer from the remainder of the premises, restricting
public access to the manufacturing area except during supervised tours;
(C) Limits the area designated to retail sales of beer manufactured on the premises: 1) to not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
total gross square footage area of the physical premises; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 37/460
(D) Complies with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, procurement of any required
federal brewer's notice, Illinois manufacturer's liquor license, Illinois craft brewer's license, and all other required licenses and permits
concerning manufacture, packaging, storing, sale, and distribution of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 2013-4505, 10-21-2013)
CLASS
7
Class 7 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of special events including, but not
limited to, festivals, carnivals, or fundraising events. A class 7 license shall not exceed six (6) consecutive days. A class 7 license shall not
be issued to any one organization for more than twelve (12) days in any twelve (12) month period. A class 7 license shall only be issued
to educational, fraternal, political, civic, religious or not for profit organizations or current Illinois liquor license retailers who do not hold a
village of Lisle liquor license. (Ord. 2013-4471, 1-21-2013)
CLASS
8
Class 8 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of wine and beer when also served with food on the premises designated therein for
consumption on said premises. The retail sale of wine and beer shall take place only during the following hours: Monday through Friday
from four o'clock (4:00) P.M. to nine thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M., or thirty (30) minutes prior to closing, whichever is earlier; Saturday and
Sunday from twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to nine thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M., or thirty (30) minutes prior to closing, whichever is earlier. No
retail sale of wine and beer will be permitted unless also served with food. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall approve the
menu of food offerings that accompany wine and beer sales before issuance and prior to renewal of a Class 8 license. The sale of wine or
beer for off premises consumption or through a drive-through window is expressly prohibited. (Ord. 2015-4582, 6-1-2015)
CLASS
8.1
Class 8.1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine for on premises consumption only to customers of personal services
establishments as defined in section 3-2-1 of this chapter. The retail sale of beer and wine pursuant to a Class 8.1 license is expressly
subject to the following conditions:
(A) The retail sale of beer or wine to a customer of a personal services establishment is limited to two (2) servings during any single
calendar day.
(B) Serving sizes for beer and wine shall be limited to no more than six (6) ounces of wine, and sixteen (16) ounces of beer.
(C) No window sign or any other signage visible from the outside of the business is permitted on the licensed premises or on surrounding
property that indicates that beer or wine is available for retail sale or delivery on the premises.
(D) Hours for sales and service of beer and wine shall be limited to the establishment's normal business hours.
(E) Complimentary service of beer and wine shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2019-4807, 2-4-2019)
CLASS
11
Class 11 licenses shall authorize retail sale of all alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises of a "hotel" as defined in section 3-2-1
of this chapter. This class shall include all banquets, conventions, meetings, group dining services, catering, cafeterias, restaurants, delis,
cocktail lounges, bars, general entertainment areas, executive floor lounges, package liquor sales, private clubs, weekend brunch service,
room service, health clubs, bar/vending machines in guestrooms, lobby and meeting room service or any other liquor dispensing facilities
located on the hotel premises.
CLASS
12
Class 12 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of champagne and wine on the premises designated therein, but not for consumption on
the premises where sold, and only in conjunction with the sale of flowers, plants, candies, chocolates, or baskets containing
miscellaneous nonalcoholic gift items. For purposes of this license classification, a "basket" shall be defined as a decorative gift container
which may be constructed of wood, metal, plastic, woven rope, decorative paper or plastic bag or such similar material the purpose of
which is to hold an arrangement of gift items. It is intended that the sale of packaged wine and champagne is merely an adjunct to the
sale of flowers, plants, candies, chocolates or other nonalcoholic gift items, and any advertising shall not indicate otherwise. No more than
ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the licensed premises shall be used for the display of wine or champagne. Tastings may be held in
accordance with subsection 3-2-17(E) of this chapter.
CLASS
13
Class 13 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors by a public park district for consumption only on the premises of any
publicly owned golf course.
CLASS
14
Class 14 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for immediate consumption only in connection with an off site catering
business operating within the village. In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a class 14 license shall only be issued to
persons who can demonstrate that they are operating a bona fide catering business.
CLASS
16
Class 16 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquor in bowling alleys for consumption on the premises. Alcoholic liquor
sold for such consumption may be distributed from bars, lounges or a restaurant located within the same structure as the bowling alley,
provided that there is no separate outside entrance leading directly into the bar or lounge.
CLASS
17
Class 17 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic beverages by a college or university, for consumption on the premises,
when groups are assembled for a common purpose other than the sale or consumption of alcohol.
Class 17 licenses shall also authorize the retail sale of champagne and wine on the premises designated therein, but not for consumption
on the premises where sold, and only in conjunction with the alumni office for the purpose of funding scholarship grants to students.
CLASS
18
Class 18 licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail by religious institutions at affiliated residential facilities, to residents
and their guests, for consumption on the premises.
CLASS
20
Class 20 licenses authorize taste testing of new alcoholic products on the licensed premises for the purposes of market research by a
bona fide market research organization under the following conditions:
(A) Free food and nonalcoholic beverages must be provided to each participant after the product testing has been completed;
(B) The village of Lisle business office manager must be notified in writing of test dates and times at least five (5) calendar days prior to
each test;
(C) No alcoholic liquor may be sold or offered for sale by the licensee. (Ord. 2013-4471, 1-21-2013)
3-2-7: LICENSE FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 38/460
The amount of the initial first time application fee and annual license fee for each class of license shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance.
All such fees shall be paid to the local liquor control commissioner or to the business office manager at the time application is made, and shall be forthwith
turned over to the finance director. In the event the license applied for is denied due to the lack of an available license, both the initial first time application
fee and the annual fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is denied or not issued for any reason other than lack of an available license, the
initial first time application fee shall be retained by the village and the annual fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, then both fees
shall be deposited in the general corporate fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the corporate authorities by proper action.
When application is made for an initial license after July 1 of any calendar year, and such applicant has not engaged in the business of alcoholic liquor
sales prior to July 1 of said year, the annual license fee shall be fifty percent (50%) of the amount provided therefor in the annual fee ordinance. The initial
first year application fee shall not be prorated.
There shall be no refund of any portion of the annual license fee imposed under this chapter for any portion of a year during which the licensee ceases to
engage in the business of selling alcoholic liquor for any reason.
The application fee for a new manager of an existing liquor license retailer shall be as established in the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 2009-4260, 7-20-
2009)
3-2-8: NUMBER OF LICENSES ISSUED:
(A) Determination Of Licenses Issued: The mayor and village board of trustees shall by motion and majority vote determine the number of licenses to be
issued in each class.
(B) Renewal And Expiration: In the event a license is not renewed at the expiration thereof or is surrendered by the licensee at any time, then a license in
the same class and for the same location as that license shall be available for a period of thirty (30) calendar days from the date of surrender or
expiration of the license to the same or a different applicant qualified under this code. If, at the expiration of the thirty (30) calendar days, the license
has not been issued, it will no longer be available for issuance without approval of the mayor and village board of trustees. All terms, conditions and
fees as set forth in this code shall apply to a license issued pursuant to this section. Nothing in this section shall prevent the village mayor and board of
trustees from decreasing the number of licenses issued in the village or shall be construed as creating a vested right in the issuance of a license.
(C) Change In Class: Requests from a current liquor license holder to change from a class that allows for the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors to a class
that allows for the retail sale of wine, beer and malt beverages only, may be granted by the local liquor control commissioner without village board
approval as long as all other terms of the new class are the same or more restrictive than the previous class. Such requests may only be granted upon
renewal for the next calendar year. (Ord. 2008-4172, 1-7-2008)
3-2-9: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
(A) Nature Of License; Nontransferable, Refund: A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance, unless
sooner revoked as in this chapter and in the Illinois liquor control act provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such
license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that the executors or
administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustees of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of
alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of such
decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but not longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from
operating under such license in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. (Ord. 541, 11-19-1974)
(B) Changes In Ownership Or Personnel: Any and all changes in officers, directors, managers, or changes involving five percent (5%) or more ownership
interests in limited liability companies, partnerships or corporate liquor license holders shall be reported in writing to the village of Lisle business office
manager within ten (10) days of said change. All new officers, owners, directors or managers shall meet all of the standards of this chapter, shall pay
an application fee and shall be subject to review by the local liquor control commissioner. Any change resulting in an ownership interest by an individual
not eligible to hold a liquor license, shall terminate such license. Any ownership change resulting in new ownership interests totaling more than fifty
percent (50%) results in the termination of the liquor license. All sales of liquor must cease until a new license has been issued based on the submittal
of a new application and related fees as indicated in the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 2010-4342, 10-4-2010)
(C) Term Of License: Each such license (except class 7 licenses) shall terminate on December 31 of the year for which it is issued, unless terminated at an
earlier date for failure to maintain adequate dramshop insurance or by reason of any other action by the local liquor control commissioner. The annual
fee to be paid shall be paid on or before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on December 15 of the year preceding the year for which such license is issued.
There shall be a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the annual fee assessed for late payment of the annual fee. (Ord. 86-1378, 1-20-1986; amd. Ord.
2010-4342, 10-4-2010)
(D) Renewal: A licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof only if he is qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal
license is sought is suitable for such purpose; and, provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested
right which shall in any case prevent the village president and board of trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the village.
(Ord. 87-1594, 9-8-1987, eff. 1-1-1988; amd. Ord. 2010-4342, 10-4-2010)
(E) Licensing Conditions: The following shall be express conditions of the granting of any license hereunder:
1. Every licensee seeking to renew a license after January 1, 1993, and every applicant for a new license after January 1, 1993, shall submit to the
local liquor control commissioner the proof of insurance as more fully set forth in subsection 3-2-4(L) of this chapter, said proof to be furnished at the
time of application for renewal or for a new license. The insurance shall be an annual policy covering the full license period, stating on its face or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 39/460
within the certificate of insurance to be attached thereto, that the insurance is in force for said period and that no cancellation, rescission or
revocation of said insurance shall take place unless and until said insurer provides to the village local liquor control commissioner ten (10) business
days' notice of such impending cancellation, rescission or revocation. In addition, a duplicate of said notice shall be provided by said insurer to the
business office manager. (Ord. 92-2338, 12-7-1992; amd. Ord. 95-2713, 12-4-1995; Ord. 2010-4342, 10-4-2010)
2. Every licensee whose dramshop insurance has either lapsed or been revoked, terminated, canceled or suspended, and every licensee who has
received oral or written notice of such lapse, revocation, termination, cancellation or suspension shall immediately notify the local liquor control
commissioner of such occurrence. Failure to provide such notification will be grounds for the exercise by the local liquor control commissioner of his
emergency powers as more fully set forth in subsection 3-2-2(B)4 of this chapter, or as set forth under any other provision in this chapter.
3. Upon notification that a licensee's dramshop insurance has lapsed or has been revoked, terminated, canceled or suspended, the local liquor control
commissioner may invoke emergency powers as set forth in subsection 3-2-2(B)4 of this chapter, or in his discretion, may invoke his powers as set
forth in section 3-2-20 of this chapter, and shall take appropriate steps to terminate the license held by the uninsured licensee. Any license so
terminated may be reinstated, and any license threatened with termination may be brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
without further cost to the licensee, by submitting to the local liquor control commissioner proof of renewal of previously held insurance or
reinsurance under the terms of a new policy. All such renewal or reinsurance shall comport with the requirements of subsection 3-2-4(L) of this
chapter. (Ord. 92-2338, 12-7-1992; amd. Ord. 2010-4342, 10-4-2010)
(F) Fingerprinting: Each applicant shall, within thirty (30) days of request made by the local liquor control commissioner for fingerprints pursuant to
subsection 3-2-4(O) of this chapter, submit said fingerprints to the village in the form requested by the commissioner. Failure to comply with this
subsection shall be cause for revocation or suspension of a liquor license. (Ord. 88-1721, 9-6-1988; amd. Ord. 2010-4342, 10-4-2010)
(G) Reporting Of Violations: Every licensee and every officer, agent or employee thereof shall have an affirmative duty to immediately notify the village
police department upon the occurrence of either a violation of law which is taking or has taken place upon the licensed premises or a threatened or
actual physical altercation between any two (2) or more persons upon the licensed premises. The failure of a licensee, officer, agent or employee to so
notify shall constitute cause for suspension or revocation of the licensee's liquor license. For the purpose of this subsection "licensed premises" shall
include, but is not limited to, any building, structure, parking lot or vacant area directly or indirectly related to the retail sale of alcoholic liquor.
(H) Access To Licensed Premises: The main entrance to the licensed premises shall be unlocked at all times during business hours; provided, however,
that the main entrance may be locked no earlier than ten (10) minutes before the closing hour of the premises. If the licensee, or an officer, agent or
employee thereof, closes the licensed premises prior to the regular closing time, all individuals who are not officers, agents or employees must first
vacate the licensed premises. If the main entrance is locked for any reason during business hours, the licensee or officer, agent or employee thereof,
shall immediately allow access to any law enforcement officer wishing to enter the premises. The failure to comply with any provision of this subsection
shall constitute cause for suspension or revocation of the licensee's liquor license. (Ord. 93-2371, 3-15-1993; amd. Ord. 2010-4342, 10-4-2010)
(I) Owner Or Manager On Duty: An owner, manager, assistant manager, or temporary manager must be on duty on the licensed premises during all hours
of operation. (Ord. 2010-4342, 10-4-2010)
3-2-10: PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO LICENSE:
No license shall be issued by the local liquor control commissioner to:
(A) A person, other than a corporation, who is not a resident of the village.
(B) A person who is not of good character or reputation in the community in which he resides.
(C) A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
(D) A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law, if the state commission determines, after investigation, that such person
has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust.
(E) A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame.
(F) A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
(G) A person whose license issued under this chapter or the Illinois liquor control act has been revoked for cause.
(H) A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application. (Ord.
541, 11-19-1974)
(I) A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited partnership thereof owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate limited
partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than residence within the political
subdivision. (Ord. 96-2802, 8-5-1996)
(J) A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the
stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the political
subdivision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 40/460
(K) A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of
the licensee.
(L) A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor
subsequent to the passage of this chapter, or shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
(M) A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to
be issued.
(N) Any law enforcing public official, any mayor of the village, any member of the village board of trustees, or any president or member of the county
board; and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor. (Ord.
541, 11-19-1974)
3-2-11: CLOSING HOURS:
No person shall sell, offer for sale or permit to be sold, or to allow anyone on his premises to consume or to have in his possession for consumption any
alcoholic liquor between the hours specified as follows: (Ord. 2009-4243, 2-2-2009)
(A) CLASS 1 THROUGH 7, 11 THROUGH 18:
Monday through Friday 1:00 A.M. - 7:00 A.M.
Saturday 2:00 A.M. - 7:00 A.M.
Sunday, for class 1 only (except as indicated below when time reverts to standard daylight time) 2:00 A.M. - 12:00 noon
Sunday for classes 2 through 7 and 11 through 18 (except as indicated below when time reverts to standard daylight
time)
2:00 A.M. - 10:00 A.M.
Sunday, if also December 24 or December 31 for classes 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, and 12 only 2:00 A.M. - 8:00 A.M.
Legal holidays, as established by state law 2:00 A.M. - 7:00 A.M.
New Year's Day 3:00 A.M. - 7:00 A.M.
On those Sundays when the time changes back to standard daylight time, the licensed establishment shall close at two o'clock (2:00) A.M. prior to setting
clocks back to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. After the time changes to one o'clock (1:00) A.M., the licensed establishment may not reopen for one more hour. In
effect, the number of consecutive hours open shall not increase due to the time change. (Ord. 2010-4342, 10-4-2010; amd. Ord. 2013-4471, 1-21-2013)
(B) CLASS 20:
Sunday through Saturday 10:00 P.M. - 10:00 A.M.
(Ord. 2009-4243, 2-2-2009)
The sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on election days and Sundays is hereby authorized within the hours hereinabove specified. (Ord. 2004-3808, 2-2-2004)
3-2-12: DISPLAYING LICENSE:
Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 541, 11-19-
1974)
3-2-13: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
(A) Retail Sales Near Churches, Schools, Etc.: No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any
church, school other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children or any
military or naval station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants,
food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on, if such place of business so exempted shall have
been established for such purposes prior to the taking effect of this chapter, or to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on
premises within one hundred feet (100') of any church or school where such church or school has been established within such one hundred feet (100')
since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be measured to the nearest part of any
building used for worship services or educational programs and not to property boundaries. In all other instances, the distance of one hundred feet
(100') shall be measured from property line to property line.
Nothing in this subsection shall apply to a class 17 license, nor prohibit the issuance of a license to a college, university, church or private school to sell
at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 41/460
object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors. (Ord. 2004-3808, 2-2-2004)
Nothing in this subsection shall apply to a class 18 license, nor prohibit the issuance of a license to religious institutions at affiliated residential facilities
to sell at retail alcoholic liquor to residents and their guests for consumption on the premises. (Ord. 2005-3956, 10-17-2005)
(B) Stores Selling School Supplies: No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of
business wherein the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted consists of schoolbooks, school
supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors.
(C) Access From Licensed Premises To Dwelling Quarters: In the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon any premises
which has any access which leads from such premises to any other portion of the same building or structure used for dwelling or lodging purpose and
which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for any use by the public. This provision shall not prevent any connection between such premises and
such other portion of the building or structure which is used only by the licensee, his family and personal guests.
(D) Change Of Location: A retail dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only within the premises or portion described in the application for
such license. A location may be changed or altered only after a written application has been made to the local liquor control commissioner and the
same has been approved. (Ord. 541, 11-19-1974)
(E) Village Buildings: Alcoholic liquors may be sold in or delivered to buildings belonging to or under the control of the village with prior approval of the
local liquor commissioner and upon presentation of evidence of any and all insurance coverages required by the village. Such coverages must name
the village of Lisle, its officers, employees, agents and assigns as additional insured and evidence of such additional insured coverage acceptable to
the local liquor commissioner must be provided before any license approval will be issued. (Ord. 2015-4607, 9-14-2015)
3-2-14: VIEW FROM STREET:
In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the premises is licensed (other than a restaurant), no screen, blind, curtain,
partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such premises, which shall prevent a
clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction nor
any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which shall prevent a full view of the entire interior of such
premises from the street, road or sidewalk and said premises must be so located that there shall be a full view of the entire interior of such premises from
the street, road or sidewalk.
All rooms wherein liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural lights or artificial white
lights so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the view into any such licensed premises required by the foregoing
provisions shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee or by him wilfully suffered to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be
subject to revocation in the manner herein provided. In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the local liquor control commissioner shall have the
right to require or cause to be required the filing with him of plans, drawings and photographs showing the clearance as above required. (Ord. 541, 11-19-
1974)
3-2-15: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
All premises used for retail sale of alcoholic liquors, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinance
provisions regulating the conditions of premises used for the storage of food for human consumption. (Ord. 86-1383, 2-3-1986)
3-2-16: EMPLOYEES:
(A) Diseases: It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with or who is a carrier of
any contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease to work in or
about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor.
(B) Qualifications: It shall be unlawful to employ any person not possessing the same qualifications as are necessary for the applicant to possess in order
to secure a license under this chapter, except the requirement as to citizenship in the United States. (Ord. 86-1383, 2-3-1986)
(C) Dispensing Of Liquor By Individuals Under Twenty One Years Of Age/Employment Of Minors: No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall
tend bar, tend a package counter or window, sell or deliver alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises, or sell, handle, draw, pour, mix, dispense,
drain or serve any alcoholic liquor and no licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of a licensee shall engage,
employ or permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years so to do; provided that, persons eighteen (18) years of age and over who have
completed the beverage alcohol sellers and services education and training (BASSET) program approved by the educational foundation of the National
Restaurant Association or have completed such training at a facility approved under 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 301/15-10 may serve alcoholic
beverages to patrons who are dining at any licensed premises, except classes 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 7, 12, 14 and 16 licensed premises if the
service of such beverages is only incidental to their primary job function of serving food. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to
prohibit an employee under the age of twenty one (21) years from handling unopened containers of alcoholic liquor if such handling is in the capacity of
a stocker on a licensed premises and for a licensed employer. (Ord. 2000-3248, 11-6-2000; amd. Ord. 2008-4228, 10-6-2008; Ord. 2013-4471, 1-21-
2013)
3-2-17: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON LICENSEE:
(A) Sales To Minors, Habitual Drunkards, Mental Incompetents:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 42/460
1. No licensee or agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years or
to any intoxicated person or to any person known by him to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift or insane, feeble minded or distracted person. (Ord.
93-2351, 1-18-1993)
2. The serving of minors and revocation of licenses pursuant to statutory authority for serving to any person buying for another or accepting
identification which the licensee knows or has reason to know may be either altered or may not be the identification material of the particular
purchaser submitted for purposes of allowing some other underaged person to obtain alcoholic liquor shall be the basis for revocation of licenses.
Licenses may also be revoked for any reason permitted under state law. (Ord. 86-1378, 1-20-1986)
3. In every location within the village where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place printed cards, no larger
than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11"), which shall be supplied by the business office manager and which shall contain the
following information:
WARNING TO MINORS
Pursuant to the provisions of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-16 and 5/6-20, and the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 3 of the Village Code of the
Village of Lisle, you are subject to a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance, or imprisonment, or both, if you are under the age of twenty-one
(21) and purchase alcoholic beverages, or misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic beverages. If valid
identification is requested and is not presented prior to sale or service, the merchant may refuse the sale or service.
PREGNANT WOMEN
Government Warning: According to the surgeon general, women should not drink alcoholic beverages during pregnancy because of the risk of
birth defects.
(Ord. 2005-3897, 2-21-2005)
4. If a licensee or a licensee's agent or employee believes, has reason to believe or should have reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because the prospective recipient is underage, such licensee, agent or employee shall, before making such sale or delivery,
demand presentation of some form of positive identification containing proof of age issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties.
(Ord. 92-2238, 1-20-1992)
(B) Gifts: No commissioner, official or employee of the village shall solicit or accept any gift, gratuity, emolument or employment from any person or agent
of any person holding a village liquor license, and the holder of any liquor license is hereby forbidden to give or offer to give to any commissioner,
official or employee of the village any gift, gratuity, emolument, or employment. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance and the license of any such person who, himself or through an agent, violates
this subsection shall be revoked forthwith.
(C) Peddling: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the village. (Ord. 541, 11-19-1974)
(D) Happy Hours Prohibited:
1. All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed
premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multiuse establishment which holds a valid retailer's license operates on its premises
more than one establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at retail, the hotel or multiuse establishment shall maintain at each such
establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at that establishment.
2. No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
(a) Serve two (2) or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one person for consumption by that one person, except selling or delivering wine by
the bottle or carafe;
(b) Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at
private functions not open to the general public; (Ord. 89-1995, 10-2-1989)
(c) Sell, offer to sell, or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any person at a price other than that charged all other persons on that same day of
business (day of business being from open to close, which may cover hours on 2 calendar dates), except as authorized in subsection (D)3(g) of
this section; (Ord. 2006-4075, 12-4-2006)
(d) Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the price
regularly charged for the drink on that day;
(e) Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or
(f) Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsections (D)2(a) through
(D)2(e) of this section.
3. Nothing in subsection (D)2 of this section shall be construed to prohibit a licensee from:
(a) Offering free food or entertainment at any time;
(b) Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
(c) Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
(d) Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract between a hotel or multiuse establishment and another group for the holding of any
function, meeting, convention or trade show;
(e) Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 43/460
(f) Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited to, buckets), carafes or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in such
manner and delivered to two (2) or more persons at one time; or
(g) Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in whole or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment not regularly
scheduled. (Ord. 89-1995, 10-2-1989)
(E) Tastings: With prior approval of the local liquor control commissioner, an off premises retail licensee may conduct tastings as defined in section 3-2-1 of
this chapter. Requests for approval of tasting events shall be submitted in writing to the local liquor control commissioner, with a copy to the business
office manager, a minimum of five (5) business days before the scheduled event. Requests for approval for multiple free tastings may be made in a
single request, however, no free tastings may be held without the express approval of the local liquor control commissioner. Tastings are limited to
three (3) samples per customer per day in the following amounts: distilled spirits, one-fourth (1/4) ounce; wine, one ounce; beer, two (2) ounces.
An on premises retail licensee may offer for sale or serve more than one drink per person for product sampling purposes without violating subsection 3-
2-17(D)2(a) of this section, provided the total quantity of the sampling package, regardless of the number of containers in which the alcoholic liquor is
being served, does not exceed one ounce of distilled spirits, four (4) ounces of wine, or sixteen (16) ounces of beer. (Ord. 2013-4471, 1-21-2013)
3-2-18: POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN VEHICLES:
(A) Except as provided for in subsection (B) of this section, no person shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in or upon any motor
vehicle except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
(B) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a restaurant licensed to sell alcoholic liquor in the village of Lisle may permit a patron to remove
one unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine for off premises consumption provided that the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a
portion of the bottle of wine with the meal on the restaurant premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises
pursuant to this section shall be securely sealed by the licensee or an agent of the licensee prior to removal from the premises, and sealed in a
transparent one time use tamperproof bag. The licensee or agent of the licensee shall attach to the bag a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal.
Wine that is resealed in accordance with the provisions of this subsection and not tampered with shall not be deemed an unsealed container for the
purposes of subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 2006-4074, 12-4-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
3-2-19: PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to permit in the licensed premises, the exposure of any male or female performer in the presence of
the audience, or the giving of the illusion of nudeness in the presence of the audience, or exposure of the lower abdomen, genital organs, buttocks or
breasts, and it shall further be unlawful for any licensee to advertise and/or conduct on the premises any "topless" or "bottomless" entertainment or activity.
(Ord. 541, 11-19-1974)
The following kinds of conduct on premises in the village licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, are prohibited:
(A) The performance of acts, or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts;
(B) The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals;
(C) The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals;
(D) The permitting, by a licensee, of any person to remain in or upon the premises who exposes to public view his or her entire breasts or buttocks;
(E) The permitting, by a licensee, of any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of his or her genitals,
vulva or anus;
(F) The displaying of moving pictures or photographic slide presentations depicting acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy,
bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act. (Ord. 611, 12-2-1975)
3-2-20: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
(A) Duties; Chief Of Police: It shall be the duty of the chief of police to report to the local liquor control commissioner the following occurrences:
1. Receipt by the chief of police of a report by a law enforcement officer or village official of a violation by a licensee of any law or ordinance pertaining
to the sale of alcoholic liquor; or
2. A conviction of a licensee by a court of law of violation of any ordinance or law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 86-1378, 1-20-1986)
(B) Notice; Hearing; Penalty; Forfeiture Of Fees:
1. Notice Of Violation: Upon receipt by the local liquor control commissioner of any report or notice, including a report referenced in subsection (A) of
this section, of any violation by a license holder, or his agent, of any village ordinance, resolution, code, or state or federal statute, regulation, or other
order relating to the conduct of such business or occupation, the local liquor control commissioner shall deliver, or cause to be delivered, via certified
mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the license holder to appear at a public hearing to consider appropriate penalties in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Any such notice issued pursuant to this subsection (B)1 shall: a) specify the provisions of this chapter that the license
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 44/460
holder is alleged to have violated, as well as any other state or federal violations, or the conviction of any such license holder, and b) provide the
date, time, and place of the public hearing, which date shall be not less than three (3) days after delivery of any such notice.
2. Public Hearing: Any public hearing conducted under this subsection (B) shall be convened and presided over by the local liquor control
commissioner, and conducted in accordance with applicable state law for purposes of fulfilling any of the powers, functions, and duties of the village
or the local liquor control commissioner in this chapter. (Ord. 2004-3836, 5-17-2004)
3. Penalties For Violations: The local liquor control commissioner shall deliver to a liquor license holder, within five (5) days after the close of any public
hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (B)2 of this section, via certified mail, return receipt requested, an order that shall state: a) the penalties, if
any, that shall be levied on the license holder, and b) the finding and reasons for any such penalties. Penalties for violations of this chapter may
include suspension of a liquor license for a period of not more than thirty (30) days, or revocation of any such license. In addition to, or in lieu of, any
such suspension or revocation, the local liquor control commissioner may levy a fine on the license holder, which fine shall not exceed:
(a) An amount as established by the annual fee ordinance for a first violation within a twelve (12) month period;
(b) An amount as established by the annual fee ordinance for a second violation within a twelve (12) month period; and
(c) An amount as established by the annual fee ordinance for a third and all subsequent violations within a twelve (12) month period.
Each day a violation exists shall be construed as a separate and distinct offense; provided, however, that not more than an amount as established
by the annual fee ordinance in fines may be imposed on any license holder during the term of its license. The local liquor control commissioner
may, in his sole and absolute discretion, require that the license holder pay for part or all of the costs of any public hearing conducted pursuant to
subsection (B)2 of this section, including, without limitation, attorney fees, document production, and all costs associated with the preparation and
delivery of any notices issued under subsection (B)1 of this section. Any fine or cost imposed upon a license holder pursuant to this subsection
(B)3 shall be paid in full within thirty (30) days after the close of the public hearing. In the event that the license holder fails, for any reason
whatsoever, to pay any such fines or costs within such thirty (30) day period, the liquor control commissioner may initiate, or cause to be initiated,
appropriate proceedings under either this code, or in any action in law or equity, to compel payment of any such delinquent fines or costs, and, in
addition to any other remedies available to the liquor control commissioner to compel payment, the liquor control commissioner may suspend or
revoke the license of, or levy additional fines upon, the license holder without further public hearing. (Ord. 2005-3907, 3-21-2005)
4. Forfeiture Of License Fee: Any license holder whose license is revoked pursuant to subsection (B)3 of this section shall forfeit any license fees paid
to the village. (Ord. 2004-3836, 5-17-2004)
(C) Closure Of Premises; Liquor Control Commissioner: In addition to the powers set forth in subsection (B) of this section, the local liquor control
commissioner may, at his discretion, order, upon the issuance of a written order, the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving
the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, if the local liquor control commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of
a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community. If such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another
business or businesses on the licensee's premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses. (Ord. 86-1378, 1-20-1986)
(D) Notice Of Appeal: The president and board of trustees of the village has heretofore adopted resolution 87-489, providing that in the event of any
appeal from an order or action of the local liquor control commissioner, the appeal to the Illinois state liquor control commission shall be limited to a
review of the official record of the proceedings before said local liquor control commissioner. In such event the said local liquor control commissioner
shall file with the Illinois state liquor control commission the certified official record of the proceedings within five (5) days after notice of the filing of
such an appeal. The said state commission shall review the propriety of the order or action of the said local liquor control commissioner on the said
certified official record. (Ord. 87-1594, 9-8-1987, eff. 1-1-1988)
(E) Suspension Ordered; Display Of Sign: At all times during the term of a suspension ordered by the local liquor control commissioner, the licensee shall
display a sign no less than four (4) square feet containing the following information:
No alcoholic liquor will be sold at this location from (date) to (date) , due to the suspension of liquor license.
By order of the Village of Lisle Local Liquor Commissioner.
Said sign shall be located in plain view of any person immediately upon entering the licensed premises and shall be clearly legible by such a person.
(Ord. 88-1745, 11-7-1988)
3-2-21: POWDERED ALCOHOL:
No person shall sell, offer for sale, or deliver, receive, or purchase for resale any product consisting of or containing powdered alcohol. (Ord. 2016-4651, 5-
2-2016)
3-2-22: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter, other than those for which specific penalties are herein provided, shall be fined as established by the
annual fee ordinance for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2016-4651, 5-2-2016)
Chapter 3
ANTIQUE, SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 45/460
The term "secondhand stores" shall include antique dealers. All references herein to the singular shall include the plural, and all references to the plural
shall include the singular. (Ord. 78-756, 4-25-1978)
3-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct any antique, other secondhand or junk store in the village without first having obtained a license therefor or
without first complying with the provisions of this chapter.
The initial first year nonrefundable application fee and annual license fee shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance, and no license shall be
issued except upon payment of all applicable fees.
There shall be no refund of any portion of the annual license fee imposed under this chapter for any portion of a year during which the licensee ceases to
operate any antique or other secondhand store within the village.
Dealers in used books, used musical instruments, and used vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-4257, 6-1-2009)
3-3-3: NUMBER OF LICENSES LIMITED; TRANSFER:
The village board of trustees shall by motion and majority vote determine the number of licenses for antique, secondhand and junk stores that shall be
issued and outstanding at any given time. No license shall be transferred or converted. Any transfer, conversion or attempted transfer or conversion shall
automatically render the issued license null and void. Any such license shall apply only to the premises for which the license was originally issued and
shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee. The mayor may revoke any licenses issued hereunder for a violation of any of
the provisions of this section, subject to notice and an opportunity to be heard. (Ord. 2008-4173, 1-7-2008)
3-3-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for licenses shall be made to the business office manager in writing and shall state the name of the applicant, the location to be used and all
such other information as may be requested by the application form as amended from time to time. Upon receipt of the application, the business office
manager shall notify the chief of police who shall investigate the character of the applicant, and shall report to the business office manager the result of
such investigation. No license shall be issued to any person of bad character nor to any person who shall have been convicted of receiving stolen goods,
burglary, robbery, theft or any other crime or offense involving stealth or deception. (Ord. 98-2956, 2-2-1998)
3-3-5: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
(A) All operations, activities and storage shall be conducted wholly inside a building or buildings.
(B) Pawnshops are hereby expressly prohibited within the village. (Ord. 96-2825, 12-2-1996)
3-3-6: PURCHASE FROM MINORS PROHIBITED:
All antique dealers and other secondhand stores, together with all dealers of junk, rags or any secondhand article whatsoever, within the village, be and
the same are hereby forbidden and prohibited from purchasing any article whatsoever from any minors, without the written consent of their parents or
guardian. (Ord. 78-756, 4-25-1978)
3-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person who is found to have violated or failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter by a court of competent jurisdiction, will be fined the sum as
established by the annual fee ordinance. A separate and distinct violation shall be deemed committed on each day during which any person is or remains
in noncompliance with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
Chapter 4
SOLICITORS
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: Solicitation activities conducted by or on behalf of an entity that operates with a primary objective of making a profit.
NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: Solicitation activities conducted by or on behalf of an entity that operates without a commercial objective. Such
entities include charitable, religious, political, and other not for profit organizations.
PERSON: Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any combination thereof.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has obtained a valid solicitation permit, as hereinafter provided.
SERIOUS FELONIES: Any felony which involves violence, deceit, fraud or misrepresentation except for those which were committed more than ten (10)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 46/460
years prior to the date of the application for a permit.
SOLICITATION ACTIVITIES: Going upon any premises not owned or leased by the solicitor for the purpose of engaging in any of the following activities:
opinion taking; distribution of printed information; seeking to obtain donations of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value; selling
or acquiring orders or contracts for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, products, or services of any kind for either immediate or future delivery, by
any person.
SOLICITOR: Any person who engages in solicitation activities. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
3-4-2: SOLICITATION PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation activities unless such person shall have first obtained a solicitation permit from the village as
hereinafter provided, with the following exceptions:
(A) Act Of Expressing Ideas: Persons engaging in the act of expressing ideas or distributing free literature for charitable, benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic, not for profit, religious, eleemosynary or political purposes shall not be required to obtain a solicitation permit from the village unless and until
such activities are coupled with a request for donations or the offering of property or services for sale.
(B) Placing Hangers On Doors: Persons placing hangers on doors for noncommercial solicitation purposes without attracting the attention of the occupant
shall not be required to obtain a solicitation permit from the village.
(C) Constitutional Rights: Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or enforced to deprive any person of any rights guaranteed under the constitutions of
the state of Illinois or the United States. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
3-4-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
(A) Contents: Application for a solicitation permit shall be made upon a form provided by the village which shall contain the following information:
1. The full name, mailing address and telephone number of the person or organization, if any, sponsoring, promoting or conducting the proposed
activities;
2. The full name, mailing address and telephone number of the individual person or persons, if any, who will have responsibility for the supervision of
the proposed activities;
3. The full name of the individual person or persons age eighteen (18) and over who will be engaged in the proposed solicitation activities;
4. The mailing address, date of birth and physical description of the individual person or persons age eighteen (18) and over who will be engaged in the
proposed solicitation activities;
5. The dates and hours in which the solicitation is proposed to begin, the expected duration of the proposed activities, and the geographic area within
the village wherein such solicitation shall be conducted at a particular time of day;
6. Description sufficient for identification of vehicles to be used in solicitation;
7. The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for a permit under this chapter, if any;
8. Whether a solicitation permit issued to the applicant under this chapter has ever been revoked;
9. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or the ordinances of any other Illinois
municipality regulating solicitation;
10. In the case of commercial solicitation, a copy of the most recent annual report filed with the Illinois secretary of state, pursuant to 805 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/14.05, shall be filed by all corporate applicants. All noncorporate applicants shall submit a copy of the most recent certificate of
registration from the Illinois department of revenue, pursuant to either 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/6, 110/6, 115/6, or 120/2a, whichever
provision is applicable;
11. If a domestic corporation has not yet been required to file an annual report, it shall submit instead a copy of its articles of incorporation. If a foreign
corporation has not yet been required to file an annual report, it shall submit instead a copy of the certificate of authority issued to it by the secretary
of state. This subsection (A)11 shall not apply to any organization which is a political subdivision or is associated with a political subdivision of the
state;
12. Name and address of the person or organization whom the applicant is employed by or represents, and the length of time of such employment or
representation, if applicable;
13. A description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the solicitation in which the applicant or agent will engage;
14. Verification that the applicant and agents have never been convicted of a commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or
federal law of the United States;
15. In the case of noncommercial solicitation, the applicant shall submit a financial statement of said noncommercial organization for the preceding
twelve (12) months which shall include a balance sheet and statement of income and expenses clearly stating forth the following: gross receipts and
gross income from all sources specifying total receipts and income from each separate solicitation project or source; cost of administration; cost of
solicitation; cost of programs designed to inform or educate the public; funds or properties transferred out of the state, with explanation as to recipient
and purpose; total net income amount for each major purpose, charitable or otherwise. Statements shall be signed by the president or other
authorized officer or agent and shall be accompanied by an opinion signed by an independent certified public accountant that said financial
statement fairly represents the financial operation of the organization.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 47/460
A copy of the annual report to the attorney general of Illinois required by 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/4 may be presented in lieu of the
aforementioned financial statements. For the purpose of financial statements, the definitions and standards applicable to the annual report to the
attorney general as set forth in said provision shall be utilized. This subsection (A)15 shall not apply to any organization which is a political
subdivision or is associated with a political subdivision of the State.
In the event a noncommercial organization has not been established for a period of twelve (12) months, a copy of the registration statement filed with
the Attorney General of Illinois pursuant to 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/2, may be utilized;
16. All applicants shall submit an indemnification and hold harmless agreement for the purpose of indemnifying the Village for all claims for damages to
persons or property arising from solicitation activities within the Village. The agreement shall be in a form provided by the Business Office Manager;
17. All applicants shall provide all such other information as may be requested by the application form, as amended from time to time.
(B) Fees: Each application for solicitation permit shall be accompanied by a license fee as established by the annual fee ordinance.
(C) Permit Duration: A permit referred to herein shall be valid for a period of up to ninety (90) days as specified on the permit application. (Ord. 2011-4408,
10-17-2011)
(D) Grounds For Denial: All applications for a solicitation permit shall be filed with the Village Manager or his/her designee and shall be verified under oath.
The Village Manager or his/her designee, within five (5) business days of receipt of the application, shall consider the information contained therein and
shall deny only the applications of applicants:
1. Who have violated one of the provisions of this chapter;
2. Whose solicitation permit issued hereunder has previously been revoked pursuant to section 3-4-10 of this chapter within the last thirty six (36)
months;
3. Who are themselves or who employ to solicit any person who has been convicted of a serious felony (as defined in section 3-4-1 of this chapter)
under the laws of any State or Federal law of the United States; or
4. Whose application does not contain all of the information and documentation required in this section.
If the applicant has complied with the above provisions, a solicitation permit shall be issued. The grounds set forth above shall be the only grounds
under which an application to solicit will be denied. In addition, failure to render a decision within five (5) business days shall constitute an approval of
the application and a permit shall be issued. (Ord. 2018-4761, 4-16-2018)
(E) Notification Of Denial; Appeal:
1. In the event that any permit to engage in solicitation is denied for the reasons stated herein, the Business Office Manager shall immediately notify
the applicant in writing of the reasons for said denial.
2. If the applicant is denied a permit, an appeal may be filed. The President and Board of Trustees shall hear appeals concerning a denial. An appeal
must be filed in the Village Manager's Office within twenty one (21) days after the date of denial of the application of permit by the Business Office
Manager.
3. If a hearing is requested, the President and Board of Trustees shall schedule a hearing at their next regularly scheduled meeting. The appealing
party shall have the right to file additional documents, amend the written appeal, and to appear at such hearing in person, or by attorney, or
otherwise to examine and cross examine witnesses.
4. The President and Board of Trustees shall not be bound by the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts of law, but shall, in ascertaining the
conditions and practices involved in the decision appealed, take into account all reliable, probative, and substantial evidence produced at the hearing
relating to the denial of the application. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
3-4-4: RECORDS OF APPLICATIONS, PERMITS:
The Village Clerk shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information
and data pertaining thereto, all solicitation permits issued under the provisions of this chapter, and a record of the denial of any and all applications.
Applications for permits shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every permit issued and any renewal thereof shall be identified with the
duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
3-4-5: VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the governing body of the village that the occupant or occupants of the residences or businesses in the village shall
make the determination of whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective premises. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
3-4-6: NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
(A) Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter, may post
written notice on or near the main entrance with lettering no less than one-half inch (1/2") in height, indicating that there is to be no soliciting on the
premises. Such written notice so displayed shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 48/460
(B) It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in the village to first examine the notice provided for above, if any is attached, and
be governed by the statement contained in said notice. If the notice states "No Solicitors Invited", or similar wording, then the solicitor shall immediately
and peacefully depart from the premises.
(C) Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
3-4-7: PROHIBITED ACTS:
(A) Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited: It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the
doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention to the occupant of such premises for the
purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined in defiance of the notice exhibited at the
premises in accordance with the provisions of section 3-4-6 of this chapter.
(B) Time Limit On Soliciting:
1. Residential Areas: No person shall engage in "commercial solicitation" as herein defined, in residential areas, prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or
after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. of any day. No person shall engage in "noncommercial solicitation" as herein defined, in residential areas, prior to nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. of any day.
2. Highways: Persons approved to solicit upon highways as provided in section 3-4-8 of this chapter shall not engage in solicitation prior to six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. of any day from April 1 to October 31. There shall be no solicitation upon highways during the period
beginning November 1 and ending March 31.
3. Train Station: Persons approved to solicit at the Lisle/Burlington Northern Railroad commuter parking facility, depot and platform as provided in
section 3-4-9 of this chapter shall not engage in solicitation prior to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. of any day.
4. Soliciting Outside Of Hours: It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether registered under this chapter
or not, to violate any portion of this section, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or
rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the
purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting, as herein defined, outside of the hours provided for in this
section.
(C) False Plans Or Schemes: It shall be unlawful for any person who engages in solicitation or peddling to use any false plan, scheme or pretense or make
any false statement which indicates or implies that the purpose of such person's visit is other than to obtain contributions or orders for sales of goods or
services.
(D) Right To Cancel: It shall be unlawful for any person who engages in solicitation or peddling to misrepresent the right of a buyer to rescind or cancel a
sale under the provisions of applicable law.
(E) Misrepresentation: It shall be unlawful for any person who engages in solicitation or peddling to cheat, deceive or fraudulently misrepresent, whether
through himself or through an employee, while acting as solicitor in the village, or to barter, sell or peddle any goods, merchandise or wares other than
those specified in his application for permit.
(F) Interfering With Vehicles Or Pedestrians: No solicitor shall interfere with either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the public right of way.
(G) Sound Or Voice Systems: It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to use sound or voice amplification systems or other mechanical sound devices in any
solicitation or peddling.
(H) Safety Badge: Each applicant eighteen (18) years of age and older who has been issued a permit by the village shall wear a safety badge on outer
garments so as to be visible at all times. Such badge shall be issued by the village and shall contain, in a form authorized by the business office
manager, the application number of the permit, as set forth in section 3-4-4 of this chapter, together with the following statement:
PERMIT NUMBER
I HAVE BEEN APPROVED BY THE VILLAGE OF LISLE TO SOLICIT WITHIN THE VILLAGE. MY PERMIT WAS ISSUED ON [date] AND EXPIRES
ON [date].
Permitted solicitors under the age of eighteen (18) shall have in their possession a copy of an approval letter issued by the village business office
manager containing the beginning and expiration date of the permit, together with the application number of the permit, as set forth in section 3-4-4 of
this chapter.
(I) Felons: It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to utilize as a solicitor any person who has been convicted of a "serious felony" (as defined in
section 3-4-1 of this chapter) under the laws of the state or any other state or under the federal law of the United States.
(J) Solicitation Near School Bus Stops: It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to offer for sale or for free any
property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, whether of value or not, including, but not limited to, goods, books, pamphlets, tickets, publications or
subscriptions to publications or brochures within two hundred fifty feet (250') (except within the confines of an enclosed structure or building) of any
location identified for the picking up or letting off of schoolchildren by a clearly recognized school bus from thirty (30) minutes before to thirty (30)
minutes after any time at which schoolchildren are scheduled to be picked up or dropped off. This prohibition shall extend to sites located at or near
school property where schoolchildren are directed to be dropped off or picked up at the school building and to school bus stops throughout the village
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 49/460
which have been identified by the village or respective school district as a location where schoolchildren are scheduled to be picked up or dropped off
before, after or during school hours. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
3-4-8: SOLICITATION ON HIGHWAYS:
(A) Solicitation Of Charitable Contributions On Highways: Solicitation of charitable contributions on highways within the village shall be permitted; provided,
however, that all such activity shall be conducted in strict conformity with and shall be limited to that activity permitted under the provisions of the Illinois
vehicle code paragraph 5/11-1006(c) and this code.
Solicitation on highways within the village shall be allowed only at intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full stop by a traffic light. The
soliciting agency shall be:
1. Registered with the attorney general as a charitable organization as provided by "an act to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for charitable
purposes, providing for violations thereof and making an appropriation therefor", approved July 26, 1963, as amended;
2. Engaged in a statewide fundraising activity; and
3. Liable for any injuries to persons or property during the solicitation, which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent.
(B) Age Requirement: Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be eighteen (18) years of age or over and shall be wearing a high visibility vest.
(C) Time Limit: There shall be no solicitation on highways within the village at the same location or for the same group or organization on whose behalf the
solicitation is being conducted, for more than three (3) consecutive days per fundraising activity.
(D) Insurance Coverage: No solicitor shall be permitted to solicit on highways unless and until the solicitor provides proof to the village of general liability
insurance coverage naming the village as well as its respective agents, officers and employees, as additional insureds in an amount as established by
the annual fee ordinance for each occurrence. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
3-4-9: SOLICITATION AT THE LISLE/BURLINGTON NORTHERN RAILROAD COMMUTER PARKING FACILITY, DEPOT AND
PLATFORM:
(A) Solicitation at the Lisle/Burlington Northern Railroad commuter parking facility, depot and platform shall be allowed only in the following areas as set
forth on exhibit A attached to ordinance 94-2460 and incorporated herein by reference: the tunnel, the breezeway connecting the depot and tunnel
shelter, and the sidewalk on the southwest side of the depot building.
(B) No solicitor shall be permitted to solicit at the commuter parking facility unless and until the solicitor provides proof to the Village of general liability
insurance coverage naming the Village and the Burlington Northern Railroad, as well as their respective agents, officers and employees, as additional
insureds in an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance for each occurrence.
(C) All persons soliciting at the Lisle/Burlington Northern Railroad Commuter Parking Facility shall be sixteen (16) years of age or older.
(D) Solicitation at the Lisle/Burlington Northern Railroad commuter facility shall be limited to five (5) days per calendar month. Only one organization may
be permitted to solicit at the train station at one time. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
3-4-10: REVOCATION:
(A) Revocation Of Permit: The Village Manager or his/her designee shall revoke a solicitation permit for a violation of any of the regulations listed in
sections 3-4-1 through 3-4-9 of this chapter, inclusive. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the Village Manager
or his/her designee to the holder of the permit by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. Upon receipt of said notice of revocation, all
solicitation shall cease.
(B) Appeals: In the event the Village Manager or his/her designee revokes any permit for solicitation, the person aggrieved by said decision shall have the
right to appeal and have a hearing before the President and Board of Trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Village Manager or his/her
designee within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice of revocation, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal.
The President and Board of Trustees shall thereupon set forth the time and a place for the hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be
given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in subsection (A) of this section. The decision of the President and Board of Trustees on such
appeal shall be by a vote of a majority of all the members then holding office and shall be final. (Ord. 2018-4761, 4-16-2018)
3-4-11: PENALTIES:
Notwithstanding any other remedies available to the Village pursuant to this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which the violation
occurs or continues to occur. (Ord. 2011-4408, 10-17-2011)
Chapter 5
PEDDLING FOODSTUFFS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 50/460
3-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED AND EXEMPTIONS:
(A) It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, or to peddle any ice cream, candy, confection, milk, dairy product, beverage or other foodstuff for immediate
human consumption from any vehicle, including motor vehicles and nonmotorized vehicles, on any public street, alley or parkway in the village without
having a license therefor.
(B) It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, or to peddle any beef, poultry, fish or pork not intended for immediate human consumption from any vehicle,
including motor vehicles and nonmotorized vehicles, on any public street, alley or parkway in the village. The proscriptions contained in this section
shall not apply to items ordered twenty four (24) hours prior to transfer of said item to purchaser. (Ord. 98-2958, 2-2-1998)
3-5-2: APPLICATION; FEE:
Application for such licenses shall conform to the regulations of the general provisions relating to all such applications, as set out under chapter 1 of this
title, and the annual fee shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance, which fee shall not be prorated. (Ord. 2002-3425, 11-4-2002)
3-5-3: TRAFFIC HAZARD PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to permit any such vehicle to stand or remain in any place where parking vehicles is prohibited, or to sell or offer any commodity for
sale on any through street or at any place or time when an unusual traffic hazard or danger to prospective customers exists; or within two hundred feet
(200') of the scene of any accident or destructive fire or any place where the members of the fire or police departments are responding to an emergency
call. (Ord. 136, 8-7-1962)
3-5-4: SANITARY REGULATIONS:
(A) Vehicles: All such vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day they are so used. It shall be
unlawful to permit stale foods, decaying matter or any other waste material or product to accumulate in or on any such vehicle while it is so used.
If unwrapped foodstuffs are transported in any such vehicle, such foods shall be carried in a portion or compartment of the vehicle which is screened
and protected against dust and insects. (Ord. 136, 8-7-1962)
(B) Temperature Control: Readily perishable foods or beverages, while in transit, shall be maintained at a temperature of not more than forty one degrees
Fahrenheit (41F). The temperature for hot liquid foods or beverages shall be maintained at not less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit
(140F); and for frozen foods at not more than zero degrees Fahrenheit (0F). The compartments in vehicles used for carrying such food shall be so
constructed, equipped and maintained as to preserve the temperature as above indicated for the respective types of food. (Ord. 98-2968, 3-16-1998)
3-5-5: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the village president, or his designee, to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-3425, 11-4-2002)
3-5-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense; and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
Chapter 6
SCAVENGERS
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL PREMISES: Real property and/or buildings used in whole or in part for business purposes.
JUNK REMOVAL SERVICE: An individual, firm, organization, corporation or other entity that does not provide curbside service, but is engaged in the
business of removing and hauling away junk from commercial premises or residential premises and is not otherwise a "scavenger" as defined in this
chapter.
LOCAL OFFICE: A location at which a scavenger conducts normal administrative and/or business operations, within thirty (30) miles of the corporate limits
of the village of Lisle, which has a local Downers Grove or Naperville telephone exchange.
MAIN OFFICE: A location at which a scavenger conducts the bulk of its administrative and/or business operations.
RECYCLABLES: Those articles defined as "recyclables" in section 8-2-1 of this code.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES: Real property and/or buildings used exclusively for residential occupancy, including, but not limited to, single-family homes
and multi-family dwellings. Single-family dwelling units which contain a section devoted to the business purposes of the residential occupant or occupants
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 51/460
shall be considered residential premises for the purposes of this chapter.
SCAVENGER: An individual, firm, organization, corporation or other entity engaged in the business of curbside waste collection.
SCAVENGER SERVICE: The provision of waste collection within village limits.
VILLAGE: The village of Lisle.
WASTE: Garbage, rubbish and refuse of any kind, nature or description, including, but not limited to, recyclables. (Ord. 2007-4141, 9-17-2007)
3-6-2: LICENSES:
(A) License Required: No person shall engage in the business of junk removal service or scavenger service within the village limits without first securing a
license to conduct such business.
(B) Application For License:
1. Application for a junk removal service or scavenger service license shall be made, in writing, under oath or affirmation, to the business office
manager annually, and shall state whether the application is for a new license or for a renewal. An application for renewal of any such license must
be received by the business office manager on or before the expiration date of the applicant's previous license.
2. All applications shall state the name and business address of the applicant's main and local offices, and shall include a list of the make, model and
license plate number of all junk removal or scavenger vehicles operated by the applicant. The applicant shall disclose any previous revocations of
any similar licenses for junk removal or scavenger service by any other governmental entity.
3. The names and addresses of the applicant, or if the applicant is a corporation, of the president, vice president, secretary and all persons owning,
beneficially or otherwise, seven and one-half percent (7.5%) or more of the common stock of said corporation, shall be listed and disclosed on said
application.
4. The applicant shall provide all other information as may be requested by the application form, as amended, from time to time, by the village
manager.
5. All applicants for a residential scavenger service license shall attach to the application, proof of all insurance coverage required by the contract
provided for in section 3-6-3 of this chapter.
6. All applicants for a junk removal service license shall attach to the application proof of all insurance coverage required under section 3-6-3 of this
chapter.
7. Any application shall be accompanied by the required fee as provided by section 3-6-4 of this chapter.
8. If the business office manager finds and determines that all the requirements for the license have been met, the license shall be issued.
(C) Term: The term of a junk removal or scavenger service license shall be from January 1 through December 31, inclusive. (Ord. 2007-4141, 9-17-2007)
3-6-3: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
(A) Residential Premises: Only one license shall be issued for scavenger service to residential premises and unlimited number of licenses may be issued
for junk removal services.
(B) Commercial Premises: An unlimited number of licenses may be issued for scavenger service or junk removal services to commercial premises.
(C) Terms; Agreement:
1. The terms of any residential premises license for scavenger service shall be subject to an agreement for scavenger service which shall be entered
into by the applicant and the village. The agreement for scavenger services may be let by the village with or without bid under such terms and
conditions as the village may deem and find advisable and beneficial to the village and to the best interest of its citizens. The terms of this chapter
shall be construed in accordance with the terms of said agreement for scavenger service.
2. The terms of any residential junk removal service license shall be subject to an agreement for junk removal services which shall be entered into by
the applicant and village. The agreement for junk removal services may be let by the village with or without bid under such terms and conditions as
the village may deem and find advisable and beneficial to the village and to the best interest of its citizens. The terms of this chapter shall be
construed in accordance with the terms of said agreement for junk removal service.
(D) Junk Removal Services Insurance And Bond Requirements: Any applicant for a junk removal service license shall procure, at the applicant's sole cost
and expense, and submit with its application a certificate of comprehensive liability insurance. The comprehensive liability insurance required under this
subsection shall be effective for the full term of the license and shall be in amounts with liability coverage under the comprehensive liability insurance of
not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence, and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in aggregate liability insurance coverage.
Each such policy shall name the village as an additional insured and shall contain an affirmative statement by the issuer that it will give written notice to
the village at least thirty (30) days prior to any cancellation of its policy. Any cancellation shall be grounds for automatic revocation of the license. (Ord.
2007-4141, 9-17-2007)
3-6-4: LICENSE AND FRANCHISE FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 52/460
The annual fee for residential premises and commercial premises licenses issued under this chapter shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance.
No license for junk removal service or scavenger service shall be valid unless payment of the entire fee due for the license term has been received by the
village. Notwithstanding any other license fee provisions contained within this code, no required fee under this chapter shall be prorated or discounted
according to the date on which such fee is paid or application for license is made. (Ord. 2007-4141, 9-17-2007)
3-6-5: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR NONRENEWAL OF LICENSE; REFUND OF FEES:
(A) Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the village board of trustees or renewal of such license may be denied, for any
violation by the licensee of any provisions of local, state or federal law, or for failure to perform services in accordance with any agreement with the
village or for a false or misleading statement on the license application.
(B) At least five (5) days prior to the suspension or revocation of any such license or the expiration of any license that is to be denied renewal, the village
shall give written notice to the licensee at the licensee's business address, stating the reason for the suspension, revocation or nonrenewal. The
licensee may, within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice, appeal to the village board of trustees by filing a notice of appeal with the business office
manager stating the basis for such appeal. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the village board shall fix a time and place for a hearing, to be held not
more than twenty (20) days following the receipt of the notice of appeal. The filing of a notice of appeal by the licensee shall not operate as a stay of a
revocation, suspension or nonrenewal during the pendency of the appeal.
(C) In the event any license is revoked or suspended pursuant to this section, no part of any license fees paid shall be refundable. In the event an
application for an initial license is denied, an existing license is not renewed or a contract for residential junk removal service or scavenger service
expires and is not renewed after the license fee for that year has been paid, fifty percent (50%) of the license fee paid for that year shall be refundable.
(Ord. 2007-4141, 9-17-2007)
3-6-6: PROHIBITED WASTE COLLECTION; COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLES:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person not holding a residential premises scavenger service license hereunder to remove any recyclables placed in or
adjacent to any villagerecycling bins or placed at the curb of any village street for routine pick up by the scavenger service holding a residential
premises license.
(B) Where a scavenger licensed to provide scavenger services to commercial premises is hired to collect waste from a site which contains units for both
commercial and residential use, and where the waste for the entire site is to be collected from a single container, that scavenger shall provide to the
residential occupants the collection of recyclables comparable to the recyclables collection services provided to residential premises by the scavenger
licensed to provide scavenger services to exclusively residential premises. If the commercial premises scavenger is unable to provide such service, the
commercial scavenger may subcontract the service to an appropriate entity for the collection of recyclables if approved by the village.
(C) All scavengers licensed to provide scavenger services, except those which provide recycling services only, shall provide its customers with recycling
services appropriate to that customer. The recycling services may be subcontracted to a village licensed provider of such services, but in no event shall
a holder of a junk removal service license be allowed to provide any such recycling services to any customer in the village. (Ord. 2007-4141, 9-17-
2007)
3-6-7: MONTHLY REPORTS:
Each residential premises scavenger shall prepare and submit a monthly report which shall provide such information as the village requests pursuant to
the aforementioned agreement for scavenger services.
Each commercial premises scavenger shall prepare a quarterly report on a form provided by the village and submit the report to the village no later than
one month after the end of the applicable quarter. The report shall state the following:
(A) The amount of waste collected, measured in tons;
(B) The amount of waste landfilled, measured in tons;
(C) The location of any landfilling;
(D) The business address of recycling processors who received village recyclables; and
(E) The amount of recyclables collected, measured in pounds or tons. (Ord. 2007-4141, 9-17-2007)
3-6-8: PENALTY:
Any person found to have violated any provision of thischapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed for each day of violation. This penalty shall not be exclusive of any other remedy afforded the village by this code. (Ord. 2007-4141, 9-
17-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 53/460
Chapter 7
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSING
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-4789, 10-1-2018)
Chapter 8
TAXICABS; PUBLIC LIMOUSINES
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CAB COMPANY: A person or company engaged in business as proprietor of one or more taxicabs.
CAB STAND: An area designated by an official sign for the use of taxicabs duly registered within the Village for the loading and unloading of passengers
and the waiting for of passengers and potential passengers.
DISABLED/HANDICAPPED PERSON: A Village resident who is unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of a medically determinable
physical or mental impairment which can be expected to result in death or which has lasted or can be expected to last for a continuous period not less than
twelve (12) months. Proof that a claimant is eligible to receive disability benefits under the Federal Social Security Act (42 USCA section 302 et seq.), as
from time to time amended, shall constitute proof of disability for the purpose of this section. A disabled person not covered under the Federal Social
Security Act shall provide proof by a physician acceptable to the Village establishing his or her status as a disabled person determined by using the same
standards as used by the Social Security Administration. The cost of any such examination shall be borne by the claimant.
DRIVER: A person who drives or is licensed to drive a taxicab or public limousine on the streets and ways within the Village.
LIVERY COMPANY: A person or company, engaged in the business that offers public limousines with drivers for hire, and that are not otherwise taxicabs.
MILEAGE: The distance in rate of fare, as mechanically registered, from the point of passenger pick up to the point of passenger delivery.
OWNER: Every individual, trustee, partnership, association, or corporation owning, operating or having the use or control of one or more taxicabs or public
limousines in the Village.
PERSON: Includes a natural person, partnership, firm or corporation.
PUBLIC LIMOUSINE: A public conveyance for hire only at lawful rates, which rates are charged on an hourly, or portion thereof, or on a prearranged
contractual basis.
SENIOR CITIZEN: A village resident who is sixty five (65) years of age or older. Proof thereof shall consist of a state of Illinois photograph identification
card, containing proof of age.
TAXICAB: A public conveyance for hire only at lawful rates of fare, which rates are as recorded and indicated by a taximeter.
VILLAGE BOARD: The village of Lisle board of trustees. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
Each cab company and livery company shall, as a condition precedent to operation of a taxicab or public limousine in the village, obtain the appropriate
village license as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-3: TAXICAB COMMISSIONER:
A taxicab commissioner (hereinafter referred to as the commissioner) shall perform all the duties and functions of commissioner as provided in this
chapter, including, but not limited to, the following:
(A) Convening and presiding at certain hearings and meetings required by this chapter; and
(B) Revoking and suspending licenses pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
The village manager shall assume the duties of commissioner. The commissioner may at any time appoint a deputy commissioner who shall have the
power to perform any of the tasks assigned to the commissioner hereunder. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-4: USE OF TAXICABS, PUBLIC LIMOUSINES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 54/460
(A) It shall be unlawful to refuse any person transportation in a taxicab to any place of destination within the village in a taxicab that is unoccupied by a
passenger for hire unless it is on its way to pick up a passenger or otherwise out of service or unless the person to be served appears intoxicated or
uses profane or abusive language in attempting to contract for service. When the taxicab is out of service or carrying a passenger, there shall be
displayed on the windshield of that taxicab, a sign reading "not for hire" in letters at least two inches (2") in height.
(B) Group riding is permitted in taxicabs; provided, that the driver accepts no more than five (5) passengers for any trip, and provided that the fare charged
to any passenger will be not greater than if he rode alone.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any driver to stop, stand or park a taxicab within the corporate limits of the village, under circumstances manifesting an intent to
solicit a passenger or fare, unless said taxicab is duly registered with the village as provided in subsection 3-8-14(C) of this chapter. For the purpose of
this section, circumstances manifesting an intent to solicit a passenger or fare shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. The presence or absence of a sign or other indicator, such as a flag or light, upon or within the taxicab, when the presence or absence of such sign
or indicator signifies that the taxicab is currently available for hire;
2. A driver placing or allowing another to place luggage or other parcels or packages into the taxicab;
3. Any other circumstances which tend to show that the driver intended to pick up a passenger within the village.
(D) In addition, there shall be designated by the village board certain cab stands within the village, which cab stands shall be marked by official signs. Said
cab stands shall be for the purpose of loading and unloading of passengers and the waiting for of passengers or potential passengers. No taxicab
entering onto premises having a designated cab stand shall park, stop or stand at any place upon said premises other than the designated cab stand.
Further, no taxicab shall park, stop or stand in any designated cab stand unless said taxicab either is registered with the village as provided in
subsection 3-8-14(C) of this chapter or is present at a cab stand for the purpose of dropping off passengers who were initially picked up outside of the
village.
(E) A public limousine may discharge a person in the village provided that the pick up was made outside the village and may pick up a person within the
village, but under no circumstances may a public limousine pick up a person within the village for the purpose of discharging a person within the village.
(F) Under no circumstances may a public limousine stand at a cab stand.
(G) Under no circumstances may a public limousine park or otherwise travel any street or road within the village with the intent and purpose to solicit fares.
All fares for public limousines must be prearranged with the customer based upon the origin, destination and time duration of the trip. In no event may
an hourly fee for a public limousine exceed such fares on file with the business office manager, as required under subsection 3-8-7(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-5: IDENTIFICATION OF TAXICAB OR PUBLIC LIMOUSINE BY A LICENSED COMPANY OR LIVERY COMPANY
REQUIRED:
(A) Every taxicab operated by a cab company licensed by the village hereunder shall have displayed thereon, in the appropriate place, the following
identification materials:
1. On the center of the main panel of the front or rear doors of each such taxicab, there shall appear the cab number and the cab company's name and
telephone number; provided further, however, that in lieu of placing the cab company's name on the door, the name may be placed on a lighted sign
which must protrude from the top of the cab.
2. On the inside panel separating the front and rear seats of each such taxicab, facing to the rear, there shall be affixed a copy of the telephone number
of the cab company and the rates charged for trips inside and outside of the village.
(B) Every public limousine operated by a livery company licensed by the village hereunder shall:
1. Keep a copy of a valid and binding license issued under this chapter in the glove compartment of the public limousine; and
2. Keep a copy of the most current hourly rate schedule on file with the business office manager, as required under subsection 3-8-7(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-6: TAXIMETERS:
Every taxicab operated by a cab company licensed by the village shall be equipped with a taximeter connected with and operating from the transmission of
the taxicab, subject to the following regulations:
(A) No taximeter shall be attached to a taxicab unless it has been inspected by an approved inspector and found to be accurate. The cab company shall
keep certificates of accuracy from the inspector for each taximeter and provide the same for inspection by a passenger upon request. The taximeter
case shall be sealed by the inspector if found to be accurate.
(B) Each taximeter shall be inspected annually, not more than sixty (60) days prior to July 1, and a certificate of accuracy, as provided in subsection (A) of
this section, shall be submitted by the cab company to the business office manager prior to the renewal of the license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 55/460
(C) All taximeters shall be equipped with a flag that is plainly visible. This flag shall be kept up only when the taxicab is for hire. Taximeters shall have a
lighted dial or dials to register the tariff in accordance with lawful rates as expressed herein and the dial shall at all times be maintained by the cab
company so that it is in plain view and readable by the passenger.
(D) No driver or cab company shall operate a taxicab with a taximeter that is unsealed, inaccurate, has not been inspected as provided herein or is
otherwise not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(E) It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with a taximeter seal or sealed taximeter.
(F) Upon the request of the commissioner, the cab company shall submit any taximeter installed on a taxicab to an inspection to determine its accuracy.
(Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-7: TAXICAB AND PUBLIC LIMOUSINE FARES:
(A) The rates of fare, fees or charges of any kind for taxicabs while being operated from a point of origin within the corporate limits of the Village shall be
according to a schedule filed with the Business Office Manager by each company licensed hereunder. A change in rates of fare, fees or charges of any
kind shall not be effective and shall not be quoted to, required by or requested of any passenger until at least thirty (30) days after an amended
schedule has been filed with the Business Office Manager.
(B) The rates of fare, fees, or charges of any kind for a public limousine shall be on an hourly or prearranged contractual basis. Under no circumstances
may a public limousine use a meter of any kind to charge fares. Each livery company shall file an hourly rate schedule with the Business Office
Manager. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-8: TRANSPORTATION SUBSIDY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-4762, 4-16-2018, eff. 5-1-2018)
3-8-9: CONDUCT OF TAXICAB AND PUBLIC LIMOUSINE DRIVERS GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful for any driver to conduct himself in a disrespectful or contemptuous manner towards any person, or to use abusive or profane language
while so occupied or in charge of such vehicle. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-10: CONDITIONS OF TAXICABS AND PUBLIC LIMOUSINES GENERALLY:
Every taxicab and public limousine operated in the Village by a cab company or livery company licensed by the Village shall be maintained in a safe
condition at all times. Each taxicab shall have two (2) doors on each side of the taxicab. If a taxicab or public limousine shall become unsafe for operation
or if its body or seating facilities shall be so damaged as to render the taxicab or public limousine unfit for public use, the Commissioner may suspend the
license issued to the cab company or livery company operating that vehicle until the vehicle is made safe for use by the public. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-
2005)
3-8-11: BOOKS AND RECORDS OF ACCOUNT:
Every licensed cab company or livery company shall keep accurate books and records of account and log books of services rendered. Each licensed cab
company shall keep such books and records in its dispatching office located in the Village. The Commissioner shall be permitted to examine those books
and records of account and logs as they may relate to a specific charge that is the subject of a public hearing under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-12: COMPLAINTS:
(A) Any person may file a written complaint with the Commissioner regarding the conduct of a driver, cab company, or livery company.
(B) The Commissioner shall investigate all complaints against drivers. He shall notify the driver and cab company or livery company of the complaint and
shall hold a meeting on that matter, if he determines that such a meeting is necessary, at which meeting the driver and a representative of the cab
company or livery company shall be present. If the Commissioner determines that any provision of this chapter has been violated, he shall take any
further action consistent with the provisions of this chapter and shall also refer the matter to the Police Department.
(C) The Village Board shall investigate complaints against a cab company or livery company, notify the cab company or livery company of the complaint
and hold a meeting on the matter, if the Village Board in its sole discretion determines that such a meeting is necessary, at which meeting a
representative of the cab company or livery company shall be present. If the Village Board determines that any provision of this chapter has been
violated, it shall refer the matter to the Police Department and the Commissioner for any further action consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-13: CAB COMPANY AND LIVERY COMPANY LICENSE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 56/460
It shall be unlawful for any cab company or livery company to operate a taxicab or public limousine for transportation of passengers for hire from a point of
origin or destination within the village unless the cab company or livery company is licensed by the village. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-14: APPLICATION FOR AND ISSUANCE OF CAB COMPANY OR LIVERY COMPANY LICENSE:
Each cab company or livery company shall apply to the business office manager for a cab company or livery company license before operating any
taxicabs or public limousines within the village. The application for a cab company or livery company license shall be approved by the village manager and
a cab company or livery company license issued pursuant to the following rules and regulations: (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
(A) An application shall be submitted to the business office manager along with payment of an initial first year nonrefundable application fee and an annual
license fee as established by the annual fee ordinance. Renewal applications shall be subject to the deadlines and late fees as established by the
annual fee ordinance.
There shall be no refund of any portion of the annual license fee imposed under this chapter for any portion of a year during which the licensee ceases
to operate a taxi or livery company within the village. (Ord. 2009-4257, 6-1-2009)
(B) The cab company or livery company shall be required to include in the application a true statement of certain facts including, but not limited to, the
state of incorporation if the cab company or livery company is a corporation; whether the cab company or livery company is organized and qualified to
do business under the laws of the state of Illinois if the cab company or livery company is a corporation; principal place of business; the names of the
individuals who own the cab company or livery company; whether the cab company or livery company, if not a corporation, is a limited liability
company, partnership, or sole proprietorship, or other type of business organization; the registered agent of the corporate cab company or livery
company; principal office if different than principal place of business; and all such other information as requested by the application form as amended
from time to time.
(C) The cab company or livery company shall be required, with its application for a license, to register each taxicab or public limousine operated by such
company within the village by providing the following information:
1. The year, make, color and serial number;
2. The actual owner of the taxicab or public limousine;
3. Written certification that required inspections of each taxicab and each taximeter or public limousine have been completed within sixty (60) days of
such application and that these inspections have demonstrated each taxicab or public limousine to be safe, and that each taximeter is in proper
working order and accurate;
4. The name, address, and home phone number of each driver;
5. A valid and current state of Illinois operator's or chauffeur's license number and license expiration date for each driver; and
6. A schedule of rates of fares, fees or charges.
(D) The chief of police shall investigate the owners of the applicant cab company or livery company to determine the good character and business
reputation of those owners and shall report his findings to the business office manager before issuance of a license. If this investigation uncovers
information showing that any owners have been convicted of a felony, have not paid a judgment against them, or have misrepresented facts in the
application for a license, the village manager shall not approve such application and no license shall be issued.
(E) The cab company or livery company shall be required to file with the business office manager, along with its application for a license, a certificate of
insurance showing that the cab company or livery company, its drivers and employees, are adequately insured against public liability, property damage,
and workers' compensation claims on account of its operation of taxicabs or public limousines in the village.
(F) Failure to fully comply with the application and disclosure requirements of this section shall constitute grounds for the business office manager to deny
issuance of a license. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-14-1: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
If a licensee holding a cab company or livery company license under this chapter changes its principal place of business of the company, the cab company
or livery company shall apply to the business office manager for a transfer of the license.
Upon approval of the village manager, the business office manager shall make the necessary alterations and endorse the transfer of the license. No fee
shall be required for the transfer of a license for a change in the principal place of business of the cab company or livery company.
If ownership of a cab company or livery company, licensed under this chapter is conveyed to a new owner, the new owner shall apply for a new license in
his name in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in this section 3-8-14. There shall be no transfer of a license issued under this chapter
from the owner of one cab company or livery company to the owner of another cab company or livery company. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-15: TERMS OF LICENSE; PRORATION:
The term of all licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be one year from the date of issuance and shall expire at the end of the last day of
the applicable term. The full license fee shall be charged no matter when the license is applied for or issued. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 57/460
3-8-16: CHANGES IN TAXICABS OR PUBLIC LIMOUSINES DURING LICENSE YEAR:
During the term of any license, if a cab company substitutes another taxicab for any taxicab registered with the village or the livery company substitutes
another public limousine for any public limousine registered with the village pursuant to subsection 3-8-14(C) of this chapter, or adds any additional taxicab
or public limousine to the list of registered taxicabs or public limousines, the company shall register such substitute or additional taxicab or public limousine
with the village by providing the information required by subsection 3-8-14(C) of this chapter concerning such substitute or additional taxicab or public
limousine. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-17: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended for a violation of the provisions of this chapter by the commissioner.
The commissioner may revoke or suspend a license only after a public hearing has been held at which hearing the driver, cab company or livery company
may appear to present evidence in his or its behalf. The business office manager shall give ten (10) days' notice of the public hearing by certified mail to
the driver or the cab company or livery company, as the case may be, whose license may be revoked or suspended. This notice shall state the date, time,
and place of the public hearing and the nature of the charges that may result in revocation or suspension of the license. Upon the conclusion of this public
hearing, the commissioner may revoke or suspend the license, in his discretion or as required by this chapter, if he finds that the preponderance of the
evidence presented at the hearing is such as to substantiate a violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-18: MANDATORY REVOCATION OF A LICENSE:
A license issued under this chapter shall be revoked by the commissioner as follows:
(A) If the cab company or livery company or any driver is convicted of a felony or violent crime while holding the license;
(B) If the cab company or livery company or any driver fails to pay a judgment;
(C) If an owner of the cab company or livery company or any driver is found in possession of narcotics;
(D) If a driver directs anyone to a house of prostitution or to illegal gambling houses;
(E) If a driver is convicted of drunken driving or reckless driving by a court of competent jurisdiction; or
(F) If any other section of this chapter requires revocation for a violation thereof. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-19: TAXICAB HOURS OF SERVICE:
Not less than forty percent (40%) of the total number of taxicabs registered for operation, pursuant to subsection 3-8-14(C) of this chapter, by a cab
company licensed under this chapter shall be operated regularly between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on
Mondays through Fridays, and may be operated at such other times, and on weekends, as shall be deemed necessary by the cab company. (Ord. 2005-
3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-20: CHANGES IN THE NUMBER OF TAXICABS OR HOURS OF SERVICE:
(A) The village board alone shall determine whether the public convenience and necessity require a change in the number of taxicabs which may be
registered for operation in the village or hours of taxicab services required by section 3-8-19 of this chapter. In determining whether the public
convenience and necessity require change in the number of taxicabs which may be registered for operation in the village or hours of taxicab service,
due consideration shall be given by the village board to the following:
1. The public demand for taxicab service.
2. The effect of increased competition on revenues of taxicab operators, on cost of rendering taxicab service including provisions of proper reserves
and a fair return on investment in property devoted to such service, and on the wages or compensation, hours and conditions of service of taxicab
drivers.
(B) A cab company may request that the village board amend the number of taxicabs which may be registered for operation in the village or required hours
of service as required in section 3-8-19 of this chapter in the same manner as if it were requesting a fare revision under section 3-8-7 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
3-8-21: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER:
The commissioner may revoke or suspend a license issued hereunder upon violation of any provision of this chapter in accordance with applicable
requirements for hearing and notice. Notwithstanding any revocation or suspension of a license by the commissioner hereunder, the cab company, livery
company, or driver may be convicted of a violation of any section of this chapter by a court of competent jurisdiction and shall be subject to the fines and
other penalties established in the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 2005-3935, 6-20-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 58/460
Chapter 9
AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING MACHINES
3-9-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to install, operate or maintain any "automatic dry cleaning machine", as hereinafter defined, except in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, or without complying with all of the provisions pertaining to the installation and operation of such machines herein contained, or in violation of
any laws, rules or regulations of the Illinois department of health relating thereto. (Ord. 138, 10-16-1962)
3-9-2: DEFINITION:
An "automatic dry cleaning machine", as the term is used herein, shall be construed to include and mean any device or apparatus for the cleaning of
clothes or fabrics, and designed to be used or operated by the owner or an employee of the owner, which machine or device makes use of or contains
perchloroethylene or any other chemical solvent or substance which may cause harm to human beings by reason of inhalation or contact. (Ord. 138, 10-
16-1962)
3-9-3: LICENSE AND PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful to install any automatic dry cleaning machine without first having secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permit shall contain
full information as to the mechanical equipment of such machine and provisions for ventilation for both the machine and the room in which the machine will
be located. Applicants shall supply all such other information as may be requested by the permit application form as amended from time to time. It shall be
unlawful to engage in the business of maintaining any such machine for use by the public upon payment of a fee without having first secured a license
therefor. The annual fee for such license shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance plus an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance
for each unit in addition to five (5) maintained in any one establishment. (Ord. 98-2956, 2-2-1998)
3-9-4: INSTALLATION REGULATIONS:
Each machine shall be completely enclosed by a cabinet and shall be vented with intake at the top and the outlet at or near the bottom of such machine.
Groups of machines may be entirely enclosed or supported on all sides by an enclosure topped with a hood vented as provided for each individual
machine.
The exhaust system must maintain a minimum flow of one hundred (100) cubic feet per minute face velocity through the loading door whenever the door is
open.
The discharge stack for the machines and for the room in which the machines are located shall extend at least two feet (2') above the level of any window
which can be opened, located within fifty feet (50') of the outlet of the stack, and shall be at least fifty feet (50') away from any fresh air intake leading to
any premises.
The machines must be so constructed so as to prevent the loading door from being opened during the normal cycle of operation. Each machine shall be
equipped with a transparent door or port to allow visual examination of the status of the cleaning cycle.
Any connection of such machine with the water supply system must be equipped with an air gap or vacuum breaker in the line upstream from the
condenser; with no control valves downstream from such gap or breaker. Wastewater shall be discharged through an air gap.
Each machine must be so designed and constructed as to prevent the leakage of liquids, gas or vapors.
The solvent shall be stored in closed containers and should be transferred from the containers in a line free of leaks. All storage facilities for solvent,
external from the equipment, must meet the requirements of the village fire inspectors.
Filter residue and other residues containing solvent shall be disposed of so as not to create a health hazard or nuisance.
Respiratory protective equipment shall be provided for maintenance personnel and must be kept in good repair and available for immediate use. Chemical
cartridge respirators are approved for light solvent concentrations and the wearer should replace the cartridges immediately upon noting odor.
A utility fire extinguisher of either the carbon dioxide or dry chemical type must be provided for use against electrical or oil fires.
Only the front or customer side of the dry cleaning machine should be exposed in the customer area. The working or maintenance portion of the
equipment should be separated from the front of the machine by a solid partition. As a means of minimizing any solvent buildup in the customer area and
also tocontrol any minor solvent leakage, it is required that there be a minimum flow rate from the customer area through the partition as follows:
Number Of Machines
Minimum Flow Rate
Per Machine (cfm)
1 - 3 500
4 - 8 400
9 - 16 375
17 or more 360
Example: An 8 machine installation requires a minimum continuous exhaust flow rate of 3,200 cfm.
The exhaust ventilation as described above shall be provided on a continuous basis while the store is open for business. The fan wiring shall be such that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 59/460
the dry cleaning equipment cannot be operated unless the fan system is in operation.
Where grille openings are to be installed in the partition to facilitate air movement, they should be sized on the basis of about five hundred (500) cfm per
square foot of net grille area and should be placed as close to the machines as possible. An example would be the use of a thirty inch by six inch (30" x 6")
grille located directly over a machine.
Access doors to the maintenance area shall be kept locked.
It is also required that a general ventilation fan be installed in the back room or maintenance area to be used in case of serious solvent leakage. This may
be installed in the rear wall and when combined with the system required in the minimum flow rate table above, should enable the exhausting of a
minimum of one thousand (1,000) cfm per machine.
A satisfactory means of preventing liquid leaks from escaping the enclosure must be provided. This should include some method of "diking" the floor of the
enclosure or machine base to hold a liquid volume equal to the maximum quantity of solvent which might possibly escape from the system. Some means
must be provided for draining solvent in the event of a leak and containment. This can be done by gravity flow with the solvent transferred to a standby
holding tank. This tank should be vented to the outside.
An interlock system must be provided on the machine to prevent the loading door from being opened during the normal cycle. This system may be either
electrical and/or mechanical and so connected that in the event of a power failure the machine remains safe.
A step by step instruction list must be posted in a conspicuous location near the machine for customer use. Competent, trained and maintenance
personnel must be available or on call as long asthe premises is open for business.
A solvent vapor sensing device within the tumbler is desirable to control the drying cycle and to prevent the removal of solvent laden garments.
The machine design must be such that essentially no solvent is retained in the cleaned items upon completion of the dry cleaning cycle. A simple
performance test which must be satisfied is the lack of any solvent odor in a closed automobile containing a newly cleaned load.
It is the responsibility of the proprietor to make certain that clothing which cannot be properly cleaned and dried will not be placed in the machines.
The machine should be checked daily and kept in good repair. All maintenance personnel should be familiar with necessary machine repairs and
instructed as to the solvent hazards.
Solvent control is to be such that under normal operation and use conditions no solvent odor can be detected in the customer area.
Only the solvent specified by the equipment manufacturer shall be used.
A supply of tempered (heated to 60 or 65 degrees Fahrenheit) make-up air equal to or greater than the total volume of air exhausted from the plant should
be provided in order to eliminate any negative pressure conditions which might otherwise develop.
It is important that solvent contaminated air, even in very low concentrations (5-20 ppm), be kept out of the air intakes of all combustion equipment so as to
minimize the thermal decomposition of the solvent. Breakdown products such as hydrochloric acid, free chloride and phosgene corrode metal surfaces
including flues and heater components and can seriously damage cloth through acid burns or weakening of fibers.
Exhaust ventilation stacks from dry cleaning machines should be located as far as possible from combustion air or dryer intakes. (Ord. 138, 10-16-1962)
3-9-5: OPERATION REGULATIONS:
No such automatic dry cleaning machine shall be operated unless all the equipment described in the foregoing section is properly installed and in good
working condition.
No establishment for which a license is required under this chapter shall be open for business, and it shall be unlawful to admit the public or customers into
the room where such machines are located unless there is on duty in the establishment at all times a competent person in charge of the establishment,
and in charge of the operation of such machines. There shall be warningsigns posted in places of easy observation warning of the dangers in the event
leakage of liquids, gas or vapor occurs. It shall be unlawful to permit any residue containing solvent to flow into the sewer system of the village; tightly
covered metal containers may be used for temporary storage of such waste outside the building. Such containers shall bear labels indicating the contents
and dangers involved in handling, and shall be locked if in an unenclosed place.
At least one legible sign shall be maintained in a place available to customers giving the name, address and phone number of the owner of the
establishment, and of the service department or agency responsible for the proper maintenance of the machine. (Ord. 138, 10-16-1962)
3-9-6: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the village president to cause such inspections to be made as are necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 138, 10-16-1962)
3-9-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense; and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-29-1996)
Chapter 10
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 60/460
3-10-1: RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in this village at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code.
Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department
of revenue required by section three of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to
purchasers for use or consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended. At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of
revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
The village clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the state department of revenue a certified copy of this section not later than five (5) days after the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 318, 9-2-1969)
3-10-2: SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the village in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost price
of all tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident
to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-5 of the Illinois municipal code.
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of this village shall file, on or before the last day of
each calendar month, thereport to the state department of revenue required by section nine of the "service occupation tax act", approved July 10, 1961, as
amended. At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.
The village clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the state department of revenue a certified copy of this section not later than five (5) days after the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 319, 9-2-1969)
3-10-3: USE TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 of the Illinois municipal code upon the privilege of
using, in the village, any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with
an agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of such tangible property with selling price to have the
meaning as defined in the use tax act, approved July 14, 1955.
Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue for all municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or certificate of
registration for the personal property is issued.
The village clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the Illinois department of revenue a certified copy of this section not later than five (5) days after its
effective date. (Ord. 533, 10-15-1974)
3-10-4: LEASING OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting or leasing tangible personal property to the users thereof at the rate of onehalf
of one percent (0.5%) of the gross receipts from such renting or leasing made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in
accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 of the Illinois municipal code.
Every person engaged in such business in the village shall file with the state department of revenue the return in the manner as required by section five of
the "leasing occupation tax act" as adopted by the 74th general assembly. At the time such return is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of
revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from renting or leasing tangible personal property during the preceding month.
The village clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the state department of revenue a certified copy of this section notlater than five (5) days after the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 193, 10-7-1965)
3-10-5: AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled or
registered with an agency of this state's government in this village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such automobile while this section
is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-8 of the Illinois municipal code.
The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as being in this
village.
The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Illinois department of revenue.
The village clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the state department of revenue a certified copy of this section not later than five (5) days after the
effective date of this section.
Certified proof of publication shall be forwarded to the Illinois department of revenue along with the certified copy of this section required by paragraph 4 of
this section. (Ord. 82-1029, 1-19-1982)
3-10-6: AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 61/460
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in the village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross
receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-7 of the Illinois municipal code.
Every person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of
revenue required by 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/1 et seq., of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property to purchasers for use or consumption".
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of
automobiles during the preceding month.
The village clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the statedepartment of revenue a certified copy of this section not later than five (5) days after the
effective date of this section.
This section shall be effective on the first day of the calendar month next following publication as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-4. Certified
proof of publication shall be forwarded to the Illinois department of revenue along with the certified copy of this section as required by paragraph 4 of this
section. (Ord. 82-1030, 1-19-1982)
3-10-7: HOTEL OPERATORS' OCCUPATION TAX:
Pursuant to authority vested in the village of Lisle by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-3-14, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of renting, leasing, or letting rooms in a hotel in the village of Lisle at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross rental receipts from the operation
of such hotel made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, except that no tax shall be imposed on the proceeds of renting, leasing, or
letting rooms to permanent residents of that hotel.
Taxes must be paid on or before the fifteenth day of the month immediately following the month for which a return is being filed. For the purpose of this
section, a "month" shall mean either a calendar month (12 annual tax periods) or a period of four (4) consecutive weeks (13 annual tax periods). All
checks, money orders or cashier's checks must be made payable to: Village Of Lisle.
As used in this section, a "hotel" shall be defined as any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping
or housekeeping accommodations. The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses and apartment houses.
No funds received pursuant to this section shall be used to advertise for or otherwise promote new competition in the hotel business.
The amounts collected pursuant to this section shall be expended by the village of Lisle solely to promote tourism and conventions within the village or to
attract nonresident overnight visitors to the village.
The village of Lisle shall be solely responsible for the collection of the tax from persons subject to the tax, and may provide for the administration and
enforcement of the tax as deemed necessary or practicable for the effective administration of the tax. (Ord. 2003-3800, 12-1-2003, eff. 1-1-2004)
Chapter 11
UTILITIES TAX
3-11-1: TRANSMITTING MESSAGES TAX REPEALED:
Effective January 1, 2003, there is enacted the simplified municipal telecommunications tax act as set forth in title 11, chapter 11 of this code. If public act
92-0526, entitled the simplified municipal telecommunications tax act, is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, or if title 11, chapter 11 of this
code is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, then ordinances 614, passed December 22, 1975; 82-1054, passed July 6, 1982; 95-2687,
passed October 2, 1995; 96-2776, passed May 20, 1996; and 98-2995, passed June 1, 1998, as they pertain to this tax, shall be deemed in full force and
effect as of the date public act 92-0526 or title 11, chapter 11 of this code is repealed or becomes ineffective. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
3-11-2: ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX:
(A) Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed effective with respect to bills issued on or after June 1, 2008, on the privilege of using and consuming electricity
acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village of Lisle at the following rates calculated on a monthly
basis for each purchaser:
1. For the first two thousand (2,000) kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.540 cent per kilowatt hour;
2. For the next forty eight thousand (48,000) kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.354 cent per kilowatt hour;
3. For the next fifty thousand (50,000) kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.319 cent per kilowatt hour;
4. For the next four hundred thousand (400,000) kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.310 cent per kilowatt hour;
5. For the next five hundred thousand (500,000) kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.301 cent per kilowatt hour;
6. For the next two million (2,000,000) kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.283 cent per kilowatt hour;
7. For the next two million (2,000,000) kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.279 cent per kilowatt hour;
8. For the next five million (5,000,000) kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.275 cent per kilowatt hour;
9. For the next ten million (10,000,000) kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.270 cent per kilowatt hour;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 62/460
10. For all electricity used or consumed in excess of twenty million (20,000,000) kilowatt hours in a month: 0.266 cent per kilowatt hour. (Ord. 2008-
4194, 4-21-2008, eff. retroactive to 3-17-2008)
(B) Coordination Of Tax:
1. The tax imposed by this section is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the village, the state of Illinois or any other
political subdivision of the state.
2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the tax imposed by this section shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or
collection of the tax would violate the constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution of the state of Illinois.
3. The tax imposed by this section shall not be imposed upon transactions involving the distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling of electricity to the
village.
(C) Collection Of Tax:
1. Subject to the provisions of this section regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this section shall be collected from
purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of
the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original
charge for delivering the electricity.
2. Any tax required to be collected by this section, and any tax in fact, collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by the person delivering the
electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which
are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit
such tax.
3. Persons delivering electricity shall collect tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse
them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the village
upon request. For purposes of this section, any partial payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be
for the delivery of electricity.
(D) Tax Remittance And Return:
1. Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form prescribed by the village finance director. The return and accompanying remittance
shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under this
section.
2. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under this section, then the
purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the village finance director and pay the tax directly to the village finance director on or before the
last day of the month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
(E) Resales Of Electricity:
1. Electricity that is delivered to a person in this village shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person receiving
the electricity has an active resale number issued by the village finance director and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity,
and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.
2. If a person who receives electricity in the village claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the village finance director
for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this section on any purchases of electricity and
shall furnish such additional information as the village finance director may reasonably require.
3. Upon approval of the application, the village finance director shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the
applicant.
4. The village finance director may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this section for electricity
used or consumed by the person, or if the number: a) was obtained through misrepresentation, or b) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
5. (a) If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this section
directly to the village finance director on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to this section
and remit the tax on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
(b) Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the village
finance director the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the village finance director may reasonably
require.
(F) Books And Records For Electric Utility Tax: Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the electric utility tax, shall keep accurate books and
records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to
any tax liability under this section. The books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village during normal business hours.
(G) Credits And Refunds For Electric Utility Tax: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting
by the village, no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this section unless the person files a claim for refund or credit
within one year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted to the village finance director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 63/460
(H) Penalty: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
(I) Definitions: The terms used in this section shall have the same meanings ascribed to them as those terms are defined in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/8-11-2 and other applicable provisions of the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 2008-4189, 3-17-2008)
3-11-3: NATURAL GAS UTILITY TAX:
(A) Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed on all persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling natural gas for use or
consumption within the corporate limits of the village of Lisle, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
(B) Coordination Of Tax: No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such
business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof;
nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas be subject to taxation under the provisions of this
section for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the "municipal retailers' occupation tax act" authorized
by section 8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code.
(C) Tax Additional: Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
(D) Definitions: For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as
the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash,
credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever;
provided, however that "gross receipts" shall not include any amounts specifically excluded from the definition of gross receipts in section 8-11-2(d) of
the Illinois municipal code.
PERSONS: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability
company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
(E) Effective Date Of Tax: The tax provided for herein shall be based on the "gross receipts", as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services
billed on or after May 1, 2008.
(F) Tax Remittance And Return: On or before June 30, 2008, each taxpayer shall make a return to the village finance director for the month of May 2008,
stating:
1. His name;
2. His principal place of business;
3. His gross receipts during the month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
4. Amount of tax;
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the village finance director for a corresponding one
month period.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the village finance director, the amount of tax
herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings
of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of
later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
(G) Credits And Refunds: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as the
result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor
shall be so credited.
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this section shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of
such amount.
(H) Penalty: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. 2008-4194, 4-21-2008, eff. retroactive to 3-17-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 64/460
Chapter 12
COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS1
(Rep. by Ord. 96-2801, 8-5-1996)
Chapter 12.1
CABLE CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS1
(Rep. by Ord. 96-2801, 8-5-1996)
Chapter 12.2
PROCEDURES FOR HEARINGS REGARDING CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES1
(Rep. by Ord. 96-2801, 8-5-1996)
Chapter 13
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
3-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
CHURCH: A church, synagogue, rectory, parish house or similar building incidental to the particular use which is maintained and operated by an organized
group of people for religious purposes.
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine or device which upon insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or similar object, may be
operated by the public generally by manipulating special equipment whereby a score is established, the object of which is to secure a special number or
numbers or a total score, whether a prize is offered or not.
OPERATOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club who sets up for the operation by another or leases or distributes for the
purpose of operation by another, any device as herein defined, whether such setting up for the operation, leasing or distributing be for a fixed charge or
rental, or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such device, or otherwise.
PLAYGROUND: An area or piece of land used for and equipped with facilities for recreation especially by children, except for those which are accessory to
a private residence or a prekindergarten daycare facility.
PROPRIETOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club who, as the owner, lessee, or proprietor has under his or its control any
establishment, place or premises or portion of any place or premises in or at which such device, as is herein defined, is placed or kept for useor play, or on
exhibition for the purpose of use or play.
SCHOOL: Any school except a prekindergarten daycare facility, having regular sessions with regularly employed teaching subjects which are fundamental
and essential for a general academic education, under the supervision of and in accordance with the applicable statutes of the state. (Ord. 81-985, 4-23-
1981; amd. Ord. 82-1056, 7-21-1982; Ord. 91-2131, 2-4-1991)
3-13-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club shall engage in the business of an "operator" or "proprietor" of "coin operated amusement
devices", as the terms are defined, without first having obtained the proper licenses therefor. (Ord. 82-1056, 7-21-1982)
3-13-3: OPERATOR'S LICENSE FEE; PROPRIETOR'S LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for each "operator" and each "proprietor" as herein defined shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance. In the event that the
proprietor is not an operator, then the operator and proprietor shall apply jointly for a license as is required in section 3-13-2 of this chapter. All said license
fees shall be payable annually in advance; provided, that where application is made after the expiration of any portion of any license year, the license may
be issued for the remainder thereof upon payment of the annual fee. In no case shall any portion of said license fee be repaid to the licensee. (Ord. 89-
2004, 11-20-1989)
3-13-4: MACHINE LICENSE FEE:
Every proprietor shall obtain, in addition to an operator's license and a proprietor's license, prior to setting up or making available to the public, a license for
each machine or device, as herein defined. The license fee shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance for each machine or device, as herein
defined, set up or made available for operation. All license fees shall be payable annually in advance; provided, that where application is made after the
expiration of any portion of any license year, a license may be issued for the remainder thereof upon payment of the annual fee. In no case shall any
portion of said license fee be refunded to the licensee. The machine or device licenses and all transfers thereof shall be incorporated and made a part of
the operator's and proprietor's licenses issued in accordance herewith. A machine license may be transferred to any other coin operated amusement
device, so long as the subsequent coin operated amusement device is used and maintained under the operator's and proprietor's licenses as was the prior
machine. (Ord. 89-2004, 11-20-1989)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 65/460
3-13-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
(A) Application for licenses hereunder shall be filed in writing together with the proper license fee with the business office manager, on a form to be
provided by the village and shall specify: (Ord. 89-1884, 8-7-1989; amd. Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
1. Name and address of the applicant(s) if a person, and the name of the principal officers and directors thereof if the applicant is a firm, corporation,
partnership, association or club.
2. Address of the premises where the licensed device or devices are to be operated, together with the character of the business as carried on at such
place.
3. Trade name and general description of the device to be licensed, the name of the manufacturer and the serial number and, if the applicant is a
proprietor, the number of devices to be licensed.
4. Name and address of the operator(s) of the devices(s), if other than the proprietor(s). (Ord. 89-1884, 8-7-1989)
5. A floor plan of the premises were the licensed device or devices are to be located including a detail of the area of the premises to be used for the
location of the license or devices. The plan shall be sufficiently dimensioned to show the gross square footage of the premises and the square
footage of the area in which the devices are to be located. (Ord. 90-2058, 7-2-1990)
6. All such other information as may be requested by the application form as amended from time to time. (Ord. 98-2956, 2-2-1998)
(B) An application for a license hereunder shall be referred by the business office manager to the chief of police and the building commissioner for
investigation of the premises and applicant to be licensed. The investigation reports shall be forwarded to the business office manager for review.
Based on the application, investigations or any other available information, the business office manager shall approve the application unless he finds
that: (Ord. 89-1884, 8-7-1989; amd. Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
1. Applicant, operator or proprietor is not of good character and reputation in the community in which each resides or transacts business; or
2. Applicant, operator or proprietor has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony under any federal or state law, unless such person demonstrates
that he has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust; or
3. Applicant, operator or proprietor has had a business license, which was issued by the village, revoked, unless such person demonstrates through
clear and convincing evidence that a new license should be issued; or
4. Applicant, operator or proprietor is not in compliance with any requirements of this chapter; or
5. Business of the applicant, operator or proprietor is conducted by a manager or agent, and said manager or agent does not possess the same
qualifications required by the licensees; or
6. Applicant, operator or proprietor is a copartnership, and if any general partnership thereof, or any limited partnership thereof, owning more than five
percent (5%) of the aggregate limited partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder; or
7. Applicant, operator or proprietor is a corporation, and if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the
aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder; or
8. Applicant, operator or proprietor is a corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the
"business corporation act of 1983" to transact business in Illinois. (Ord. 89-1884, 8-7-1989)
(C) If the application is approved by the business office manager, the license shall be issued and the business office manager shall remit the license fee to
the village treasurer. All licenses under this chapter shall expire on December 31 following their issuance. The operator/proprietor's license shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee. The business office manager shall also furnish and there shall be prominently
displayed on and affixed to each device, a serially numbered decalcomania sticker. All licenses shall be nonassignable and nontransferable, except as
set forth in section 3-13-4 of this chapter. All licenses shall apply only to the premises for which such license is issued. No more than one device shall
be operated under one machine license.
(D) If the application is not approved by the business office manager, the business office manager shall return the license fee and the business office
manager's findings to the applicant. The applicant may appeal the business office manager's decision to the corporate authorities who shall review all
the information available and shall give the applicant notice and an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the corporate authorities shall be final. The
decision to deny an application shall be based on one or more of the standards set forth in subsection (B) of this section. (Ord.89-1884, 8-7-1989; amd.
Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
(E) Application for renewal of licenses herein may be granted or denied in the same manner as an original application. No license shall be renewed unless
information required and set forth by the applicant on the current license is identical to the information set forth on the application for renewal. (Ord. 89-
1884, 8-7-1989)
3-13-6: INCREASING NUMBER OF DEVICES:
In the event a proprietor licensed under the provisions of this chapter desires, after the expiration of any portion of any license year, to increase the
number of devices to be used or played, or exhibited for use or play in his establishment, he shall surrender his license to the business office manager
who shall issue a new proprietor's license showing the number of devices licensed thereunder, upon payment of the proper proprietor's license fee plus the
proper license fee together with the entire annual fee for each additional machine or device. (Ord. 89-2004, 11-20-1989; amd. Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
3-13-7: EVIDENCE OF OWNERSHIP:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 66/460
Any proprietor who owns such device or devices at the time this chapter becomes effective shall file with the business office manager evidence of such
ownership prior to the issuance of a license; and any proprietor purchasing a device or devices after the effective date of this chapter shall file with the
business office manager evidence of ownership thereof before exhibiting or placing said device or devices for use or play. (Ord. 81-985, 4-23-1981; amd.
Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
3-13-8: REPLAYS TO PLAYERS:
A proprietor, operator or person in charge of a coin operated amusement device may permit free replays to players on the basis of the player's skill,
accumulated score, or any other means, and a machine may record or indicate free replays; provided, however, no coin operated amusement device shall
provide or contain or have attached thereto a "knockoff" device or switch and at no time, except at the close of the day's business, may such a proprietor,
operator or person eliminate free replays registered and remaining on any device after use by any person. No evidence of entitlement to accumulated
games, or to play any device, nor cash, nor anything of value shall be given to any person in acknowledgment of or for the accumulation of any score or
replays by any player. (Ord. 81-985, 4-23-1981)
3-13-9: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The mayor shall have the right to revoke or suspend any license issued hereunder for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter subject to notice
given and hearing conducted by said mayor. (Ord. 81-985, 4-23-1981)
3-13-10: NUMBER OF LICENSES ISSUED:
The number of machine licenses issued to a proprietor for a specific building or structure pursuant to this chapter shall be limited as follows:
(A) If the machines are in a room used exclusively for coin operated amusement devices, the maximum number of licenses shall be derived from the
following calculation:
Gross Floor Area -Private Floor Area = X
2
X = Number of machine licenses
250
The room used for such machines shall be less than thirty percent (30%) of X.
(B) If the machines are not in a room used exclusively for coin operated amusement devices the maximum number of licenses shall be derived from the
following calculation:
(Gross Floor Area - Private Floor Area) 0.25 = Y
Y = Number of licenses
250
For the purpose of this section, "private floor area" shall mean that area not available for public use. "Gross floor area" shall have the same meaning
as given in the building code1. (Ord. 97-2841, 2-3-1997)
3-13-11: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No coin operated devices shall be made available for operation to the public between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
Monday through Friday and between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on Saturdays and Sundays. (Ord. 81-985, 4-23-
1981)
3-13-12: LOCATION:
No coin operated amusement device shall be located or madeavailable to the public for operation within two hundred feet (200') of any church, school or
playground. (Ord. 2001-3360, 11-19-2001)
3-13-13: DIRECT ROUTE OF ACCESS:
No structure or building wherein four (4) or more coin operated amusement devices are made available to the public for use or operation shall have a
direct route of access from the outside of such structure or building to the room or rooms wherein any device is placed or located; provided, however, any
such structure shall in all respects, and in the event of any conflict with the provisions hereof, conform with all building code2 provisions applicable hereof.
(Ord. 81-985, 4-23-1981)
3-13-14: INSULATION REQUIRED:
In addition to any other condition or regulation or statutes, the following condition and regulation shall be applicable to and shall govern and control the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 67/460
business of keeping or providing coin operated amusement devices for public use within the village.
The walls, ceiling or floor, or any combination thereof, of the building or structure, or portion thereof containing four (4) or more devices shall be insulated
or otherwise constructed so that no noise or vibration is detectable without the aid of any mechanical device or instrument beyond the outer perimeter of
the licensed premises or such portion thereof. (Ord. 81-985, 4-23-1981)
3-13-15: MINIMUM AGE RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to allow any person under the age of seventeen (17) years to use coin operated amusement devices or to be present
in a room used exclusively for such devices, unless such person is under the direct supervision of a parent or guardian of such person. Further, signs
informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be posted by every licensee at or near every room containing such devices. Each sign
shall be plainly visible and shall state:
The playing of coin-operated games, or the presence of persons under seventeen years of age in the game room is prohibited by law, unless under
direct parent or guardian supervision.
(Ord. 97-2841, 2-3-1997)
3-13-16: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 97-2841, 2-3-1997)
Chapter 14
RAFFLES1
3-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial
and civic interests of a community.
CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported
schools.
FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to
provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
POLITICAL COMMITTEE: As that term is defined in the Illinois election code, 10 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-1.8.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-2(b) of the "criminal code of 1961", conducted by an organization licensed
under this act, in which:
(A) The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or
by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance;
(B) The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the
part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship.
SPLIT THE POT RAFFLE: Any raffle whereby the raffle chances are sold the same day as the winners are determined, and the raffle prize is cash equal to
a portion of the total proceeds of the sale of the raffle chances.
VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 68/460
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way
as to confer a public benefit. (Ord. 2012-4459, 12-3-2012; amd. Ord. 2016-4647, 5-2-2016)
3-14-2: LIMITATIONS OR TERMS OF THE RAFFLE:
For the purpose of this chapter, raffles shall be conducted under the following limitations:
(A) The aggregate retail value of all prizes and merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle should not exceed the amount as established by the
annual fee ordinance.
(B) The maximum retail value of each prize awarded in a single raffle should not exceed the amount as established by the annual fee ordinance.
(C) The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold shall not exceed the amount as established by the annual fee
ordinance.
(D) For raffles where the cost of a single chance is less than fifty dollars ($50.00), the maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or
sold and winners determined shall not exceed one hundred eighty three (183) days. For raffles where the cost of a single chance is fifty dollars
($50.00) or more, the maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold and winners determined shall not exceed three hundred
sixty five (365) days. (Ord. 2012-4459, 12-3-2012)
3-14-3: CONDITIONS OF LICENSES:
Raffle licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that operate without
profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license
and which have had during that entire five (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects, or to a nonprofit fundraising
organization that has been organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering
extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster, or to a political committee that complies with 230 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 15/8.1 et seq. (Ord. 2016-4647, 5-2-2016)
3-14-4: LICENSE; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE RESTRICTIONS; PERSONS ELIGIBLE:
Licenses issued shall be subject to the following restrictions: (Ord. 2016-4647, 5-2-2016)
(A) No person, firm, corporation, or organization shall sell raffle chances, including door to door or face to face solicitation for the sale of raffle chances, or
determine raffle winners within the village without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this chapter.
(B) The license and application for license must specify the area or areas within the village in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period
during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances and the location or locations at which winning chances
will be determined.
(C) The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the prospective licensee organization, signed by the
presiding officer and the secretary of that organization, and such other information as may be requested by the application form as amended from time
to time.
(D) Each application and license shall be valid for one raffle, except for split the pot raffles as defined in section 3-14-1 of this chapter. One application and
license may cover up to fifteen (15) split the pot raffles held during a period not to exceed one hundred eighty three (183) days. Split the pot raffle
license applications shall provide specific dates and places for each raffle held within the one hundred eighty three (183) day period.
(E) The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
1. Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
2. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter;
3. Any person who is not of good moral character;
4. Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection (E)1, (E)2, or (E)3 of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in
which such a person is active or employed;
5. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (E)1, (E)2, or (E)3 of this section is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated
or not;
6. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (E)1, (E)2, or (E)3 of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
"raffle" as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 2012-4459, 12-3-2012)
(F) License applications for raffles where either the cost of a single chance is equal to or greater than fifty dollars ($50.00), or the total value of all prizes
awarded for a single raffle event is equal to or greater than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), shall be placed on an agenda for approval or denial
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 69/460
by the village board of trustees. License applications for raffles where the cost of a single chance is less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and the total value of
all prizes awarded is less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) may be approved or denied by the business office manager.
(G) Political committees applying to conduct a raffle shall at the time of application present documentation verifying compliance with 230 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 15/8.1 et seq., including a raffle license approved by the Illinois state board of elections.
(H) Such other information as the business office manager may require. (Ord. 2016-4647, 5-2-2016)
3-14-5: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
(A) The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
(B) No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
(C) No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
(D) A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under
this chapter.
(E) Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
(F) No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or guardian. (Ord. 2012-4459, 12-3-2012)
3-14-6: RAFFLES MANAGER; BOND:
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager shall
give a fidelity bond in the sum of an amount determined by the village manager in favor of the organization conditioned upon his honesty in the
performance of his duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the village not less than thirty (30) days prior to its
cancellation. The bond requirement may be waived by including a waiver provision in the license issued to an organization under this chapter, provided
that such waiver received unanimous approval of the members of the licensed organization. (Ord. 2012-4459, 12-3-2012)
3-14-7: RECORDS:
(A) Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and
the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.
(B) Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts, if
bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state, and
placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and
net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
(C) Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to its membership, and to the licensing local unit of government, its gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
(D) Records required by this section shall be retained for three (3) years after expiration of the raffle license, and organizations shall make available their
records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. (Ord. 2012-4459, 12-3-2012)
3-14-8: LICENSE FEE:
The raffle license fee shall be as established in the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 2012-4459, 12-3-2012)
Chapter 15
INTERTRACK WAGERING LOCATIONS
3-15-1: DEFINITION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 70/460
As used in this chapter, an "intertrack wagering location" is defined as an establishment licensed by the state of Illinois racing board to accept legal
wagering on the outcome of simultaneously televised horseraces taking place at an Illinois racetrack or horseraces of national or international interest held
at racetracks in other states or countries. (Ord. 89-1991, 10-2-1989)
3-15-2: PROHIBITION:
Intertrack wagering locations are prohibited within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 89-1991, 10-2-1989)
Chapter 16
TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS AND ELECTRONIC
CIGARETTES AND VAPES
3-16-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDING AND DECLARATION:
The Mayor and Village Board of Trustees expressly find and declare that:
(A) Cigarette smoking, vaping and the use of electronic cigarettes are dangerous to human health;
(B) There exists substantial scientific evidence that the use of tobacco products causes cancer, heart disease and various other medical disorders;
(C) The Surgeon General of the United States has declared that nicotine addiction from tobacco is similar to addiction to cocaine, and is the most
widespread example of drug dependence in this country;
(D) The Director of the National Institute On Drug Abuse concluded that the majority of the three hundred twenty thousand (320,000) Americans who die
each year from cigarette smoking became addicted to nicotine as adolescents before the age of legal consent;
(E) The National Institute On Drug Abuse found that cigarette smoking precedes and may be predictive of adolescent illicit drug use; and
(F) The present legislative scheme of prohibiting sales of tobacco products to persons under the age of eighteen (18) has proven ineffective in preventing
such persons from using tobacco products.
The enactment of this chapter directly pertains to and is in furtherance of the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Village, particularly those
residents under eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 2019-4808, 2-18-2019)
3-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT: A product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. "Alternative nicotine product" excludes cigarettes,
smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products as these terms are defined in section 1 of the Prevention of Tobacco Use by Minors and Sale and
Distribution of Tobacco Products Act1 and any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration as a nontobacco product for sale as a
tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR VAPE: Any electronic device that provides a gas or vapor derived from nicotine and/or other chemicals and inhaled by the
user simulating smoking. The term electronic cigarette or vape includes electronic cigars, electronic pipes, electronic hookah pipes, vape pens, advanced
personal vaporizers, box mods or other devices capable of delivering aerosolized nicotine or other chemicals through inhalation.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or
dipping tobacco; or any alternative nicotine product.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device, which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses tobacco products. (Ord. 2019-4808, 2-18-2019)
3-16-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or delivering any
tobacco products, alternative nicotine product, and/or electronic cigarette or vape within the Village without having first obtained a tobacco dealer's license
pursuant to this chapter. Said license shall be in addition to any other license required by this Code. (Ord. 2019-4808, 2-18-2019)
3-16-4: LICENSE APPLICATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 71/460
Application for a license hereunder shall be made in writing to the Business Office Manager and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 2019-4808, 2-18-2019)
3-16-5: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for a tobacco product, electronic cigarette and alternative nicotine product dealer's license shall be as established by the annual fee
ordinance. (Ord. 2019-4808, 2-18-2019)
3-16-6: PROHIBITED SALES AND PURCHASES; PROHIBITED ACCESS TO RETAIL TOBACCO STORES:
(A) Sale To Minors: It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes and alternative nicotine products to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. Further, signs informing the public of the age
restrictions provided for herein shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes and alternative
nicotine products and on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products, electronic cigarettes and alternative nicotine products for sale.
Each sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER
EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said letters to be at least one inch (1") high.
(B) Minimum Age To Sell Tobacco Products, Electronic Cigarettes And Alternative Nicotine Products: It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer,
associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or permit any person under eighteen (18) years of age to
sell tobacco products, electronic cigarettes and alternative nicotine products in any licensed premises; provided, that the temporary handling of tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes and alternative nicotine products by a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the course of the sale of other
nontobacco goods shall not be prohibited if said person is under the immediate and direct supervision of an employee eighteen (18) years of age or
older and if said employee completes the transaction.
(C) Purchase By Minors: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase tobacco products, electronic cigarettes and
alternative nicotine products, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes and alternative nicotine products. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be fined as established by
the annual fee ordinance for each offense.
(D) Possession By Minors: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any tobacco products, electronic cigarettes
and alternative nicotine products; provided, that the possession by a person under the age of eighteen (18) years under the direct supervision of a
parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited. Further, the temporary handling of tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes and alternative nicotine products by a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the course of the sale of other
nontobacco goods shall not be prohibited if said person is under the immediate and direct supervision of an employee eighteen (18) years of age or
older and if said employee completes the transaction. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be fined as established by the annual
fee ordinance for each offense.
(E) Proximity To Certain Institutions: No license shall be issued for the sale, offer for sale, give away or delivery of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes
and alternative nicotine products within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for
aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station, provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels
offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes and alternative nicotine products is not the principal business carried on, if such place of business so exempted shall have been established
for such purposes prior to the taking effect of this chapter, or to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes
and alternative nicotine products on premises within one hundred feet (100') of any church or school where such church or school has been
established within such one hundred feet (100') since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of one hundred feet
(100') shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational programs and not to property boundaries. In all
other instances, the distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be measured from property line to property line.
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private school to sell at retail tobacco products, electronic cigarettes
and alternative nicotine products if any such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some
common object other than the sale or consumption of tobacco products.
(F) Free Distributions: It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising
tobacco products, electronic cigarettes and alternative nicotine products, or any employee or agent of any such licensee or person, in the course of
such licensee's or person's business, to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco products, electronic cigarettes and alternative nicotine products free of
charge to any person on any right-of-way, park, playground or other property owned by the Village, any school district, any park district or any public
library.
(G) Minors Entering Tobacco Stores: Persons under the age of eighteen (18) are prohibited from entering the premises of retail tobacco, electronic
cigarette and alternative nicotine product stores, as that term is defined in subsection 8-1-2(A) of this Code, and whereby smoking is permitted under
subsection 8-1-2(C)5 of this Code. Further, signs informing the public of this age restriction shall be posted at each entrance stating the following:
PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE ARE PROHIBITED BY VILLAGE ORDINANCE FROM ENTERING THIS PLACE OF BUSINESS
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said letters to be at least one inch (1") high. (Ord. 2019-4808, 2-18-2019)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 72/460
3-16-7: VENDING MACHINES; LOCKING DEVICES:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or delivering tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes and alternative nicotine products by use of a vending machine, unless such vending machine is equipped with a manual,
electric or electronic locking device controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(B) Any premises where access by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not
permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of businesses located at such premises, shall be exempt from the
requirements set forth above. (Ord. 2019-4808, 2-18-2019)
3-16-8: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if
such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord. 2019-4808, 2-18-2019)
3-16-9: SUSPENSION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES, COSTS:
The Mayor shall be charged with the administration of this chapter. The Mayor may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this
chapter, if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. In lieu of suspension or revocation of a license, the Mayor may
instead levy a fine on the licensee. The fine imposed shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance for each violation. Each day on which a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
No license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the Mayor with a seven (7) day written notice to
the licensee, affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven (7) day notice provisions
shall begin the day following delivery by certified mail or by personal service.
The Mayor shall within seven (7) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, or that the
licensee should be fined, state the reason for such determination in a written order and either the amount of the fine, the period of suspension or that the
license has been revoked and serve a copy of such order within the seven (7) days upon the licensee.
Any licensee determined by the Mayor to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the Village the costs of the hearing before the
Mayor on such violation. The Mayor shall determine the costs incurred by the Village for said hearing, including, but not limited to: court reporter fees, the
costs of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the
Village or such lesser sum as the Mayor may allow.
The licensee shall pay said costs to the Village within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the Village. Failure to pay said costs within thirty (30)
days of notification is a violation of this chapter and may be cause for license suspension or revocation, or the levy of a fine. (Ord. 2019-4808, 2-18-2019)
3-16-10: USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION:
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to said licensee for a period of six (6) months thereafter for the
conduct of the business of selling "tobacco products", "electronic cigarettes" or "alternative nicotine products" as defined in section 3-16-2 of this chapter in
the premises described in such revoked license. (Ord. 2019-4808, 2-18-2019)
Chapter 17
FRAUDULENT SALES
3-17-1: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this chapter are intended to provide compliance with "the fraudulent sales act", 815 Illinois Compiled Statutes 350/0.01 et seq., as
amended. The provisions of the act are incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 99-3113, 5-17-1999)
3-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, the words and phrases herein shall have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them:
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE: Any sale, whether described by such name or by any other name (such as, but not limited to, "closing out sale",
"liquidation sale", "lost our lease sale", "forced to vacate sale"), held in such a manner as to induce a belief that upon disposal of the stock of goods on
hand, the business will cease and be discontinued at the premises where the sale is conducted.
GOODS: Includes all goods, wares, merchandise and other personal property, excepting legal claims and cash.
PERSON: Includes a person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest.
REMOVAL SALE: Any sale held in such a manner as to induce a belief that upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be
discontinued at the premises where the sale is conducted, and thereafter will be moved to and occupy another location. (Ord. 99-3113, 5-17-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 73/460
3-17-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
No person shall directly or indirectly advertise or cause to be advertised, represent or cause to be represented, or hold out to the public in any manner that
any sale of goods is an insurance, salvage, removal, going out of business, insolvent's, assignee's, or creditor's sale of goods, or that it is a sale of goods
which have been damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, unless such person shall first have obtained a license to conduct such sale. No license shall
be required for those sales exempt under section 3 of the fraudulent sales act.
The fee for a license shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance and no license shall be issued except upon payment of this fee. (Ord. 2002-3425,
11-4-2002)
3-17-4: TRANSFER:
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred or converted. (Ord. 99-3113, 5-17-1999)
3-17-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for licenses shall be made to the village clerk in writing and shall state the name of the applicant, the location to be used, contents and
inventory, and all such other information as may be requested on the application form as amended from time to time. (Ord. 99-3113, 5-17-1999)
3-17-6: DURATION OF LICENSE:
A license to conduct a sale issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days from the start of such sale. Such license may
be renewed once for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days upon affidavit of the licensee that the goods listed in the inventory have not been disposed of
and that no new goods have been or will be added to the inventory previously filed. The application for renewal of the license shall be made not more than
fourteen (14) days prior to the time of the expiration of the license and shall contain a new inventory of the goods remaining on hand at the time the
application for renewal is made, which new inventory shall be prepared and furnished in the same manner and form as the original inventory. No renewal
shall be granted if any goods have been added to the inventory since the date of the issuance of the license. A fee as established by the annual fee
ordinance shall accompany the request for renewal of the license. (Ord. 2005-3905, 3-21-2005)
3-17-7: POSTING; ADVERTISEMENTS:
A copy of the application for a license to conduct a sale including the inventory filed therewith, shall be posted in aconspicuous place in the salesroom or
place where the goods are to be sold. A duplicate copy of the license shall be attached to the front door of the premises where the sale is conducted in
such a manner that it be clearly visible from the street.
Any advertisement or announcement published in connection with the sale shall conspicuously state on its face the number of the license and the date of
its expiration. (Ord. 99-3113, 5-17-1999)
3-17-8: CERTAIN PURCHASES PROHIBITED:
There shall be no substitution for or addition to goods described in the inventory filed or any change in the time or place for a sale conducted. In the case
of a sale of damaged goods, the goods to be sold shall be clearly marked or identified as damaged as required by section 10 of the fraudulent sales act.
No goods may be purchased in contemplation of a sale, as provided in section 10 of the fraudulent sales act. (Ord. 99-3113, 5-17-1999)
3-17-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The mayor may revoke any license issued hereunder for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, subject to notice and an opportunity to be
heard. (Ord. 99-3113, 5-17-1999)
3-17-10: PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT:
Enforcement of this act shall be as provided in sections 10, 10.5 and 11 of the fraudulent sales act. Any violation of these provisions shall be reported to
the state's attorney of DuPage County and the attorney general of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 99-3113, 5-17-1999)
Chapter 18
TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
3-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
BODY PIERCING: Puncturing the skin for the purpose of making a permanent hole or scar, but does not include acupuncture, injection of medication, or
any other process carried out for medical or therapeutic purposes.
LICENSED MEDICAL PRACTITIONER: A licensed physician, osteopath, registered nurse or chiropractor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 74/460
TATTOOING: Puncturing the skin with a needle, pin, pen or other device for the purpose of placing ink, dye or other foreign substance in or under the skin
to make a permanent mark, design, symbol, letter, or figure. (Ord. 2003-3444, 2-3-2003)
3-18-2: PROHIBITED EXCEPT BY LICENSED MEDICAL PRACTITIONER:
No person other than a licensed medical practitioner, or a person acting under the direct supervision of a licensed medical practitioner, shall engage in the
business of tattooing or body piercing. (Ord. 2003-3444, 2-3-2003)
3-18-3: RECORDS TO BE MAINTAINED:
Any person engaged in the business of tattooing or body piercing shall maintain a record of each customer, including name, home address and date of
birth. Such record shall be maintained for not less than five (5) years and must be made available to the business office manager upon request. (Ord.
2003-3444, 2-3-2003)
3-18-4: PROHIBITIONS:
No person shall engage in tattooing or body piercing on a person who is:
(A) Under the age of eighteen (18), except in the presence of and with the written consent of, a parent or legal guardian;
(B) Under the influence of alcohol or drugs; or
(C) Suffering from any infection or communicable disease. (Ord. 2003-3444, 2-3-2003)
3-18-5: FEES:
Each application for a tattooing and body piercing establishment license shall be accompanied by a license fee in the amount as established by the annual
fee ordinance. (Ord. 2005-3912, 3-21-2005)
Chapter 19
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
3-19-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
(A) Title: This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the LISLE SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSING ORDINANCE, and is also
referred to herein as this chapter.
(B) Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to minimize and control the negative secondary effects of
sexually oriented businesses within the municipality in order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the municipality. The provisions
of this chapter have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials or
communication, including sexually oriented entertainment. Similarly, it is not the purpose nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented entertainment protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to
their intended market. Furthermore, it is not the intent or effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution or exhibition of entertainment that
is obscene.
(C) Findings: Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses presented to the municipality from findings
incorporated in the cases of City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120 S.Ct. 1382 (2000); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); City of
Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); Berg v. Health and Hospital Corporation,
865 F.2d 797 (7th Cir. 1989); Ellwest StereoTheaters v. Wenner, 681 F.2d 1243 (9th Cir. 1982); Bamon Corp v. City of Dayton, 730 F.Supp. 80 (S.D.
Ohio, 1990); and EWAP Inc. v. City of Los Angeles, 97 Cal.App. 3d 179, 158 Cal.Rptr. (1979), and on studies in other cities including the "Report Of
The Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses" (Minnesota, 1989); "Memorandum Re: Adult
Entertainment Ordinance", of the assistant chief of police of Tucson, Arizona (May 1, 1990); Hecht, Peter R., Ph.D., "Report To The American Center
For Law And Justice On The Secondary Impacts Of Sex Oriented Businesses" (March 31, 1996); "Adult Entertainment Businesses In Indianapolis, An
Analysis" (1984) and McCleary, Richard, Ph.D., and Meeker, James W., Ph.D., "Final Report To The City Of Garden Grove: The Relationship Between
Crime And Adult Business Operations On Garden Grove Boulevard", (Garden Grove, California, October 23, 1991), this legislative body finds:
1. Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary, unlawful and unhealthy activities.
2. Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral sex and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semiprivate booths or rooms for viewing films, videos, or live sexually oriented entertainment. Such activities may result in spreading communicable
diseases such as syphilis, gonorrhea, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
3. Offering sexually oriented entertainment under conditions that encourage such activities creates unhealthy conditions.
4. Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part because of the failure of owners and operators to regulate those
activities and maintain their facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 75/460
5. Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view sexually
oriented films concealed from public view.
6. The findings noted in subsections (C)1 through (C)5 of this section raise compelling and substantial governmental concerns.
7. Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics, which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those compelling and
substantial governmental concerns.
8. A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and operators of
sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on operators to see that sexually
oriented businesses are run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the
municipality. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, and fully in
possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
9. The regulation of nudity, seminudity, and physical contact between employees and patrons in sexually oriented businesses will further the compelling
and substantial governmental interests in preventing prostitution and other sex related crimes, including illegal sex acts, and protecting the public
health, safety, and welfare.
10. Requiring open sight lines in sexually oriented businesses and requiring sufficient lighting will advance the compelling and substantial governmental
interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in sexually oriented businesses and will facilitate enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter and other federal, state and local laws, thereby furthering the compelling and substantial governmental interest in protecting the public
health, safety, and welfare.
11. The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of sexually oriented
businesses, and by employees of such businesses, will facilitate the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and other federal, state and local
laws, and will thereby further the compelling and substantial government interest in protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
12. A person who recently has been convicted of a sexually related crime is not an appropriate individual to operate or be employed in a sexually
oriented business.
13. Barring such individuals from the management of and employment in sexually oriented businesses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to
and prevents the commission of sexually related criminal acts, including conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
(Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
EMPLOYEE: A natural person who performs any service or work on the premises of a sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, providing
entertainment, performing work of a management or supervisory nature, or performing support functions, on a full time, part time or contract basis, whether
or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include a person on the premises exclusively for repair or maintenance of the
premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
EMPLOYEE STATION: An area on the premises of a sexually orientedbusiness designated for occupancy exclusively by one or more employees whose
duties include assuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The village manager of the village of Lisle or his or her designee.
EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS: Urination, defecation, lactation, ejaculation and menstruation. It shall not mean urination and defecation performed in a public
or employee only restroom in the manner in which those facilities are intended to be used, and when not performed or presented for a commercial
purpose. It shall not mean lactation as part of breast feeding an infant, unless performed or displayed for a commercial purpose other than education and
training in the art, science or technique of breast feeding an infant.
LICENSEE: With respect to a sexually oriented business license issued under this chapter, a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual(s) designated on the license application as principally responsible for the operation of the
sexually oriented business. With respect to a sexually oriented business employee license issued under this chapter, licensee means a natural person in
whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business.
MUNICIPALITY: The village of Lisle, Illinois.
NUDITY OR NUDE: Exposing to view specified anatomical areas or any device, costume, or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates any
specified anatomical areas.
OPERATE OR CAUSE TO BE OPERATED: To control or hold primary responsibility for the operation of a sexually oriented business, either as a business
entity, as an individual, or as part of a group of individuals with shared responsibility. It shall also mean to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A
person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or
licensee of the business.
OPERATOR: Any person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business.
PATRON: Any natural person who is not an employee.
PERSON: A natural person, proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company, firm, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation or
combination of individuals of whatever form or character.
SEMINUDITY OR SEMINUDE: Exposing to view, with less than a fully opaque covering, any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or
any portion of the buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the female breast, butshall not include any portion of the cleavage of the
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other clothing, provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 76/460
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any of the following when done in a place where the public is invited or permitted, or when done for any commercial
purpose including sale and rental, regardless of who pays or receives the consideration therefor, and regardless of the form of consideration:
(A) Exhibition or display of a natural person or people in the state of nudity or seminudity, or engaged in specified sexual activities or excretory
functions;
(B) Premises with a sexually oriented amusement device;
(C) Rental or leasing of a hotel room, motel room or similar room for a period not exceeding ten (10) hours, but not including dining rooms, banquet
rooms, ballrooms, conference rooms and similar facilities unless they are used or to be used for specified sexual activities or excretory functions;
(D) Offering of physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between natural persons of the opposite sex, when one or more of the persons is
nude or seminude, and also the offering of physical contact which constitutes specified sexual activities regardless of the sex of the person
performing or receiving the contact;
(E) Offering of products, services or activities by or with a natural person or people when one or more of the people, whether a patron, agent, employee
or otherwise, is in a state of nudity or seminudity;
(F) Displaying or offering to others any recorded depiction of a natural person, or created image or character, as in cartoons and animation, by any
medium, including, without limitation, film, videotape, closed circuit television, digital video disc (DVD), laser disc, compact disc (CD), floppy disc,
photograph, slide, television, book, magazine, and computer software, which is:
1. Characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified
anatomical areas; or
2. Advertised or otherwise held out to thepublic as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas, including, without limitation, the use of the term "adult" and the use of the
designation of one or more "X" such as, but not limited to, "XXX";
(G) The display and offering to others of novelties, instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with
specified sexual activities or that give the appearance of or simulate any of the specified anatomical areas.
(H) The term sexually oriented business shall exclude the following:
1. The display and offering to others of condoms, spermicide or other nonprescription contraceptives, unless displayed and offered to others on the
premises of a business which would otherwise be considered a sexually oriented business;
2. The display and offering to others of drugs, instruments or devices which require a prescription, that are designed primarily for use in connection
with specified sexual activities, and which are in fact dispensed by or under the supervision of a pharmacist licensed by the state of Illinois;
3. The display and offering to others of instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with specified sexual
activities if they are displayed and offered to others on the premises where a pharmacist licensed by the state of Illinois is employed to dispense
prescription drugs, instruments or devices;
4. Breast feeding an infant, unless performed or displayed for a commercial purpose other than education and training in the art, science or
technique of breast feeding an infant;
5. The display and offering to others of motion pictures, by any format, which have received a rating from the Motion Picture Association of America
of G, PG, PG-13, R or NC-17, when offered or displayed substantially in their entirety;
6. Libraries and museums funded in whole or in part by federal, state or local governmental funds;
7. The display and offering to others of items which would otherwise qualify as a sexually oriented business pursuant to this section, if and only if the
display and offering are done for a commercial purpose, and all of the following apply to the business displaying and offering such items to others:
(a) Less than twenty percent (20%) of its gross income comes from the sale, rental or exhibition of the following types of items:
(1) Items which are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory
functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, and
(2) Items which are advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, including, without
limitation, the use of the term "adult" and the use of the designation of one or more "X" such as, but not limited to, "XXX"; and
(b) Less than twenty percent (20%) of its display space is used for the sale, rental or exhibition of the items described in subsections (H)7(a)(1)
and (H)7(a)(2) of this definition; and
(c) Less than twenty percent (20%) of the items it offers to others are the items described in subsections (H)7(a)(1) and (H)7(a)(2) of this definition;
and
(d) The items described in subsections (H)7(a)(1) and (H)7(a)(2) of this definition are segregated from all other displays and retail areas of the
premises by a solid partition from floor to ceiling with no openings or windows and with entrance and egress by means of a solid door posted
with a sign not less than one foot by one foot (1' x 1') with the words "UNDER 18 NOT ADMITTED" lettered on the sign, except that magazines
characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified
anatomical areas or any combination thereof may be displayed on racks or other display cases only if the magazine is encased or otherwise
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 77/460
covered up and concealed from common view of anything other than the magazine title or text or other materials which would not be described
assexually oriented;
(e) Certain uses which fall within this definition may also constitute uses which are illegal under local, state or federal law, such as obscenity or
child pornography. Even if such illegal uses constitute a sexually oriented business under the definition set forth herein, they shall not be
permitted uses in any district.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, any portion of the areola of the
female breast if less than fully and opaquely covered; and the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque covering. In
determining whether any of the foregoing portions of the anatomy are fully and opaquely covered, coverage by makeup, paint, or similar matter applied
directly to the skin, shall not be considered to be fully and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: (A) Any of the following offenses, as set forth in the Illinois criminal code of 1961, as amended, or any substantially
similar offenses to those set forth below under the criminal or penal code of any local jurisdiction, state, country, or international law: indecent solicitation of
a child, indecent solicitation of an adult, adultery, fornication, public indecency, sexual exploitation of a child, custodial sexual misconduct, presence within
school zone by child sex offenders prohibited, sexual relations within families, bigamy, marrying a bigamist, prostitution, solicitation of a sexual act,
soliciting for a prostitute, soliciting for a juvenile prostitute, pandering, keeping a place of prostitution, keeping a place of juvenile prostitution, patronizing a
prostitute, patronizing a juvenile prostitute, pimping, juvenile pimping, exploitation of a child, obscenity, child pornography, commercial film and
photographic print processor - reports, harmful material, tie in sales of obscene publications to distributors, criminal sexual assault, aggravated criminal
sexual assault, predatory criminal sexual assault of a child, criminal sexual abuse, aggravated criminal sexual abuse, criminal transmission of HIV,
ritualized abuse of a child, female genital mutilation, violation of the sex offender registration act, stalking (if the basis of the conviction is the threat of
immediate or future sexual assault, or placing a person in reasonable apprehension of immediate or future sexual assault), first degree murder (if the basis
for the conviction is 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-1(a)(3), commonly known as felony murder, where the predicate felony is any felony otherwise set
forth in this definition), burglary (if the basis for the conviction is an intent to commit any felony otherwise set forth in this definition), residential burglary (if
the basis for the conviction is an intent to commit any felony otherwise set forth in this definition), armed violence (if the basis for the conviction is an intent
to commit any felony otherwise set forth in this definition), attempt to commit any of the foregoing crimes, conspiracy to commit any of the foregoing
crimes, and any other felony or misdemeanor forwhich an element of the offense is the commission of any of the foregoing crimes or an intent to commit
any of the foregoing crimes.
(B) For which: 1) less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor, business offense or petty offense; or 2) less than five (5) years have elapsed since
the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense.
(C) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall not prevent such conviction from constituting a specified criminal activity as defined herein.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following, whether actual or simulated:
(A) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, buttocks, or female breasts,
regardless of whether the performer or recipient is clothed, in a state of nudity or in a state of seminudity;
(B) The manipulation of the human body of another, including massage, by the use of any portion of manipulator's body, whether covered or
uncovered, or by any device, if the person performing the manipulation or the person receiving the manipulation is in a state of nudity or seminudity;
(C) Sex acts, normal or perverted, heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual, including, without limitation, intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, analingus,
masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism and masochism, and any other act intended to cause sexual arousal;
(D) Sex acts between animals when offered or displayed for the purpose or with the intent of causing the sexual arousal of a human viewer.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: (A) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(B) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
(C) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfers by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-3: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
(A) No person shall operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the municipality pursuant to this
chapter.
(B) No person shall, in connection with operating a sexually oriented business, retain the services of a person as an employee who is not licensed as a
sexually oriented business employee by the municipality pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-4: EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall act as an employee on the premises of a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee
license pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 78/460
3-19-5: BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION:
(A) An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be submitted to the municipality's business office manager on a form provided by the
enforcement officer. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such information as reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to
enable the municipality to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
(B) An application for a sexually oriented business license shall identify the following persons and be signed under oath by said persons that the
information contained therein is true:
1. If the business entity is a sole proprietorship, that sole proprietor;
2. If the business entity is a corporation, each officer and director of the corporation and each individual with a ten percent (10%) or greater ownership
interest in the corporation;
3. If the business entity is a partnership, each general partner, and each limited partner who owns ten percent (10%) or more of total limited partnership
interest;
4. If the business is a limited liability company, each manager, and each member with a ten percent (10%) or greater ownershipinterest in the company.
If the limited liability company does not have any managers, then each member.
(C) An application for a sexually oriented business license must designate one or more natural persons who are to be principally responsible for the
operation of the proposed sexually oriented business, if a license is granted. At least one natural person so designated must be involved in the day to
day operation of the proposed sexually oriented business on a regular basis. Each natural person so designated, as well as the business entity itself,
shall be considered a license applicant, must qualify as a licensee under this chapter, and shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
(D) An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be completed according to the instructions of the application form, which shall require the
following:
1. If the applicant is:
(a) An individual, state the legal name, date of birth, home address, home phone number, social security number, driver's license number, and any
aliases of such individual;
(b) A partnership, state the complete name of the partnership and all of its partners and whether the partnership is general or limited, and provide a
copy of the partnership agreement, if any, and the information specified in subsection (A) of this section for each partner;
(c) A corporation, state the complete name of the corporation and the date of its incorporation, provide evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of its state of incorporation and of Illinois, and state the names and capacity of all officers and directors, all persons
owning ten percent (10%) or more of the stock of the corporation, the name of the registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered
office for service of process, and the information specified in subsection (A) of this section for each officer, director and owner of ten percent (10%)
or more of the stock;
(d) A limited liability company, state the complete name of the company and the date of its organization, provide evidence that the company is in
good standing under the laws of its state of organization and of Illinois, and state the names and capacity of all members, owners and managers,
the name of the registered agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process, and the information specified in subsection (A) of
this section for each member, owner and manager.
2. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, state the fictitious name to be used
and submit copies of documentation evidencing the registration of the business's name under applicable laws.
3. State whether any applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, and if so, the specified criminal activity involved and the date, place,
and jurisdiction of each such conviction.
4. State whether any applicant has had a previous license under this chapter or other similar regulation of another jurisdiction denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the
date of the denial, suspension or revocation; and state whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or ten percent
(10%) or greater owner of a corporation, or a member or manager of a limited liability company, licensed under this chapter whose license has
previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the business for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
5. State whether any applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar regulation from this or another jurisdiction and, if so, the
names and locations of other such licensed businesses.
6. State the nature of the sexually oriented business for which the applicant is filing.
7. State the location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property (i.e., block and lot), street address,
telephone number(s), e-mail address and internet web site URL, if any.
8. State the mailing address of each applicant and each person signing the application.
9. For any applicant who is a natural person, describe and identify the location of any tattoos on such person's face, arms, legs, or hands, or any other
anatomical area that normally would be visible when such person is on the premises of the proposed sexually oriented business.
10. Submit proof that each applicant who is a natural person is at least eighteen (18) years old.
11. Submit a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises of the sexually oriented business, including the location of all stages, walls,
partitions, designated sales areas, bookcases, and patron seating, and a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The diagram shall
also designate the place at which the sexually oriented business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus one foot (1').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 79/460
12. Confirmation of applicant's citizenship, place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of naturalization. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-6: ISSUANCE OF BUSINESS LICENSE:
(A) Upon receipt of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license, the municipality's business office manager shall immediately file a
copy of the completed application with the enforcement officer.
(B) Upon receipt of a copy of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license, the enforcement officer, or any peace officer designated by
the enforcement officer, shall promptly investigate the information provided in the application concerning the criminal background of the applicants and
shall record the results of the investigation in writing within five (5) days of the completion of the investigation. If the investigation is done by a peace
officer designated by the enforcement officer, then the written results of the investigation shall also be filed with the enforcement officer within five (5)
days of the completion of the investigation.
(C) Within five (5) days of receipt of a copy of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license, the enforcement officer shall notify the
municipality's fire chief and building department of such application. In making such notification, the enforcement officer shall request that the fire chief
and the building department promptly inspect the premises for which the sexually oriented business license is sought to assess compliance with the
regulations under their respective jurisdictions.
(D) The fire chief shall provide to the enforcement officer a written certification of whether the premises are in compliance with the fire code within five (5)
days of completing the inspection.
(E) The building department shall provide the enforcement officer a written certification of whether the premises are in compliance with the building code,
the planning and zoning code, and the provisions of this chapter related to physical characteristics of the premises within five (5) days of completing the
inspection.
(F) The enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless the enforcement officer determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
1. An applicant is a natural person under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or has provided
false information.
3. An applicant has been denied a sexually oriented business license or has had a license to operate a sexually oriented business revoked within the
preceding twelve (12) months by any jurisdiction.
4. An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity.
5. The proposed sexually oriented business or the premises on which it would operate would violate or fail to be in compliance with any provisions of
the zoning code, the provisions of this chapter related to physical characteristics of the premises, or any state or federal law.
6. The application and investigation fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
7. An applicant is otherwise in violation of or is not in compliance with any provision of this chapter.
8. An applicant is not a citizen of the United States.
(G) If the enforcement officer determines that no grounds for denial of a license exist under this section, the enforcement officer shall not delay approval of
the application.
(H) A sexually oriented business license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date,
and the address of the licensed sexually oriented business. All sexually oriented business licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near
the entrance to the business so that they may be easily read at any time.
(I) The enforcement officer shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for any license denial. The written license denial shall be either served on
the applicant personally or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the application, and depositing it
with the United States postal service, proper first class postage prepaid. The enforcement officer may, but is not required to serve the written license
denial by certified or registered mail, as set forth above. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-7: EMPLOYEE LICENSE APPLICATION:
(A) An application for a sexually oriented business employee license shall be submitted to the municipality's business office manager on a form provided
by the enforcement officer. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such information as reasonably necessary (including
fingerprints) to enable the municipality to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
(B) An application for a sexually oriented business employeelicense shall be completed according to the instructions of the application form, signed by the
applicant under oath that the information contained therein is true, and shall require the following:
1. State the applicant's name and any other names (including "stage" names) or aliases used by the applicant.
2. State the applicant's date and place of birth.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 80/460
3. State the applicant's height, weight, and hair and eye color.
4. Describe and identify the location of any tattoos on the applicant's face, arms, legs, or hands, or any other anatomical area that normally would be
visible when the applicant is on the premises of the proposed sexually oriented business.
5. State the applicant's present and intended business address and telephone number, identifying the sexually oriented business at which the applicant
intends employment.
6. Submit proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years old.
7. Provide a statement detailing the sexually oriented business employee license history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding
the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate a sexually oriented business, in
this or any other jurisdiction, and whether the applicant has ever had a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee
license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended by this or any other jurisdiction. In the event of any such denial,
revocation, or suspension, state the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or
suspension. Attach a copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension.
8. State whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved and the date, place
and jurisdiction of each such conviction, and the date of release from confinement, if any, for such conviction.
9. State applicant's home address, home phone number, social security number, and driver's license number. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-8: ISSUANCE OF EMPLOYEE LICENSE:
(A) Upon receipt of a completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the municipality's business office manager shall
immediately file a copy of the completed application with the enforcement officer.
(B) Upon receipt of a copy of a completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the enforcement officer, or any peace officer
designated by the enforcement officer, shall promptly investigate the information provided in the application concerning the criminal background of the
applicant and shall record the results of the investigation in writing within five (5) days of the completion of the investigation. If the investigation is done
by a peace officer designated by the enforcement officer, then the written results of the investigation shall also be filed with the enforcement officer
within five (5) days of the completion of the investigation.
(C) The enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless the enforcement officer determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings are true:
1. The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or has given
false information.
2. The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
3. The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity.
4. The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local, state, or federal law, statute, rule or
regulation.
5. The sexually oriented business where the applicant intends employment is not a licensed sexually oriented business pursuant to this chapter.
6. The applicant has been denied a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, or has had a sexually
oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months by any jurisdiction.
(D) The enforcement officer shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for any license denial. The written license denial shall be either served on
the applicant personally or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the application, and depositing it
with the United States postal service, proper first class postage prepaid. The enforcement officer may, but is not required to serve the written license
denial by certified or registered mail, as set forth above. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-9: FEES:
(A) Every application for a new sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application andinvestigation fee as
established by the annual fee ordinance.
(B) Every application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee as
established by the annual fee ordinance.
(C) In addition to the application and investigation fee required in subsection (A) or (B) of this section, every applicant that is granted a sexually oriented
business license (new or renewal) shall pay to the municipality an annual, nonrefundable license fee as established by the annual fee ordinance prior
to or at the time of issuance or renewal.
(D) Every application for a new sexually oriented business employee license shall be accompanied by an annual, nonrefundable application, investigation,
and license fee as established by the annual fee ordinance.
(E) Every application for renewal of a sexually oriented business employee license shall be accompanied by an annual, nonrefundable application,
investigation, and license fee as established by the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 81/460
3-19-10: EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
(A) Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on December 31 and may be renewed by making application as provided in this section.
Annual license fees for all licenses except those issued for Lisle commuter parking lot mobile concessionaire/merchandiser shall be paid to the village
no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on December 15 of the preceding year for which the license is issued. A fee paid after that date shall include
a late fee as established by the annual fee ordinance.
(B) An application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license shall be submitted to the
municipality's clerk on a form provided by the enforcement officer. The renewal application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information as reasonably necessary to enable the municipality to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
The completed renewal application shall describe any changes or additions to, or deletions from, the information provided in the applicant's initial
license application. The completed renewal application shall be accompanied by copies of any document or material submitted in connection with the
initial license application that has been revised or requires revision to reflect any change in circumstances or conditions. Sketches or diagrams
submitted with an initial sexually oriented business license application may be resubmitted with subsequent renewal applications, provided that the
applicant certifies in writing that the sketch or diagram still depicts the premises accurately.
(C) The enforcement officer shall make the determinationconcerning the approval of license renewals based on the same criteria and using the same
procedures used to evaluate applications for new licenses under this chapter.
(D) The enforcement officer shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for any renewal denial, and shall serve the written renewal denial on the
applicant in the same manner as a denial of an initial application.
(E) When the enforcement officer denies an application for renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued another license for one year from the
date of denial. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-11: SUSPENSION:
(A) The enforcement officer shall suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the enforcement officer
determines that a licensee: 1) has violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter except as set forth in subsection (B) of this section;
or 2) has knowingly allowed an employee to violate or fail to comply with any section of this chapter.
(B) The enforcement officer shall suspend a sexually oriented business employee license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the enforcement
officer determines that a licensee has violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter, except as set forth in subsection (C) of this
section.
(C) The enforcement officer shall advise the licensee in writing of the reasons for any suspension. The written suspension shall be either served on the
applicant personally on or before five (5) days before the suspension is to take effect, or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the licensee at
the address set forth in the application, and depositing it with the United States postal service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before five (5)
days before the suspension is to take effect. The enforcement officer may, but is not required to serve the written suspension by certified or registered
mail, as set forth above. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-12: REVOCATION:
(A) The enforcement officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license if a cause of suspension
under section 3-19-11 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended two (2) times within the preceding twelve (12) months.
(B) The enforcement officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business license if he/she determines that:
1. A licensee gave false or misleading information in thematerial submitted during the application or renewal process;
2. A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
3. A licensee has knowingly allowed any specific criminal activity, or the commission of any felony on the premises;
4. A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was pending initial application,
expired or suspended;
5. A licensee has knowingly allowed one or more specified sexual activities to occur in or on the licensed premises;
6. A licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal activity during the term of the license; or
7. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the municipality for any taxes or fees past due that were assessed or imposed in relation to any business or
business property.
(C) The enforcement officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business employee license if he/she determines that:
1. The licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application or renewal process;
2. The licensee has knowingly acted as an employee on the premises of a sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's
license was pending initial application, expired or suspended; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 82/460
3. The licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal activity during the term of the license.
(D) The enforcement officer shall advise the licensee in writing of the reasons for any revocation. The written revocation shall be either served on the
applicant personally on or before five (5) days before the revocation is to take effect, or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the licensee at
the address set forth in the application, and depositing it with the United States postal service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before five (5)
days before the revocation is to take effect. The enforcement officer may, but is not required to serve the written revocation by certified or registered
mail, as set forth above.
(E) When the enforcement officer revokes a license, the licensee shall not be issued another license for one year from the date the revocation became
effective. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-13: APPEAL RIGHTS:
(A) Any denial, suspension, or revocation of a new or renewal license under this chapter may be appealed to the mayor bywritten notice filed with the
municipality's clerk within ten (10) days of the effective date of such denial, suspension, or revocation.
(B) The mayor shall notify the appellant in writing of the date for the hearing on the appeal. The written notice shall be either served on the appellant
personally on or before five (5) days before the hearing, or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the appellant at the address set forth in the
application, and depositing it with the United States postal service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before seven (7) days before the hearing.
The mayor may, but is not required to serve the written notice by certified or registered mail, as set forth above.
(C) The mayor shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written notice of appeal by the municipality's clerk, at which
hearing the appellant may present witnesses or other evidence opposing the denial, suspension or revocation. The enforcement officer may also
present witnesses or other evidence supporting the denial, suspension or revocation. Both parties shall have the right to cross examine witnesses.
(D) The mayor shall determine whether the preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing supported the decision of the enforcement officer to
deny, suspend or revoke the license of the appellant.
(E) The mayor shall issue a written decision setting forth his findings regarding the evidence presented at the hearing, and his decision to affirm or overrule
the decision of the enforcement officer. The mayor shall serve a copy of his written decision on the appellant and the enforcement officer in writing. The
written decision shall be either served on the parties personally on or before five (5) days after the date of the hearing, or by placing it in a sealed
envelope, addressed to the respective parties at the address set forth in the application and at the enforcement officer's ordinary business address,
and depositing it with the United States postal service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before five (5) days after the hearing. The mayor may,
but is not required to serve the written decision by certified or registered mail, as set forth above.
(F) The written decision of the mayor shall be considered a final decision. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-14: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
(A) A sexually oriented business license is not transferable from one licensee to another or from one location to another. Any purported transfer of a
sexually oriented business license shall automatically and immediately revoke that license.
(B) A sexually oriented business employee license is nottransferable from one licensee to another, but the use of the license by the individual to whom it
was issued may be transferred from one licensed sexually oriented business to another such licensed establishment during the term of the license,
provided that the licensee gives written notice of such transfer to the enforcement officer within fifteen (15) days after such transfer. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-
17-2004)
3-19-15: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
(A) Certain Activities Prohibited: No employee on the premises of a sexually oriented business may engage in any specified criminal activity, specified
sexual activities or excretory functions.
(B) Nude Or Seminude Employees Must Be On Stage; Specifications: Any employee appearing on the premises of a sexually oriented business, in a place
that can be viewed by patrons, when said employee is in a state of nudity or seminudity must be on a stage that is at least forty five inches (45") from
the floor, and at a distance at least seventy two inches (72") from all parts of a clearly designated area in which patrons will be present, and no patron
shall be permitted in any area closer than seventy two inches (72") from the stage.
(C) Touching Prohibited: No employee appearing on the premises of a sexually oriented business in a state of nudity or seminudity may intentionally or
knowingly touch a patron or a patron's clothing or permit himself or herself to be touched by a patron or a patron's clothing. No employee may
intentionally or knowingly touch a patron's genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, buttocks, pubic hair, or female breast either
directly or through clothing or other covering. No employee may intentionally or knowingly permit a patron to touch the employee's genitals, pubic area,
perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, buttocks, pubic hair, or female breast either directly or through clothing or other covering. For purposes of this
subsection, touching need not be accomplished by the hand, and includes the touching by any part of the toucher's body, clothing or device held by the
toucher.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 83/460
(D) Dressing Rooms: All sexually oriented businesses that offer live entertainment must provide separate dressing room facilities for female and male
employees, and which shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than employees.
(E) Minors Prohibited: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted on the premises of a sexually oriented business. Mistake of age
is not a defense to a charge under this section, unless the person under the age eighteen (18) who was permitted on the premises exhibited to the
employee a driver's license, or other apparently official government issued identification card bearing the patron's photograph, and purporting to show
that the person was eighteen (18) years of age or over, and the employee to whom that document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable
cause to believe that the personseeking admittance was under eighteen (18) years.
(F) Hours Of Operation: No sexually oriented business shall remain open at any time between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays, and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays, nor shall any
entertainment, service, or product be provided to a patron on the premises of a sexually oriented business during those hours.
(G) Minimum Lighting Level:
1. The premises of every sexually oriented business shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to
which patrons are permitted access, including restrooms, at an illumination level of not less than one hundred fifty (150) foot-candles as measured at
floor level.
2. The illumination described in subsection (G)1 of this section shall be maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. In the event
of a power failure, the business shall stop operating immediately and all patrons shall be cleared from the premises. The premises shall not be
reopened until the minimum illumination level is restored.
(H) Exterior Display: No sexually oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation from outside the premises of any image,
material or entertainment depicting or describing excretory functions, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or any person in a state
of nudity or seminudity, whether by means of display, decoration, sign, window or any other means. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-16: PENALTY:
(A) Any person who violates or who intentionally or knowingly permits the violation of any section of this chapter shall be fined the amount as established
by the annual fee ordinance and may additionally be sentenced to a term of incarceration not to exceed six (6) months.
(B) Each day that a sexually oriented business or employee operates in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense or violation. (Ord. 2004-
3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-17: INJUNCTION:
Any person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in violation of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for ordinance violations as provided in section 3-19-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
3-19-18: EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY:
If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be deemed to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining
sections, subsections, clauses and phrases shall not be affected. (Ord. 2004-3838, 5-17-2004)
Chapter 20
ANNUAL BUSINESS REGISTRATION
3-20-1: REQUIRED:
Every "business" as defined in this chapter, whether or not subject to any licensing requirements of the village or of any other governmental agency, shall
annually register with the village in the manner and at the times prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
3-20-2: DEFINITION OF BUSINESS:
For purposes of this chapter, the term "business" shall include any and all persons selling or providing any type of service or product. It shall also mean
any for profit or not for profit entity, including, without limitation, any sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company, limited liability partnership,
corporation, joint venture, association, franchisee, or cooperative that leases or owns a building or space within a building located in the village of Lisle for
occupational purposes. Businesses that operate from distinct spaces or buildings with separate addresses shall be deemed to be separate businesses
regardless if such businesses are owned or operated by the same sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, franchisee, or
cooperative. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
3-20-3: EXEMPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 84/460
The registration requirements of this chapter shall not apply to educational, governmental, religious, or political organizations, or home based businesses.
Those entities not required to register may do so at their discretion. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
3-20-4: APPLICATIONS:
Annual business registration applications shall be on forms prepared and supplied by the village. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
3-20-5: REGISTRATION DEADLINES:
Every business subject to the regulations in this chapter shall renew their registration on or before June 30 of each year. Each new business must register
prior to commencing operations. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
3-20-6: CHANGES TO REGISTRATION:
Every business shall submit written notice of any change to a previously submitted annual business registration application to the village within thirty (30)
days of the occurrence of such change. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
3-20-7: FEES:
Business registration fees shall be as enumerated in the village of Lisle annual fee ordinance. The fee is waived for charitable and other not for profit
organizations. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
3-20-8: PENALTIES:
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall subject the violator to penalties and late fees as enumerated in the village of Lisle annual fee
ordinance. (Ord. 2010-4310, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 21
ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM
3-21-1: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this chapter are designed to describe the manner in which the village shall implement an opt out electricity aggregation program
authorized by section 1-92 of the Illinois power agency act. (Ord. 2012-4440, 6-4-2012)
3-21-2: FINDINGS:
The mayor and board of trustees hereby make the following findings of fact:
(A) Section 1-92 of the Illinois power agency act, 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3855/1-1 et seq. (the "act"), authorizes municipalities to aggregate the
electric loads of residential and small commercial retail customers and to then solicit bids, select a retail electric supplier, and enter into a supply
agreement to facilitate the purchase of electricity and related services and equipment on behalf of its participating residents and small businesses
(collectively, an "aggregation program").
(B) At the March 20, 2012, general primary election, electors of the village of Lisle approved a referendum authorizing the village to adopt an "opt out"
aggregation program.
(C) The village held public hearings on the proposed plan of operation and governance (the "plan") for the aggregation program on May 21, 2012, and
June 4, 2012, notice of which was given prior to the first hearing once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in the "Daily Herald", a newspaper of
general circulation in the village.
(D) On June 4, 2012, the village adopted the plan of operation and governance for the electricity aggregation program herein described, a copy of which
shall be available for public inspection and copying at the village hall. (Ord. 2012-4440, 6-4-2012)
3-21-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this chapter, shall be defined as follows:
ACT: The Illinois power agency act, 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3855/1-92, as may be amended from time to time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 85/460
ALTERNATIVE RETAIL ELECTRIC SUPPLIER OR ARES: An entity certified by the Illinois commerce commission ("ICC") to offer electric power or energy
for sale, lease or in exchange for other value received to one or more retail customers, or that engages in the delivery or furnishing of electric power or
energy to such retail customers, and shall include, without limitation, resellers, aggregators and power marketers but shall not include the incumbent
electric utility. For purposes of this chapter, the definition of alternative retail electric supplier is more completely set forth in 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/16-102.
CUSTOMER: Recipients of residential and small commercial retail electric loads as provided in the act.
ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM: A program pursuant to the act for the aggregation of residential and small commercial retail electric loads
located within the corporate limits of the village that provides customers with the opportunity to opt out of participating in that program as provided in the
act.
PLAN OF OPERATION AND GOVERNANCE: The plan of operation and governance adopted by the village on June 4, 2012, or as thereafter amended,
which describes: a) how the aggregation program will provide for universal access to all applicable residential customers and equitable treatment of
applicable residential customers; b) how demand management and energy efficiency services will be provided to each class of customers; and c) how the
aggregation program will meet any other legal requirements concerning aggregated electric service. (Ord. 2012-4440, 6-4-2012)
3-21-4: ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM ADOPTED:
(A) The village is authorized and hereby adopts an electricity aggregation program in a manner not inconsistent with the act.
(B) The village is authorized to exercise its power to operate an electricity aggregation program jointly with two (2) or more other municipalities or counties.
(C) The electricity aggregation program shall operate in the manner prescribed in the plan of operation and governance, as amended from time to time.
(D) The village manager is designated as the village's authorized representative for the purpose of: 1) cooperating with other municipalities or counties for
the joint exercise of the power herein described, and 2) soliciting bids for electricity and other related services in the manner provided by the act and
the plan of operation and governance, for the provision of electric power to customers participating in the electricity aggregation program.
(E) Except for those customers who opt out of the electricity aggregation program pursuant to the plan of operation and governance and the act, the
electricity aggregation program shall automatically apply to each person owning, occupying, controlling, or using an electrical load center proposed to
be aggregated in the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2012-4440, 6-4-2012)
Chapter 22
RETAIL SALE OF ANIMALS
3-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ANIMAL: Any living member of the kingdom Animalia, comprising multicellular organisms that have a well-defined shape and usually limited growth, can
move voluntarily, actively acquire food and digest it internally, and have sensory and nervous systems that allow them to respond rapidly to stimuli.
OFFER(S) FOR SALE: To display, sell, deliver, offer for sale or adoption, advertise for sale of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of an
animal.
RETAILER: Any person licensed or required to be licensed under this title who offers for sale any animal in the Village. (Ord. 2018-4790, 10-15-2018)
3-22-2: PROHIBITION OF THE RETAIL SALE OF ANIMALS:
A retailer may not offer for sale any animal. (Ord. 2018-4790, 10-15-2018)
3-22-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The restriction on retailers set forth in section 3-22-2 of this chapter shall not apply to any veterinary hospital or clinic licensed pursuant to the Veterinary
Medicine and Surgery Practice Act of 2004, codified at 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 115, or to a person who offers for sale only dogs or cats that he has
produced and raised, provided the person owns, has possession of, or harbors four (4) or less females capable of reproduction. (Ord. 2018-4790, 10-15-
2018)
3-22-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of any section of this chapter shall be fined as established in the annual fee ordinance for each offense, and each day
of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 2018-4790, 10-15-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 86/460
Title 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
4-1-1: ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for construction, alteration, removal, demolition, relocation,
equipment use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures, including permits and penalties, that certain document, one copy of
which is filed in the office of the village clerk, being marked and designated as the 2015 international building code, as published by the International Code
Council, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof
as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in section 4-1-5 of this chapter, and from the date on
which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the village. (Ord. 2016-4626, 1-4-2016)
4-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except when in conflict with the definitions set forth in this section, or in conflict with the definitions as set forth in the international building code which is
adopted herein, the definitions as set forth in section 5-1-7 of this code shall also control and govern in this title.
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY: A change in occupancy of a building, or space within a building, within the same classification of use and occupancy as
further defined under chapter 3 of the building code.
CHANGE OF USE: A change in occupancy of a building, or space within a building, resulting in a change in classification of use and occupancy as further
defined under chapter 3 of the building code.
CODE OFFICIAL: The community development director, and/or the building official of the village of Lisle.
CONDOMINIUM: A form of ownership only. A "condominium" shall be held to mean an individual dwelling unit within a multiple-family dwelling structure.
JURISDICTION OR AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION: The village of Lisle.
LEGAL COUNSEL: The attorney for the village of Lisle.
TOWNHOUSE OR ROW HOUSE: A building of not more than six (6) individual dwelling units connected side to side. For purposes of building code
regulations, a townhouse or row house shall be structurally independent of neighboring units, and shall be vertically separated from other units by an
approved two (2) hour firewall. (Ord. 2007-4161, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-17-2008)
4-1-3: PERMIT FEES:
No permit, as required by said building code, shall be issued until the fee prescribed in this section shall have been paid, nor shall any amendment to a
permit be approved until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure, shall have been paid. Should any
work for which a permit is required be commenced or be done before such permit is issued and obtained, the required permit may be issued for such and
subsequent work, however, the amount of the required fee as provided herein for all work to which it applies shall be double that otherwise so provided.
The issuance of such permit does not act to bar any other penalty, liability or action otherwise provided for in this chapter or Village Code but shall be in
addition thereto. (Ord. 98-2977, 4-20-1998)
(A) Fees: Fees for the following shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance:
1. A permit for the construction of a building or structure.
2. A permit for the alteration or remodeling of a building or structure.
3. A permit for the demolition or removal of a building or structure.
No permit shall be issued for demolition or removal of a building, where served by a private water well, until a written verification is received from the
DuPage County Health Department that said well has been sealed and capped except when said well is to be used for new construction when a
public water supply system is not available.
4. The issuance of an electrical inspection certificate.
5. The issuance of a plumbing inspection certificate.
6. Any occupancy permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 87/460
7. Each permit for installing a driveway approach.
8. Each building plan review.
9. The issuance of a mechanical inspection certificate. (Ord. 98-2977, 4-20-1998; amd. Ord. 2001-3275, 2-19-2001)
(B) Other Fees: In addition to the permit fees in this section, other fees may be required in accordance with the following provisions of this Village Code:
1. Subsection 4-4-4(E), signs.
2. Section 4-6-2, elevators.
3. Section 4-7-2, swimming pools.
4. Subsection 4-9-1(B), tents.
5. Subsection 4-11-3(E), multiple-family residential rental property inspection.
6. Section 5-13-3, parking and loading spaces.
7. Section 5-18-5, security deposits.
8. Subsection 5-21-4(A), model homes.
9. Section 7-2-10, grading permits.
10. Title 7, chapter 5, water connection permits.
11. Title 7, chapter 6, sanitary sewer connection permits. (Ord. 98-2977, 4-20-1998)
12. Section 5-18-6, letter of credit. (Ord. 2000-3200, 2-21-2000)
(C) Reinspections: In the event a required inspection or reinspection is conducted and the inspector finds that the work has not been properly completed or
that necessary corrections have not been made, then the owner of the project will be responsible for paying a fee as established by the annual fee
ordinance for each such inspection. Payment of reinspection fees are a condition of the approval of any building permit and any building permit may be
revoked if payment for reinspection fees has not been made within ninety (90) days of the mailing date of an invoice from the Village.
(D) Estimated Cost: The term "estimated cost", as used in this section, means the reasonable value of all services, labor, materials, and use of scaffolding
and other appliances or devices entered into and necessary to the prosecution and completion of the work ready for occupancy, provided that the cost
of excavation or grading and painting, decorating or other work that is merely for embellishment or not necessary for the safe and lawful use of the
building or structure, is not deemed a part of such estimated cost. (Ord. 98-2977, 4-20-1998)
4-1-4: PROFESSIONAL PREPARATION OF PLANS:
All drawings, plans and specifications submitted with construction permit applications for work covered within the scope of this Code shall be prepared
under the personal direction and supervision of an architect, structural engineer, land surveyor, or professional engineer registered under the laws of the
state, as regulated by the Illinois department of professional regulation, and shall bear the stamp of his official seal.
Plans for the renovation of interior space not involving major changes to the mechanical systems, or any change to the life safety or structural systems of
the building or space, and where the cost of construction including labor and materials does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), are exempt
from this requirement. (Ord. 2007-4161, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-17-2008)
4-1-5: AMENDMENTS:
The building code of the village of Lisle, as hereinbefore adopted, is amended in the following respects:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code Of The Village Of Lisle, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the village of Lisle plumbing code adopting and amending the latest edition of the Illinois plumbing code, shall apply
to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and
where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system. The provisions of the DuPage County private sewage disposal
ordinance shall apply to private sewage disposal systems.
101.5 Add new section:
101.5 Construction Hours. No construction, erection, excavation, or any other process of building whatsoever, shall be performed within the village
before the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on any Sunday, or before the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or
after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on any other day.
102.6 Existing Structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without
change, except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, the international existing building code, the international property maintenance code, the
international fire code or the adopted life safety code (NFPA 101).
103.1 Enforcement Agency. The community development department shall be charged with the administration and enforcement of this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 88/460
103.2 Appointment. Delete section in its entirety.
103.3 Deputies. Delete section in its entirety.
104.10.1 Flood Hazard Areas. Delete section in its entirety.
105.2 Work Exempt From Permit. Amend to read:
Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of
the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:
1. Residential play equipment installed accessory to a group R-3 occupancy and intended for the use of children.
2. Landscape retaining walls not more than 2' in height used to create decorative landscape beds. Retaining walls installed for the purpose of
changing the lot grade level or drainage flow shall be regulated under title 5, chapter 16 and title 7, chapter 2 of the village code.
3. Minor pavement work constructed entirely on private property in conformance with the setback requirements of the village zoning ordinance, not
more than 6" above existing grade, provided said improvements do not obstruct stormwater drainage or create a safety hazard. All new or
replacement pavement work occurring in a village owned public right-of-way shall require a permit under section 7-1-4 of the village code. Village
staff shall determine if work is minor following a cursory review of the project.
4. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting and similar cosmetic finish work. All finish materials shall comply with requirements of the building code
regulating flame spread and smoke development ratings.
5. Portable private residential swimming pools accessory to a group R-3 occupancy, installed entirely above ground, less than 24" in depth, and with
a surface area less than 250 square feet, and less than 3,250 gallons in volume.
6. Minor electrical repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved
permanently installed receptacles.
7. Replacement of any minor part of existing mechanical equipment that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
8. The stopping of plumbing leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil,
waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered
as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in the plumbing code.
105.5 Expiration. Amend to read:
If the work described in any building permit has not begun within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance thereof, or if the permitted work is
suspended or abandoned for more than ninety (90) days, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the building official and written notice thereof
shall be given to the persons affected.
If the work described in any building permit has not been completed within two (2) years of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and
be canceled by the building official and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as
described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a building permit extension has been obtained along with payment of the required
extension permit fee.
At the discretion of the building official, such extension permit may be based on the original application or may require submission of a new
application. The extension permit shall include limitations on time allowed for substantial completion of the work, and provisions for a reasonable
cash security deposit to ensure completion within the time limit set.
105.7 Placement Of Permit. Amend to read:
The building permit placard or copy thereof shall be displayed onsite in a location viewable from the public right-of-way until the completion of the
project. Permits for work located within multi-tenant buildings shall be posted at the entry door to the unit visible from a common area corridor.
107.2.7 Add new section:
107.2.7 Plat Of Survey. All applications for permits involving new construction, additions to existing structures, structural modifications to existing
structures, or changes in use of existing structures, shall require the submittal of a current plat of survey of the subject property. Said plat shall be
prepared and certified by a licensed land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois.
107.3.3 Phased Approval. Amend to read:
The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations before the construction documents for the whole building or
structure have been submitted provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) That adequate and detailed building and civil engineering plans for the foundation are submitted to the building department for review by village
staff and consultants.
(b) That any additional documents reasonably required by the building department which are necessary for the review of plans and drawings to
determine compliance with provisions of the village code in the issuance of the permit are submitted for review.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 89/460
(c) That such building and civil engineering plans are fully approved in writing by the building department.
(d) That the site is properly zoned for the proposed development.
(e) That an irrevocable letter of credit is provided in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of removal of the foundation and restoration of the site in
a form and amount as approved by the village. This letter of credit shall be for the purpose of securing construction or removal of the foundation
upon the property, and restoration of the site to its natural condition if a full building permit is not issued.
(f) That the application is approved by the building code board of appeals.
The holder of such permit for the foundation shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for
the entire structure will be granted. Any permit issued hereunder shall expire 90 days after date of issue or upon issuance of a full building permit,
whichever is first to occur. Extensions to the dates of validity of the permit shall be authorized only by the building code board of appeals.
109.6 Refunds. Amend to read:
No plan review fees will be refunded. For all building projects wherein no work has occurred within the prescribed deadline, the building permit shall
be terminated and an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance in relation to the required building permit fees shall be refunded. For all
building projects wherein work has begun and has stopped for any reason, no part of the required building permit fees will be refunded upon
expiration of the building permit.
110.3 Required Inspections. Amend to read:
The following types of inspections may be required depending upon the type and scope of work permitted. It is the responsibility of the permit holder
to make themselves aware of the required inspections for their particular project and to comply in obtaining inspection approval of each phase of
construction prior to continuation of work. Possible inspection types include:
* Pre-construction meeting/inspection
* Civil engineering inspection
* Fencing - site inspection
* Sign foundation & electric inspection
* Footing inspection
* Foundation inspection (prior to pour)
* Backfill inspection
* Underground plumbing inspection
* Underground electric inspection
* Concrete slab, patio, driveway and/or floor deck inspection
* Insulation and fire-stopping inspection
* Water & sewer service inspection
* Electric service inspection
* Rough framing, electric, mechanical, and plumbing inspection
* Above ceiling inspection
* Water meter inspection
* Fire alarm & fire suppression systems inspection
* MEP final inspections
* Final building inspection
113 Board Of Appeals. Delete section in its entirety and replace with:
113.1 Means Of Appeal Or Variation. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official or request a variation from the terms of
this code before the board of appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted
hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used. The board of
appeals shall grant variations from the strict application of any of the requirements of this code in the case of exceptional conditions, whereby such strict
application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of reasonable use of the land or building involved. In
granting any variation, the board of appeals shall prescribe any conditions that it deems to be necessary or desirable. The board shall affirm, modify, or
reverse the decision of the building official by a majority vote. The board of appeals shall be the village of Lisle president and board of trustees and the
chairman of the board of appeals shall be the president, also known as the mayor, of the village of Lisle.
114.4 Violation Penalties. Amend section to read:
Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under
the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
115.3 Unlawful Continuance. Amend to read:
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 90/460
202 Definitions. Amend definition of High-Rise Building to read:
High-Rise Building. A building with an occupied floor located more than 50 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
403.3 Automatic Sprinkler System. Delete Exceptions.
403.5.1 Remoteness Of Interior Exit Stairways. Amend to read:
Required interior exit stairways shall be separated by a distance not less than one-third of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of
the building or area to be served. The distance shall be measured in a straight line between the nearest points of the enclosure surrounding the
interior exit stairways. In buildings with three or more interior exit stairways, no fewer than two of the interior exit stairways shall comply with this
section. Interlocking or scissor stairs shall be counted as one interior exit stairway.
403.5.4 Smokeproof Enclosures. Amend section to read:
Every required interior exit stairway serving floors more than 50 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall be a smokeproof
enclosure in accordance with sections 909.20 and 1023.10.
404.6 Enclosure Of Atriums. Delete exception #3.
505.2.3 Openness. Delete exceptions #1 and #3.
507.4 Sprinklered, One-Story Buildings. Delete exception #2.
Table 504.3 Allowable Building Height In Feet Above Grade Plane. Amend as follows:
Table 504.3 is hereby amended so as to prohibit type V construction as a permitted type of construction for any occupancy classification regulated
under this code.
Table 506.2 Allowable Area Factor In Square Feet. Amend as follows:
Table 506.2 is hereby amended so as to prohibit type V construction as a permitted type of construction for any occupancy classification regulated
under this code.
508.3 Nonseparated Occupancies. Delete section in its entirety.
602.3 Type III. Amend section to read:
Type III construction is that type of construction in which the exterior walls are of noncombustible materials and the interior building elements are of
any material permitted by this code. Non-structural fire-retardant-treated wood framing complying with section 2303.2 shall be permitted as backing,
blocking, or door and window bucks within exterior wall assemblies of a 2-hour rating or less.
603.1 Allowable Materials. Delete item #1 in its entirety.
603.1.2 Piping. Amend section to read:
The use of combustible piping materials in any building of type I or II construction shall be prohibited. Combustible piping materials may be used
above ground in single story commercial use buildings of type III construction provided the piping does not penetrate floor/wall/ceiling construction
required to be of fire resistive construction by the adopted building code. PVC piping is not permitted in a plenum ceiling environment.
708.1 General. Add item #6 as follows:
6. Walls separating individual tenant spaces in all use groups.
708.3 Fire-Resistance Rating. Delete exception #2 in its entirety.
708.6 Openings. Add the following exception:
Exception: A fire partition is not required between a business use occupancy and a one-hour rated exit access corridor or lobby where a glass wall,
glass sidelight or glass door equipped with a fire sprinkler water curtain forming an equivalent level of protection is provided. The glazed area shall
comply with all of the following:
1. Automatic sprinklers are provided along both sides of the separation wall and doors. The sprinklers shall be located between 4 inches and 12
inches (102 mm and 305 mm) away from the glass and at intervals along the glass not greater than 6 feet (1829 mm). The sprinkler system shall be
designed so that the entire surface of the glass is wet upon activation of the sprinkler system without obstruction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 91/460
2. The glass wall shall be installed in a gasketed frame in a manner that the framing system deflects without breaking the glass before the sprinkler
system operates.
3. Where glass doors are provided in the separation wall, they shall be either self-closing or automatic-closing. Approved frameless doors shall be
permitted.
711.2.4.3 Dwelling Units And Sleeping Units. Delete the exception in its entirety.
718.5 Combustible Materials In Concealed Spaces In Type I Or II Construction. Delete exceptions #4 and #5.
903.2 Where Required. Delete exceptions to this section.
903.2.1.1 Group A-1. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group A-1 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
903.2.1.2 Group A-2. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group A-2 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
903.2.1.3 Group A-3. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group A-3 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
903.2.1.4 Group A-4. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group A-4 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
903.2.3 Group E. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group E occupancies. Delete exception.
903.2.4 Group F-1. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group F-1 and F-2 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
903.2.6 Group I. Delete exceptions.
903.2.7 Group M. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group M occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
903.2.8 Group R. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group R-1, R-2 and R-4 occupancies. R-3 occupancies shall be
regulated under the 2015 international residential code.
903.2.9 Group S-1. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group S-1 occupancies.
903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas used as repair garages.
903.2.10 Group S-2 Enclosed Parking Garages. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group S-2 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area. All parking
garages, open or enclosed, shall be equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 92/460
903.2.10.1 Commercial Parking Garages. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas used as commercial parking garages.
903.2.11.3 Buildings 55 Feet Or More In Height. Delete exceptions.
903.2.13 Add the following section:
Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group B occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
903.2.14 Add the following section:
Wood Frame Construction.
An automatic fire suppression system shall be provided throughout all wood frame buildings used for other than single family or duplex residential
use. Variations from this section may be considered by the board of appeals subject to the properties' compliance with the following:
(a) That the subject wood frame building is less than two thousand square feet (2,000') in gross floor area including all floors.
(b) That the subject wood frame building is separated by more than thirty (30) feet from all other buildings on surrounding properties.
(c) That the subject wood frame building is within three hundred feet (300') of at least two (2) separate fire hydrants.
(d) That the furnace room and storage room in the subject wood frame building be enclosed with one hour fire rated construction and a self-closing
forty-five (45) minute rated door.
(e) That the subject wood frame building be used for no use other than, or more hazardous than, an office use.
(f) That a complete automatic fire alarm system, including a fire alarm control panel, pull boxes located at the exit doors, audio-visual signaling
devices, heat detectors located in each room or space, and a direct tie-in to an approved central station installed.
(g) That the subject wood frame building have two (2) direct exits to the outside.
(h) That the subject wood frame building complies with all other village codes for the proposed use.
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt Locations. Delete exemptions #3 and #4.
903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R Sprinkler Systems. Delete section in its entirety.
903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems. Delete section in its entirety.
903.3.5.2 Residential Combined Services. Delete section in its entirety.
907.2.1 Group A. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group A occupancies. Delete exception.
907.2.2 Group B. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group B occupancies. Delete exception.
907.2.3 Group E. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group E occupancies. Delete exceptions.
907.2.4 Group F. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group F occupancies. Delete exception.
907.2.5 Group H. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group H occupancies.
907.2.6 Group I. Amend section to read:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 93/460
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group I occupancies. Delete exceptions.
907.2.7 Group M. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group M occupancies. Delete exceptions.
907.2.8 Group R-1. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group R-1 occupancies.
907.2.9 Group R-2. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group R-2 occupancies.
907.2.10 Group R-4. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group R-4 occupancies.
907.2.11 Single- And Multiple-Station Smoke Alarms. Amend section to read:
Smoke detection devices of a type approved by the fire inspector shall be provided in all buildings equipped with an automatic fire alarm system.
Devices shall be located as determined necessary to provide early fire detection based upon the use and as required under applicable provisions of
NFPA 72. All smoke detectors shall be connected to and supervised by the fire alarm control panel where one is required.
907.2.24 Add the following section:
Where Required-Retroactive In Existing Buildings And Structures.
Fire alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in existing buildings in accordance with requirements of the life safety code (NFPA 101) as
adopted and amended by the village of Lisle.
New fire alarm systems installed in all existing use group R-2 occupancies, as required under applicable provisions of the life safety code, shall be
installed in conformance with the following specifications:
1. The fire alarm control panel (FACP) shall be located at the point of fire department entry, or may be remotely located provided an approved
remote annunciator with silence and reset capability is installed in its place.
2. Manual pull stations shall be installed throughout the building in accordance with NFPA 72.
3. System smoke detectors shall be installed in all sleeping rooms, in all public corridors and stairwells, above the FACP, in all elevator shafts, in all
elevator lobbies, and in other areas as deemed necessary by the fire code official.
4. System heat detectors shall be installed in all public storage areas, in all mechanical/electrical/janitors closets, in all elevator shafts, in all closets
in excess of 50 square feet located within dwelling units, in other areas as deemed necessary by the fire code official.
5. Smoke and heat detectors shall be installed in the general living space of all dwelling units and in other areas as deemed necessary by the fire
code official. These devices shall be wired so as to act as a local smoke detector and a system heat detector for the dwelling unit.
6. Audio/visual notification devices shall be installed throughout all public areas as per NFPA 72, as required by provisions of the Illinois
accessibility code, and in other areas as deemed necessary by the fire code official.
7. An audible notification device (sounder) shall be installed in each dwelling unit. Additional sounders may be necessary, or replaced with a/v
devices as approved by the fire code official, to achieve the required audio decibel levels in all areas of the unit.
907.5.2.1.3 Add the following section:
Compliance With NFPA 72. All audible alarms and notification devices shall comply with applicable requirements of NFPA 72. All required devices
shall be wall mounted only.
Table 1006.2.1 Spaces With One Exit Or Exit Access Doorway. Amend table to read:
Occupancy Maximum Occupant Load
A, B, E, F, M, U 20
H-1, H-2, H-3 3
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 94/460
H-4, H-5, I-1, I-3, I-4, R 10
S 30
1006.3.2 Single Exits. Delete section in its entirety.
1008.3.1 General. Amend section to read:
The power supply for means of egress illumination shall normally be provided by the premises' electrical supply. In the event of power supply failure,
an emergency electrical system shall automatically illuminate all portions of the means of egress including: exits, exit access, and exit discharge.
Additionally, conference rooms, break rooms, laundry rooms, toilet rooms, electrical closets, mechanical rooms, all areas of assembly or gathering,
and all rooms containing fire alarm control panels and/or fire suppression control valves shall be equipped with emergency lighting. Battery back-up
type lighting fixtures shall be utilized to provide the required lighting in the event of a loss of power to the line voltage lighting circuit.
1009.1 Accessible Means Of Egress Required. Amend section to read:
Accessible means of egress shall comply with this section and the Illinois accessibility code, whichever is most restrictive. Accessible spaces shall be
provided with not less than one accessible means of egress. Where more than one means of egress are required by section 1006.2 or 1006.3 from
any accessible space, each accessible portion of the space shall be served by not less than two accessible means of egress.
1010.1.9.3 Locks And Latches. Delete item #2.
1020.1 Construction. Amend section to read:
All exit access corridor walls shall be constructed as one-hour rated fire partitions in accordance with the requirements of section 708.
Exceptions:
1. A fire resistance rating is not required for exit access corridors located within an individual tenant space in group B occupancies provided the
entire building is equipped with a code compliant fire suppression system.
2. A fire resistance rating is not required for corridors located within a dwelling or sleeping unit in group R occupancies.
3. A fire resistance rating is not required for corridors in open parking garages.
1101.2 Design. Amend section to read:
Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be accessible in accordance with this code, ICC A117.1, and the Illinois accessibility
code, whichever is most restrictive.
1503.4 Roof Drainage. Amend section to read:
Design and installation of roof drainage systems shall comply with the requirements of this section and the latest Illinois plumbing code, as adopted
and amended by the village of Lisle, whichever is most restrictive.
1503.4.2 Add new section to read:
1503.4.2 Rain Gutter Discharge. All rain gutter systems installed on commercial use buildings shall be directly connected to an on-site stormwater
control system using approved materials. The discharge of rain gutters to grade is not permitted.
1510.2.5 Type Of Construction. Delete exceptions #2 and #3 in their entirety.
1510.6.2 Type I, II, III And IV Construction. Delete section in its entirety.
1603.1.7 Flood Design Data.
Section 1603.1.7 is amended by deleting the words "in section 1612.3" and replacing it with the following: "in title 5, chapter 16 Stormwater And
Floodplain Regulations, as amended".
1612.1 General.
Section 1612.1 is amended by deleting the words "in section 1612.3" and replacing it with the following: "in title 5, chapter 16 Stormwater And
Floodplain Regulations, as amended".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 95/460
1612.2 Definitions. Amend section to read:
Definitions. The following terms are defined in chapter 2:
Basement
Dry Flood Proofing
Existing Structure
Flood Damage Resistant Materials
Flood Hazard Area
Start Of Construction
The following terms are defined in the title 5, chapter 16 Stormwater And Floodplain Regulations, as amended:
Base Flood
Base Flood Elevation
Flood Or Flooding
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
Flood Insurance Study
Floodway
Lowest Floor
Special Flood Hazard Area
Substantial Damage
Substantial Improvement
1612.3 Establishment Of Flood Hazard Areas. Delete section in its entirety.
1612.5 Flood Hazard Documentation.
Condition 1, 1.1 shall be amended by deleting "The" and replacing with "An elevation certificate documenting the", and shall be amended by deleting
condition 2 and subsections 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3.
1804.5 Grading And Fill In Flood Hazard Areas. Delete section in its entirety.
1805.1.2.1 Flood Hazard Areas. Delete exception.
1807.1.4 Permanent Wood Foundation Systems. Delete section in its entirety.
1808.8.5 Forming Of Concrete. Amend section to read:
All concrete footings shall be placed by use of proper forming installed in accordance with chapter 6 of ACI 318. The earth may not be used as a
form.
1808.10 Add new section to read:
1808.10 Frost Protection. Foundation walls, piers and other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be constructed not less than 42" below
grade. Footings shall not bear on frozen ground.
Exception: Free standing non-occupiable single story accessory use structures not to exceed 400 square feet in area may be constructed on slabon-
grade foundations. Slab foundations shall be designed and constructed to support and distribute the imposed loads and shall be no less than 16"
wide x 18" thick with 2-#5 bars around the entire perimeter. The slab shall be poured monolithically with the footing and shall be no less than 5" thick
reinforced with 6 x 6/10 gage welded wire fabric supported on a minimum 6" compacted stone base.
Chapter 29. Delete chapter in its entirety. All plumbing shall be performed in conformance with the latest Illinois plumbing code, as adopted and amended
by the village of Lisle.
(Ord. 2016-4626, 1-4-2016)
4-1-6: ILLINOIS ACCESSIBILITY CODE ADOPTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 96/460
There is hereby adopted by the village, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the minimum design, construction and alteration
requirements to facilitate access to and use of public facilities by environmentally limited persons, that certain code known as the Illinois accessibility code,
being particularly title 71, chapter I, subchapter b, part 400 of the Illinois administrative code, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as may
be deleted, modified or amended from time to time, of which not less than three (3) copies have been and now are filed in the office of the village clerk,
and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the village. (Ord. 98-2977, 4-20-1998)
4-1-7: LANDSCAPING PLANS AND REQUIREMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005)
4-1-8: MULTIPLE-FAMILY BUILDING REGULATIONS:
Each dwelling unit contained in a multiple-family residence building shall have a ceiling and floor and walls of a material with a minimum two (2) hour fire
rating. All exterior walls of multiple-family residence buildings shall be of solid masonry construction except for "townhouse or row house" buildings as
defined in this chapter. (Ord. 98-2977, 4-20-1998)
4-1-9: CONCRETE BLOCK EXTERIOR CONSTRUCTION:
No building within the village shall be constructed in such a manner so as to have an exposed concrete block exterior wall. (Ord. 98-2977, 4-20-1998)
4-1-10: ROOFTOP SCREENINGS REQUIRED:
All heating, air conditioning, ventilating or other mechanical equipment located on the roof of any structure or building within the village shall be screened
or enclosed in such manner as to mask such equipment, and no building permit shall be issued for any building unless the plans therefor provide for such
screening, as described herein. Also, no occupancy permits shall be granted for buildings unless such screening is provided, although building permits
may have been issued prior to the passage of this section. Said screening shall be of noncombustible material and of the same character and design as
the building upon which the screening is erected, subject to approval by the community development director. (Ord. 98-2977, 4-20-1998)
4-1-11: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks satisfying the standards and details as specified in section 7-7-5 of this code shall be installed on all parcels being developed by the owner or
developer of those parcels. However, this section shall not be construed to require sidewalks for parcels being developed for single-family dwelling unit
purposes unless the parcel is being developed within a subdivision which improvements for the subdivision include the installation of sidewalks. (Ord. 98-
2977, 4-20-1998)
4-1-12: APPLICABILITY:
Nothing in the building code and sections hereby amended shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court, or rights acquired,
or liabilities incurred, or any cause(s) of action accrued or existing, under any act or section amended hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall be
lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. This chapter shall prevail to the extent of any inconsistency over all prior sections. (Ord. 98-2977, 4-20-1998)
4-1-13: PENALTY:
Any person having been found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated or failed to comply with any provision of this chapter or the building
code or prior sections hereby amended shall be fined for each violation or such failure a sum as established by the annual fee ordinance. Additional
violations or any such failure to comply shall be construed and deemed to be separate and distinct offenses subjecting the violator to an additional fine for
each day of each violation or noncompliance. (Ord. 98-2977, 4-20-1998)
Chapter 2
ELECTRICAL CODE
4-2-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village of Lisle, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations concerning the installation, alteration, removal,
relocation, use, location, and maintenance of electrical equipment, including permits and penalties, that certain document, three (3) copies of which are on
file with the office of the village clerk, being marked and designated as the 2011 national electrical code as published by the National Fire Protection
Association, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to, adopted and made part
hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in section 4-2-3 of this chapter, and from the date
on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the village. (Ord. 2014-4543, 8-18-2014)
4-2-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 97/460
(A) A permit shall be required to install, repair, alter, or make additions to any and all electrical equipment, fixtures, wiring system, service, and
appurtenances connected to any electrical distribution system within the purview of this code as further defined under section 90.2 of the adopted code.
Electrical fixture or device replacement shall not require the issuance of a permit provided the existing work is legal conforming and the new work is
installed in conformance with requirements of this code using only permitted materials.
Exception: Revision and/or replacement of any electrical service equipment shall require the issuance of an electrical permit prior to commencement of
such work.
(B) Should any work for which a permit is required be commenced or be done before such permit is issued and obtained, the required permit may be
issued for such and subsequent work, however, the amount of the required fee as provided herein for all work shall be double that otherwise so
provided. The issuance of such permit does not act to bar any other penalty, liability or action otherwise provided for in this chapter or village code but
shall be in addition thereto.
(C) All applications for permits shall include plans and specifications of sufficient clarity to clearly depict the proposed work. The application shall include
such other information as lawfully may be required by the building official. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the building
official after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. The second copy
of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the building official.
(D) The electrical permit placard or copy thereof shall be displayed on site in a location viewable from the public right of way until the completion of the
project.
(E) An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned ninety (90) days after the date of filing, unless such
application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of
time for additional periods not exceeding ninety (90) days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
(F) For all projects wherein no work has occurred within the prescribed deadline, the electrical permit shall be terminated and an amount as established by
the annual fee ordinance in relation to the required permit fee shall be refunded. For all projects wherein work has begun and has stopped for any
reason, no part of the required permit fee will be refunded upon expiration of the building permit.
(G) The following types of inspections may be required depending upon the type and scope of work permitted. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to
make themselves aware of the required inspections for their particular project and to comply in obtaining inspection approval of each phase of work
prior to continuation of work. Possible inspection types include:
1. Electric service inspection.
2. Rough in - underground electric inspection.
3. Rough in - slab prepour inspection.
4. Rough in - aboveground wall inspection.
5. Above ceiling inspection (commercial).
6. Modular furniture inspection, rough and final.
7. Underground street lighting cable/parking lot lighting base inspection.
8. Sign inspection, rough and final.
9. Temporary wiring.
10. Final inspection.
(H) Permit fees shall be assessed and collected in accordance with the annual fee ordinance as amended from time to time by the village of Lisle. (Ord.
2008-4174, 1-7-2008, eff. 1-17-2008)
4-2-3: AMENDMENTS:
The following modifications and additions are hereby made to said national electrical code, 2011 edition, hereinabove adopted:
(A) Conductors And Devices:
1. Electrical conductors shall be of the proper capacity to serve the loads connected hereto and shall not be loaded in excess of the current ratings
shown in the national electrical code. The minimum size conductor for use in residential wiring systems shall be #14 AWG and for commercial wiring
systems shall be #12 AWG.
2. Electrical conductors used on service conductors and on branch circuits shall be insulated copper wire. No aluminum wire or cable is allowed inside
of any building.
3. All duplex receptacles installed in other than residential use units shall be minimum 20 amp rated devices.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 98/460
4. All motors and pumps serving hot tubs, spas, hydro massage tubs, or similar fixtures shall be protected by a ground fault protected (GFCI) circuit
breaker mounted in the main electrical service panel or sub-panel. Individual GFCI protected outlet devices are not permitted. A properly sized and
identified equipment grounding conductor shall also be installed.
(B) Electric Service Grounding:
1. A primary and secondary grounding connection shall be made on every building.
2. The primary grounding connection shall be made to the neutral or common conductor of the system, where one exists; and shall be made at each
individual service on the supply side of the service disconnection device. The grounding shall in no case be smaller than #8 AWG copper wire and
shall be connected directly to the water system on the street side of the water meter with a continuous un-spliced jumper connection to the house
side of the water meter. Where a plastic water service is used an approved ground rod shall be installed. In any case, there shall be not less than two
ground paths on every electric service.
3. The secondary ground on all commercial use buildings shall be a concrete-encased electrode of one or more bare, zinc galvanized, or other
electrically conductive reinforcing bars, or rods not less than 1/2 in diameter, installed in one continuous length or in multiple pieces totaling 20 feet or
#4 bare copper to be installed in footing or foundation.
4. The secondary ground on all one- and two-family dwelling units shall be a driven rod installed in conformance with NEC 250-52 (A)(5), or a concrete
encased electrode as described above.
5. Ground clamps for use on copper water pipe shall be of copper or brass, and those for use on galvanized or iron pipe shall be of galvanized iron and
so designed as to avoid physical damage to pipe.
(C) Service Requirements:
1. Service wire attachment to the building should be in accordance with the requirements of the local public utility company.
2. Rigid galvanized, IMC, or rigid aluminum conduit shall be used on all services from service head to inside disconnecting means.
3. In single-family dwelling units, both attached and detached, the service size shall be a minimum of 100 amps per dwelling unit utilizing a maximum
30 branch circuits. Sub panels on 100 amp service shall be maximum 60 amp utilizing no more than 8 branch circuits.
4. All overhead services shall be equipped with approved raintight service heads. Gooseneck configurations are not permitted.
5. The main service disconnecting means (circuit breaker or fused switched device) shall be located within (5) five feet of the point where the service
conductors enter the building and/or within (5) five feet of the metering device. A service disconnecting means shall be provided on all commercial
use buildings. The required disconnect shall be readily accessible from the outside of the building or a shunt device shall be installed in conjunction
with the fire alarm system to allow manual disconnect of power to the building by fire department personnel.
6. A main lug breaker panel shall be installed in all single-family use buildings where an exterior main disconnect is required. All main lug panels shall
have a permanent placard installed in a conspicuous location stating the location of the main service disconnect.
7. Where the use and installation of multi-metering devices are provided in buildings and/or structures such as apartment complexes, condominiums,
etc., all service entrance equipment shall be grouped and installed in a dedicated area.
8. All commercial and industrial use installations shall use bolt-in type circuit breakers.
9. No more than one conductor may be connected to an individual circuit breaker terminal or fuse holder.
10. For wiring 277 volts and above, conductors shall be identified as follows: A phase-brown, B phase-orange, C phase-yellow, neutral-gray.
11. Electrical panels shall contain no more than 42 circuit breaker spaces.
(D) Conduit Fittings:
1. All conduit fittings, locknuts, bushings, couplings or connectors shall provide secure mechanical and electrical joints.
2. All fittings shall be either set screw or compression.
3. A building or other premises shall be supplied at one service location. The village electrical inspector may permit additional service locations if where
justified.
4. EMT and copper wire shall be the main wiring method for both residential and commercial installations.
(E) Concrete Encased Conduits:
1. Rigid steel galvanized pipe, IMC conduit, or approved rigid plastic conduit shall be installed in all concrete construction located at or below grade
level.
2. EMT conduit may only be used in concrete construction located above grade.
3. All non-metallic conduits must be protected from physical damage at the point where the conduit enters or exits the concrete, or where exposed
above grade, by use of approved metallic conduit elbows. Metallic conduit exiting concrete in parking garages, or similar locations where road salt
may be present, shall be encased in a concrete curb or shall be sleeved to a point not less than 4" above the parking deck.
(F) Buried Conduits:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 99/460
1. Conduits buried in other than concrete shall be rigid galvanized steel, IMC, or rigid plastic with approved grounding. Minimum burial depth shall not
be less than 24 inches in commercial applications.
2. Directional boring is permitted using HDPE conduit. Minimum burial depth shall be not less than 24 inches.
(G) Additional General Requirements:
1. All lighting fixtures designated as emergency lighting luminaires shall be identified as such by a red dot not less than 3/4" diameter affixed to the
fixture in a readily visible location.
2. All test buttons on emergency lighting luminaires shall be readily accessible without disassembly of the luminaire, nor located above ceilings
requiring portable means to activate.
3. All rooms and spaces in office occupancies shall have a room number posted on door or door frame. Any space having more than two office
modular furniture cubicles shall have each cubicle numbered. Electrical panel directory shall identify all room/cubicle number circuits.
4. All emergency generators providing power for a required emergency back-up power system shall be inspected and tested annually as specified in
the adopted international fire code.
5. All motors, actuators, dampers, controllers and pumps, rated 120 volts or more, shall have a disconnecting means installed within sight of the
equipment. Disconnecting means installed not within sight shall have a provision for locking or attaching a lock to the disconnecting means and must
be part of the disconnect and a permanent component of the switch or circuit breaker.
6. All new commercial fire alarm system wiring shall be installed in conduit. Existing buildings or building areas being renovated so as to expose the fire
alarm wiring shall be brought into conformance with the current code requirement for new construction. All fire alarm junction box covers shall be
painted red so as to readily identify the fire alarm wiring raceway.
(H) Additions, Deletions, And Insertions: The following additions, deletions and insertions and changes are hereby made to the national electrical code,
2011 edition:
1. The following articles of said code are hereby deleted in their entirety:
(a) Article 320 - Armored Cable: Type AC
(b) Article 322 - Flat Cable Assemblies: Type FC
(c) Article 326 - Type IGS
(d) Article 330 - Metal Clad Cable: Type MC. Exception: factory fixture wiring assemblies
(e) Article 332 - Type MI
(f) Article 334 - Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable: Types NM, NMC, NMS
(g) Article 340 - Type UF
(h) Article 355 - Type RTRC
(i) Article 356 - Type LFNC
(j) Article 360 - Type FMT
(k) Article 362 - Electrical Nonmetallic Tubing: Type ENT
(l) Article 382 - Nonmetallic Extension
(m) Article 394 - Concealed Knob-And-Tube Wiring
(n) Article 398 - Open Wiring On Insulators
2. The following articles have been amended:
(a) Article 110.26 shall be amended by adding subsection 110.26 (B): In commercial and industrial installations, all required working spaces around
electric service entrance equipment shall be illuminated at all times.
(b) Article 300-11(a) shall be amended by the addition of the following language: "Support wires and associated fittings that provide secure support
and that are installed in addition to the ceiling grid support wires, shall be permitted as the sole support. Where independent support wires are
used, they shall be secured at both ends. Lighting fixtures, including recessed can type fixtures, may also be secured using not less than two
screws to grid, or tie wires at not less than two corners."
(c) Article 338 Service-Entrance Cable: Type SE and USE shall be amended so as to disallow the use of type SE cable in any application and to
allow for the use of type USE cable for underground feeder cable to street lighting fixtures.
(d) Article 348 Flexible Metal Conduit: Type FMC shall be amended so as to allow for its use only in limited applications. The permitted uses shall be:
1. As described within section 348.20 (A)(1) and (A)(2).
2. As electrical conduit to indoor equipment subject to vibration or movement.
3. As electrical conduit to a fixture box where minor adjustment to the final box location is required dependent upon the placement of finish
materials.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 100/460
4. In limited remodeling applications where it is necessary to fish the conduit through existing concealed spaces so as to minimize damage to
existing finished surfaces. A separate grounding wire shall be provided so as to bond adjacent junction boxes at each end of the flexible conduit.
5. In any other application approved by the electrical inspector due to impractical installation of non-flexible raceways.
(e) Article 352 PVC: Type PVC shall be amended so as to not allow permitted uses as described under subsections 352.10 (A) and 352.10 (F).
(f) Article 358.30 (A) shall be amended by and replacing it with the following: Electrical metallic tubing shall be installed as a complete system as
provided in article 300 and shall be securely fastened in place at least every 7 feet (2.13m) and within 3 feet (0.914m) of each outlet box, junction
box, cabinet or fitting.
(I) Additional Single-Family Residential Requirements:
1. In all applications a single main disconnecting means shall be installed.
2. Any heating plant shall be on a separate circuit.
3. All recessed fixtures shall be of the "prewired" type, marked sixty degrees centigrade (60C) maximum for supply connections, and shall be wired
with approved wire.
4. A light shall be installed in every accessible storage area, including attic and crawl spaces, all closets and pantries over ten (10) square feet in area.
5. Duplex weatherproof receptacles ground fault (GFI) shall be installed at the front and rear of each building. This is meant to include balconies.
6. Walk in closets shall have a recessed or fluorescent light controlled by a wall switch.
7. Crawl spaces with horizontal type heating plants shall have one light at the access to the crawl space and one light at the heating plant, both being
controlled by a wall switch at the access. This is also meant to include remote sump pumps, sewage ejectors, etc.
8. There shall be no more than ten (10) load openings per circuit.
9. A light shall be installed directly over every kitchen sink, bathroom lavatory and utility sink in addition to the general lights in the room.
10. An outside light controlled by a wall switch shall be installed at each entry and exit, including garages, balconies, patios, loading docks, ramps,
overhead doors, service doors, etc.
11. Stairways, halls, passageways, corridors, garages, patios and rooms accessible by more than one entry or exit shall have a ceiling light or lights
controlled by three-way or four-way switches.
12. Twin, tandem, duplex or split circuit breakers are not permitted.
13. Each motor load of one-fourth (1/4) horsepower or more shall be on a separate circuit.
14. Low voltage wiring for lighting circuits, control or signaling circuits, or communication systems may be run exposed only in accessible areas when
not subject to mechanical injury.
15. Built in ovens and surface sections (ranges) shall each be supplied by a separate circuit unless they are directly adjacent to or adjoining each other.
Built in microwave ovens and dishwashers shall be supplied by separate 20 amp circuits.
16. All motors and pumps serving hot tubs, spas, hydro massage tubs, or similar fixtures shall be protected by a ground fault protected (GFCI) circuit
breaker mounted in the main electrical service panel. Individual GFCI protected outlet devices are not permitted. A properly identified and sized
equipment grounding conductor shall also be installed.
17. All convenience outlets serving bathroom vanities and kitchen countertops shall be 20 amp rated GFCI protected devices, wired using #12 wire,
and protected by 20 amp circuit breakers. A minimum of one 20 amp circuit is required per bathroom and two 20 amp circuits shall be provided
serving kitchen countertop outlets.
18. Smoke detectors shall be installed in all new one- and two-family residential dwelling units in conformance with requirements of the village of Lisle
one- and two-family dwelling building code. All existing one- and two-family dwelling units shall be equipped with a minimum (1) one battery powered
smoke detector on each floor level of the dwelling unit.
Further, carbon monoxide detection devices shall be installed in conformance with requirements of the state of Illinois carbon monoxide detector act
requiring at minimum (1) one battery powered detector within (15') fifteen feet of every room used for sleeping purposes.
19. Detached garage buildings shall have electricity supplied to them, shall be on separate circuits, and shall include the following, which will also apply
to any other accessory building that incidentally has electric power:
(a) Direct burial conductors shall be a minimum of eighteen inches (18") below the surface of the ground.
(b) Direct burial cable shall be in rigid metal conduit or IMC for eighteen inches (18") when it leaves and enters the building.
(c) One ceiling light controlled by a wall switch.
(d) A minimum of one grounding type 20 amp duplex GFI receptacle.
(e) Properly sized equipment grounding conductor shall be installed in detached garage or other auxiliary buildings. (Ord. 2014-4543, 8-18-2014)
4-2-4: RIGHT TO ENTER FOR INSPECTION:
The electrical inspector, building inspector, and building official shall have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building in the discharge of his
official duties or for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation or alteration of electrical equipment contained therein, or for the purpose
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 101/460
of reinspecting present wiring installations to determine whether or not such wiring installations conform to the provisions of this chapter, and shall have
the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical currents and to cut or disconnect, in cases of emergency, any wire where such electrical currents are
dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the fire department. (Ord. 2008-4174, 1-7-2008, eff. 1-17-2008)
4-2-5: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
Upon the completion of the wiring of electrical installations in or on any building or structure, it shall be the duty of the person doing the same to notify the
community development department, which shall cause to be inspected said wiring or electrical installation, and if the same conform to the requirements of
this chapter shall cause to be issued a written certificate of compliance, in triplicate, one copy of which shall be delivered to the person doing the same,
one copy to be delivered to the person or firm which is to furnish electricity or electrical service (if so required), and the third copy shall remain in the village
files.
It shall be unlawful for any person to install electrical energy recording meters on any electrical equipment that has been installed or connect any electrical
distribution system or circuit to any electricity system previous to the issuance by the electrical inspector of a certificate of compliance. (Ord. 2008-4174, 1-
7-2008, eff. 1-17-2008)
4-2-6: NONLIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
This chapter shall not relieve from nor lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or installing any electrical wires, appliances, apparatus or
equipment for damages to anyone injured by any defect therein by reason of the inspections authorized herein or the certificate of compliance issued by
the community development department; nor shall the village be held liable for any damages resulting from the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2008-4174, 1-7-2008, eff. 1-17-2008)
4-2-7: APPEALS:
Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official or request a variation from the terms of this code before the board of appeals. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted,
the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used. The board of appeals shall grant variations from the strict
application of any of the requirements of this code in the case of exceptional conditions, whereby such strict application would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of reasonable use of the land or building involved. In granting any variation, the board of appeals shall
prescribe any conditions that it deems to be necessary or desirable. The board shall affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the code official by a majority
vote. The board of appeals shall be the village of Lisle president and board of trustees and the chairman of the board of appeals shall be the president,
also known as the mayor, of the village of Lisle. (Ord. 2008-4174, 1-7-2008, eff. 1-17-2008)
4-2-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of the code adopted by reference herein shall, on conviction, be fined as established by the
annual fee ordinance for each offense; and every person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day such violation shall continue, and shall
be subject to the penalty under this section for each and every separate offense. (Ord. 2008-4174, 1-7-2008, eff. 1-17-2008)
Chapter 3
PLUMBING CODE
4-3-1: ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the Village, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for plumbing and the fixtures, materials, design and
installation methods of plumbing systems that certain Plumbing Code known as the Illinois Plumbing Code, the latest edition thereof, and the whole
thereof, save and except such portions as are hereafter amended, of which not less than three (3) copies have been and now are filed in the Office of the
Village Clerk and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out in length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take
effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the Village. (Ord. 2018-4767, 5-21-2018)
4-3-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE PLUMBING CODE:
The Plumbing Code of the Village, as hereinbefore adopted, is amended in the following respects:
(A) Definitions: The following definitions are added supplemental to the definitions contained within the Illinois plumbing code;
"Code": The latest edition of the Illinois plumbing code as adopted and amended by the village of Lisle.
"Existing Legal Non-Conforming Plumbing System": A plumbing system, or portion thereof, presently in existence on a premises which lawfully existed
prior to the enactment of this code and which complies with the plumbing code in effect at the time of installation.
"Existing Non-Conforming Piping": Any part of an existing plumbing system installed without proper permit approval and which does not comply with
the requirements of the plumbing code in effect at the time of installation.
"Strip Mall": A single story commercial building arranged or divided into several occupiable areas, each with independent entrance and egress, lacking
a common core area, with the potential need for the addition or reconfiguration of plumbing fixtures within each unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 102/460
(B) Materials: Only the following materials are permitted for the following locations:
1. All PVC piping shall be primed and glued. Cell core PVC is not permitted.
2. Underground Water Supply Piping: Type "K" copper or ductile iron is permitted. Polyethylene plastic pipe or tubing may be used for private wells
only.
3. Above Ground Water Supply Piping: Only type "L" copper, type "M" copper and properly installed cross-linked polyethylene tubing is permitted.
4. Repairs to existing plumbing systems using dissimilar materials shall be allowed only if the repair results in one material transition between the point
of repair and the building sewer or waste/vent stack.
5. Fixture Supply Stops And Fixture Supply Lines: Non-metallic stops and slip-on stops/supply lines are not permitted. Fixture supply lines shall be
copper tubing or flexible braided stainless steel fixture supplies sized for the use and installed without loops or kinks.
Exception: Fixture supplies that are integral to the faucet by the manufacture will be allowed.
(C) Water And Sanitary Sewer Service: All building water and sewer services must comply with the following requirements:
1. Water and sewer services shall be installed a minimum of five feet (5') in depth and shall have a horizontal separation of ten feet (10').
2. All single-family residential building drains must be minimum four inch (4") in diameter. A commercial building sewer must be brought into the
building a minimum of six inches (6") in diameter. All strip malls require six inch (6") sanitary waste line for future tenant build out at thirty six inches
(36") below finished floor with six inch (6") cleanout in last tenant space.
3. The minimum size water service is one inch (1"). Copper water service lines must be continuous one piece lengths of pipe from the service stop to
the water meter.
4. A full port shut-off valve is required on the inlet side of the water meter. The first joint of the valve inlet shall be a flared type adapter with brassthreaded
connections to meter adapter.
5. Private wells are prohibited within the corporate boundaries of the Village and must be sealed in accordance with the DuPage County Health
Department regulations once connection to the public water system has occurred.
6. Minimum one inch (1") cold water supply to water heater inlet or branch piping is required.
(D) Fixtures: The following special fixture requirements shall apply in the Village:
1. All residential kitchen sinks require a minimum two inch (2") waste opening with two inch (2") cleanout.
2. Commercial kitchens, deli's, and catering business with triple bowl sinks and mop basins must have a 1/2" hot water supply at fifty four inches (54")
above finish floor for future chemical feeder water supply.
3. Tank type urinals are not permitted.
4. All new plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after the effective date of this ordinance shall bear the WaterSense label (as designated
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense Program), when such labeled fixtures are available.
5. No residential water softeners may use more than seventy five (75) gallons (285 liters) during the entire regeneration cycle, and sized to cycle no
more than three (3) times per week.
(E) Drainage System: The following additional requirements will apply to drainage systems:
1. Grease interceptors must be installed outside of a building in a location convenient to being pumped out. Outside grease interceptors must be
properly vented into the building using a minimum three inch (3") vent separately terminated thru roof.
Exception #1: Non-grease producing kitchens & restaurants may install in floor grease interceptors meeting IL plumbing code and DuPage health
department requirements.
Exception #2: An inside grease trap may only be used with the prior approval of the plumbing inspector when field conditions absolutely prohibit the
use of an outside grease trap.
2. Floor and/or trench drains are prohibited in private residential garages unless drained to all approved gas and oil interceptor. Drywells are not
permitted.
3. Any proposed acid or chemical waste systems must be approved by the DuPage County department of environmental concerns.
4. Properly installed floor drains with tamper proof covers must be installed in each commercial restroom. In residential basements the floor drain must
be within five feet (5') of a furnace, boiler or water heater.
5. Individual pump units for the use of lifting waste from a fixture is prohibited unless prior approval from the plumber inspector.
6. Floor drains in mechanical rooms, fire sprinkler equipment rooms, and adjacent to reduced pressure zone principle backflow preventor assembly
(RPZ) must have eight and a half inch (81/2") round top with rough finish.
(F) Special Requirements: The following special requirements will apply:
1. Where piping is installed through studs, joist or rafters close enough to be pierced by nails, nail guards or stud guards must be installed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 103/460
2. All new or remodeled car wash facilities must have a water recycling system installed to recycle the water used for car washing.
3. A minimum two inch (2") sewage pump is required where laundry facilities discharge into a sanitary ejector pit.
4. All irrigation sprinkler systems shall have unthreaded valve connections or hose bibbs after the reduced pressure zone principle backflow preventor
assembly (RPZ).
(Ord. 2018-4767, 5-21-2018)
Chapter 4
SIGN CODE
4-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the LISLE SIGN CODE. (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-2005)
4-4-2: INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and protect the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the village by regulating outdoor advertising and
signs of all types. It is intended to enhance the physical appearance of the village, make it a more enjoyable and pleasing community, and create an
attractive economic and business climate. Also, it is intended to reduce the sign or advertising distractions which may increase traffic accidents, eliminate
hazards caused by signs overhanging or projecting over public rights of way, relieve pedestrian and traffic congestion, provide more open space and avoid
the "canceling out" effect of adjacent signs. (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-2005)
4-4-3: INTERPRETATION, CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS:
Where there is a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the zoning provisions of the village1, the provisions contained in this chapter shall
prevail; and if there is found a conflict between any provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive provision shall prevail.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are hereby defined:
AREA, SIGN: The total exposed surface devoted to the advertiser's message, including all ornamentation, embellishment and symbols, but excluding the
supporting structure which does not form part of the sign proper or of the display. The area of a sign, composed of characters or words attached directly to
a large uniform building wall surface, shall be the smallest rectangle which encloses the whole group.
ATTENTION GETTING DEVICE: A sign or other device designed to attract attention by means of flashing or moving parts, bright color or light, or
movement of any kind. Examples of such signs include pennants hung in series, whirligigs, spinners, streamers, flashing lights, searchlights, beacons, and
balloons or similar inflatable devices.
AWNING SIGN: Any structure made of cloth or other nonrigid material attached to and projecting from a building and including structures which are fixed
or so erected as to permit their being raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use.
BALLOON SIGN: Any outdoor inflatable sign, including, but not limited to, air dancers, balloons, blimps, costumes, helium balls and rooftop or freestanding
gorillas.
BUILDING LINE: The line as established by the face of the building.
BUILDING SIGN: A sign attached to and supported by the exterior of any part of a building, except the roof.
CANOPY SIGN: A permanent roof like structure extending from part or all of a building and constructed of a metal framework with an approved covering.
COMMERCIAL SIGN: Any sign which promotes goods or services for sale and profit.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER: A variable message sign that utilizes computer generated messages or some other electronic means of changing
copy. These signs include displays using incandescent lamps, LEDs (light emitting diodes), LCDs (liquid crystal displays) or a flipper matrix. Such signs
shall be permitted by special use permit only.
EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign illuminated by a source of light which is cast upon, or falls upon, the surface of the sign illuminated by
reflection only.
FESTOON LIGHTING: A group of ten (10) or more incandescent light bulbs hung or strung overhead, not on a building or advertising structure, which are
exposed to persons on a public right of way, and which are not shaded or hooded to prevent the direct rays of light from shining above four feet (4') from
sidewalk grade.
FLASHING SIGN: A sign whose illumination intermittently flashes off and on, in whole or in part.
FREESTANDING SIGN: Any sign which is not a "building sign" or a "roof sign" as those terms are defined herein. A freestanding sign may be either an off
premises sign or an on premises sign.
Freestanding Off Premises Sign: A sign that does not direct persons to a business, person, activity, goods, products or services located on the premises
where the sign is to be maintained.
Freestanding On Premises Sign: A sign identifying or advertising a business, person, activity, goods, products or services located on the premises where
the sign is installed and maintained.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 104/460
FRONTAGE: That amount of a subject property fronting on a street or right of way. Multiple frontages shall not be construed to allow additional square
footage of sign area beyond the maximum areas permitted under the zoning district in which the premises are situated.
INTERIOR SIGN: Any sign wholly within and enclosed by a "building" as defined in section 5-1-7 of this code.
INTERIOR SIGNS: Permanently affixed to a window or the walls enclosing the display area behind a window, which are obviously intended for viewing
from the exterior, shall be considered exterior signs.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign, all or any part of the letters or design of which is made of incandescent, neon or other types of lamps, a sign
with painted, flush or raised letters lighted by an electric lamp or lamps attached thereto, a sign having a border or incandescent or fluorescent lamps
thereto attached and reflecting light thereon; or a transparent glare sign, whether lighted by electricity or other illuminant.
LOCATION: A lot, premises, building, wall or any place upon which a sign is located.
MONUMENT SIGN: A sign which is completely or principally supported by a short wall typically constructed of masonry material which is a minimum of
eighty percent (80%) of the width of the sign, and is not attached to the principal building on the property, and is anchored in or upon the ground.
NEON BORDER WINDOW SIGN: Any shapes that form skeleton tubing, outline lighting, and other decorative elements or art forms, in various colors and
diameters that creates neon borders around the perimeter of a window.
NONCOMMERCIAL SIGN: Any sign which promotes something other than goods or services for sale and profit.
PERMITTEE: That person to whom a sign is issued.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, association, firm, partners and the like, singular or plural.
POSTERBOARD OR BILLBOARD: A sign used for the display of advertising posters not usually associated with the product or major enterprise offered on
the premises on which the sign is located.
PRINCIPAL PRODUCT: A product described by category rather than by name; that is, refrigerators and not Frigidaire refrigerators.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign, other than a wall sign, which overhangs public property and is supported by a wall of a building or structure.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip dedicated to the public and occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or
gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, public utility easements or for another special use.
ROOF SIGN: A sign located or painted on or above any roof of a building.
ROOFLINE: Either the edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette; and where a building has several
roof levels, this roof or parapet shall be the one belonging to that portion of the building on whose wall the sign is located.
SHOPPING CENTER: Any concentration of retail stores and service establishments in one or more buildings under single ownership or management with
common parking facilities.
SIGN: Any name, identification, description, letters, figures, design, display, trademark, symbol, illustration, or illumination intended to attract attention to a
place, subject, firm, institution, organization, business, corporation, public performance, service, article, items, idea, product, activity, object, machine or
merchandise, painted, printed or constructed and displayed in any manner whatsoever. However, this shall not include any notices from or in connection
with any court, village, county or other judicial, quasi-judicial, municipal, or governmental body, or the flag, emblem, or insignia of a government, school or
religious group when displayed for official purposes.
SIGN FACE AREA: Is to be construed as the area of a single face of a sign. For a double faced sign, both faces shall be of the same dimensions, parallel
to each other and supported by the same structure. The total allowable area of the double faced sign shall be twice that of a single faced sign.
UNUSUALLY SHAPED SIGNS: Such as globes, cylinders or pyramids shall be considered double faced signs, and the sign area shall be computed as
one-half (1/2) the total of the exposed surfaces.
WALL SIGN: A sign attached to or painted on a wall of a building, with the exposed face of the sign approximately parallel to the wall surface.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event,
sale, or service that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-
2005)
4-4-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
(A) Permits Required: No sign shall be erected, altered or relocated without a permit issued by the building commissioner, except as otherwise provided
herein. Where electrical permits are required, they shall be obtained at the same time as the sign permit.
Application for a permit shall be made upon blanks furnished by the building commissioner, and shall include the following information:
1. Name, address and telephone number of applicant;
2. Location of the building, structure or parcel of property to which, or upon which, the sign is to be attached or erected;
3. Position of sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, lot lines and street grade;
4. Two (2) copies of plans and specifications showing method of construction, location and support, sealed by a registered architect or structural
engineer;
5. Sketch showing sign faces, exposed surfaces and proposed message thereof accurately represented in scale as to sign, proportion and color;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 105/460
6. Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting the sign;
7. Written consent of the owners of the building, structure or land on or to which the sign is to be erected; and
8. Such other information as the building inspector shall require to show full compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances of the village.
(B) Conformance With Electrical Code: All signs in which electrical wiring and connections are required shall conform to the applicable provisions of the
electrical code of the village2.
(C) Wind Pressure And Dead Load Requirements: Any "sign" or advertising structure, as defined in this code, shall be designed and constructed to
withstand a wind pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot of net surface area and to receive dead loads as required in the building
code or other ordinances of the village.
(D) Issuance Of Permits: It shall be the duty of the building commissioner, who shall be the enforcing officer hereof, upon the filing of an application for
permit, to examine such plans and specifications, the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign or other advertising structure, and other
data; and if it shall appear that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter, and all other ordinances of the village,
he shall then issue the permit. If the signage is located in, on, is a part of or is associated with a planned unit development then the signage and any
changes thereto shall also be in compliance with those requirements set forth in title 5, chapter 14 of this code. If the work authorized under the permit
has not been completed within six (6) months after date of issuance, said permit shall become null and void.
(E) Permit Fees:
1. Fees: Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder, shall pay the following permit fee for each sign to the village collector:
A fee as established by the annual fee ordinance per square foot of facing, for all signs requiring a permit, other than temporary signs, canopies,
awnings or marquees; and an additional amount as established by the annual fee ordinance per square foot if the sign is electrical.
A fee as established by the annual fee ordinance for a temporary sign.
2. Permit For Work Commenced Prior To Issuance: Should any work for which a permit is required be commenced or be done before such permit is
issued and obtained, the required permit may be issued for such and subsequent work, however, the amount of the required fee as provided herein
for all work shall be double that otherwise so provided. The issuance of such permit does not act to bar any other penalty, liability or action otherwise
provided for in this chapter or this code but shall be in addition thereto.
3. Security Deposit: A cash security deposit is required to guarantee performance by each building permit holder of the obligation to maintain the
building and adjacent public and private property in a clean condition both during and after construction, installation or demolition in accordance with
applicable laws and ordinances of the village of Lisle. The cash security deposit required under this section shall be in the amount as established by
the annual fee ordinance.
4. Preerection Inspection: The sign contractor shall schedule an inspection with the building and zoning department prior to the installation of any sign
that requires a foundation inspection, if applicable, and confirmation of the other details of mounting and placement.
5. Final Inspection: The sign contractor shall notify the building and zoning department upon completion of the work and, accordingly, schedule a final
inspection.
(F) Unsafe Or Unlawful Signs: If the building commissioner shall find that any sign is unsafe, insecure or a menace to the public, or has been constructed,
erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this code, he shall give written notice to the permittee thereof. The permittee shall remove or alter
the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within ten (10) days after such notice.
The building commissioner may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed
summarily and without notice.
(G) Maintenance Required: The owner of a sign shall be required to maintain it in a safe, neat and attractive condition. The sign and sign supports must be
kept painted to prevent rust, rot or deterioration.
(H) Removal: Any commercial sign, which no longer identifies a bona fide business conducted or a product sold, shall be taken down, together with any
supporting structure, and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or property upon which said sign
may be found.
(I) Exemptions: The provisions and regulations of this chapter shall not apply to the signs hereinafter listed; provided, however, no sign, excluding signs
denoted in subsection (I)6 of this section, shall be placed within the public right of way:
1. "For Sale", "For Rent", and "Sold" signs, which advertise the sale or rental of the real estate upon which said sign is located or indicating that the
property has been sold. The following restrictions apply to such signs:
(a) The total allowable sign face area of such signs shall be as prescribed by the zoning district regulations of this chapter, but in no event shall the
total sign face area of such a sign exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet;
(b) The maximum allowable height of such signs shall be as prescribed by the zoning district regulations of this chapter;
(c) Said signs may remain in place during the time the property is for sale or rent, and for a period not to exceed one week after the consummation of
the sale or rental of the property to a ninety percent (90%) occupancy level.
2. Professional nameplates not exceeding one square foot in area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 106/460
3. Bulletin boards for public, charitable or religious institutions, when the same are located on the premises of said institutions and are not over fifteen
(15) square feet in area.
4. Occupational signs denoting only the name and profession of an occupant in a commercial building or public institutional building and not exceeding
two (2) square feet in area.
5. Memorial sign or table, name of building and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other
noncombustible materials.
6. Traffic or other village signs, legal notices or railroad crossing, danger or such temporary emergency or nonadvertising signs as may be approved by
the president and board of trustees.
7. Address signs not over one square foot in area.
8. Window signs; provided, however, that they shall be subject to the provisions of this section relating to the area for such signs.
9. Any civic event or family event signs.
10. Political signs pursuant to the requirements in subsection 4-4-6(A)3 of this chapter.
11. Sandwich board signs, provided the signs comply with the provisions found under the sign regulation sections of this chapter where such signs are
permitted.
(J) Indemnity Policy: Each person maintaining a projecting sign, canopy, awning or marquee overhanging public property prior to the effective date of this
chapter, shall file with the building commissioner a policy of insurance showing the village as an additional named insured in the amount as established
by the annual fee ordinance conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss, damage or liability which may result from the construction or maintenance
of such a sign.
(K) Obstructions To Doors, Windows Or Fire Escapes: No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free access to or egress from
any door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(L) Signs Not To Constitute Traffic Hazards: In order to obtain and secure traffic safety, no sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to be
likely to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device, as determined by the chief of police.
Accordingly, no sign, marquee, canopy or awning shall make use of the words "Stop", "Go", "Look", "Slow", "Danger", or a similar word, phrase, symbol
or character or employ any red, yellow, orange, green or other colored lamp in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
(M) Illumination: The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed that the light intensity or brightness will not be objectionable
to surrounding areas.
1. No sign shall have blinking, flashing or fluttering lights or other illuminating device which has a changing light intensity, brightness or color. Beacon
lights are not permitted.
2. Neither the direct or reflected light from primary light sources shall create a traffic hazard for, or confuse, operators of motor vehicles on public
thoroughfares.
3. No exposed reflective type bulb or incandescent lamp which exceeds fifteen (15) watts shall be used on the exterior surface of any sign so as to
expose the face of the bulb, light or lamp to any public street or adjacent property.
4. Signs shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting light upon property located in any residence district or upon any public street or park.
Any illuminated sign located on a lot adjacent to or across the street from any residence district, which sign is visible from such residence district,
shall not be illuminated between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
5. Internally illuminated signs shall permit light to shine fully through the lettering and graphic elements of the sign. The background for such lettering
and graphics shall be opaque or translucent, and shall transmit light at a level substantially less than that transmitted through the lettering and
graphics.
(N) Glass; Limitation: Any glass forming part of a sign shall be safety glass. In case any single piece or pane of glass has an area exceeding three (3)
square feet, it shall be wired glass.
(O) Public Hearing Procedure: No action of the corporate authorities shall be taken on any variance request which requires a public hearing until a public
hearing is held at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. No less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days'
notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be caused to be published by the village clerk at the applicant's expense in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village. Such notice shall contain the number designation of the request, the date, time, location and purpose of the hearing, the name
of the applicant and a description of the subject property. There shall be posted notice of the hearing on a sign to be located on the subject property for
which the variance is requested. The applicant shall submit a fee as established by the annual fee ordinance with his application to defer the costs of
the hearing including cost of publication, notice, and erection, maintenance and removal of said sign by the village. Failure of the village to post said
sign shall not impair or in any way affect the validity of any variance granted subsequent to published notice. The applicant shall also furnish the village
with a list of people who own property within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the subject property who shall be given notice of the public hearing.
(P) Sight Obstruction: No sign shall be constructed so as to obstruct the view of motorists of oncoming traffic and of pedestrians. Signs that exceed three
feet (3') in height shall not be located within a twenty five foot (25') line of sight vision clearance triangle at the intersection of driveways and roadways.
(Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-2005)
(Q) Ground Mounted Signs; Structural Requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 107/460
1. Requirements: The structural frame of all ground signs shall be constructed using noncombustible materials securely fastened to an approved
foundation system capable of supporting the sign under maximum design loads.
All signs shall be designed and constructed so as to withstand a wind pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot of net surface area
and to receive dead loads as required by the building code.
All plans for ground mounted signs shall be prepared and "stamped" by a licensed structural engineer registered in the state of Illinois.
2. Exception: Ground signs, the top of which is no higher than four feet (4') above grade, and less than fifty (50) square feet in face area, may be
constructed using an approved decay resistant wood and shall not require certification by a structural engineer subject to conformance with the
following specifications:
(a) All structural posts shall be not less than six inches by six inches (6" x 6") nominal dimensions and of a decay resistant material approved for
direct earth contact.
(b) Posts shall be set in minimum sixteen inch (16") diameter holes, not less than forty eight inches (48") below grade, and backfilled using selfcompacting
or self-draining material such as three-fourths inch (3/4") washed limestone, or a similar material approved by the village building
official, compacted to within four inches (4") of the finished grade.
(c) The lowest edge of the sign face shall be constructed not less than twelve inches (12") above finished grade. (Ord. 2008-4218, 8-4-2008)
4-4-5: LEGAL AND NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Signs existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter and not conforming to its provisions, but which were constructed in compliance with previous
regulations, shall be regarded as legal nonconforming signs.
Nonconforming signs which are discontinued or abandoned for a period of thirty (30) days or more, structurally altered, damaged, relocated or replaced, or
which advertise a business which use or business name is changed, shall comply immediately with all provisions of this chapter.
(A) Sign Amortization Of Nonconforming Signs: All nonconforming signs shall be removed or made conforming to the requirements of this chapter within
seven (7) years of the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-2005)
4-4-6: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
(A) The following signs shall be permitted anywhere within the village and shall not require a permit:
1. Construction Signs: Construction signs, identifying the architects, engineers, contractors, but not including the advertisement of any product, and
announcing the intended character of the building up to a maximum area of sixteen (16) square feet for each firm. The signs shall be confined to the
site of the construction, and shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after the beginning of the intended use of the project.
2. Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs not exceeding a total area of four (4) square feet advertising the sale or rental of all, or part, of the premises on
which the signs are displayed. These signs must be removed within seven (7) days after the sale is closed or the lease signed. (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-
17-2005)
3. Political Campaign Signs: Political campaign signs, announcing the candidates seeking public political office and other data pertinent thereto, which
are confined exclusively within private property, not exceeding 3.5 square feet per individual sign. Properties that have a street frontage of more than
one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be allowed one additional sign not to exceed forty eight (48) square feet. Political campaign signs on nonresidential
property shall be displayed not more than thirty (30) days prior to an election, and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the election. (Ord.
2011-4367, 1-17-2011)
4. Show Window Signs: Show window signs in a window display of merchandise, when incorporated with such a display. They need not be related in
content with the display.
5. Temporary Sale Signs: Garage sale, yard sale or other temporary signs of this nature. Such signs must be located on private property with the
property owner's permission. Said signs may not exceed four (4) square feet in area and six feet (6') in height. Said signs may not be erected for a
period longer than seventy two (72) hours and must be removed by the property owner or by the party who posted the sign at the end of the seventy
two (72) hour period. Signs erected or maintained in violation of this section may be removed by village enforcement personnel.
(B) The following signs shall require a permit and shall conform in all respects with all applicable regulations imposed under section 4-4-4 of this chapter.
1. Street banners advertising a public entertainment or event, if specifically approved by the village board and then only for locations designated by
said village board, during fourteen (14) days before and three (3) days after the event. (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-2005)
2. Temporary signs not in excess of forty (40) square feet in area for the promotion of a specific event, grand opening, or other like function. Said time
period shall not exceed thirty (30) days. No flashing or sequential lights shall be allowable and any business, person or location shall be entitled to
only two (2) such approvals within any single calendar year. Any signs shall be mounted in a secure fashion and shall in all respects comply with all
other applicable provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the village. (Ord. 2005-3904, 3-7-2005)
3. Inflatable balloons or other cold air advertising devices for the promotion of a specific event, grand opening, or other like function. Only one such
inflatable balloon or other cold air advertising device is permitted. Any inflatable advertising device shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height
measured at grade and shall not exceed ten feet (10') in diameter. Said advertising device shall be ground mounted and properly secured to avoid
being a windblown hazard. Said device shall be displayed one time per calendar year for a maximum of seven (7) days. (Ord. 2005-3901, 2-21-2005)
4. Pennants or streamers for the promotion of a specific event, grand opening, or other like function. The pennants or streamers shall be mounted in a
secure fashion and shall in all other respects comply with all other applicable provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the village. Said
device shall be displayed one time per calendar year for a maximum of seven (7) days. (Ord. 2005-3904, 3-7-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 108/460
4-4-7: EXEMPTIONS:
The following types of signs are exempted from all the provisions of this chapter, except for construction and safety regulations and the following
requirements:
(A) Public Signs: Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance of his public
duty, such as safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest and the like.
(B) Integral: Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved into stone, concrete or similar
material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other permanent type construction, and made an integral part of the structure.
(C) Traffic Direction: Signs directing traffic movement onto a premises or within a premises, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area and four feet (4') in
height for each sign. Illumination of these signs shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations contained in this chapter.
(D) Flags: Flags provided any flagpoles are set back at least five feet (5') from any property lines.
(E) Decorative: Noncommercial holiday decorations or seasonal banners.
(F) Address Signs: Address signs provided the sign does not exceed one square foot in area. (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-2005)
4-4-8: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
(A) Flashing signs;
(B) Roof signs;
(C) Commercial signs which promote an enterprise not in existence, or product or service no longer sold;
(D) Signs which move or have moving parts, which movement is caused either by the wind or mechanically;
(E) Signs which contain statements, words or pictures of obscene, indecent or immoral character and which offend the public morals or decency;
(F) Miscellaneous advertising devices, other than signs which conform to the provisions of this chapter, shall not be allowed;
(G) Signs in conflict with traffic signals;
(H) Billboard signs;
(I) Graphics or other signs attached to power poles or light standards;
(J) Attention getting devices except electronic message center signs approved by special use permit;
(K) Off site advertising signs;
(L) Neon border window sign;
(M) Any signs in the public right of way except those signs denoted in subsection 4-4-4(I)6 of this chapter;
(N) Any sign not expressively expressed in this chapter. (Ord. 2005-3904, 3-7-2005)
4-4-9: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS REGULATIONS:
(A) Permitted Sign Types:
Development identification signs, R-3, one- to four-family dwellings, a single identification sign not exceeding five (5) square feet in area indicating only
the name and address of the building and the name of the management and rental information thereof. The area surrounding the base of the sign shall
be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of the landscaping and tree preservation ordinance (section 5-26-10 of this code).
Development identification signs, R-4, multiple-family dwellings, a single identification sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area, indicating
only the name and address of the building and the name of the management and rental information thereof, may be displayed; provided that, on a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 109/460
corner lot, two (2) signs, sixteen (16) square feet each, one facing each street, may be permitted. The area surrounding the base of the sign shall be
landscaped in accordance with the provisions of the landscaping and tree preservation ordinance (section 5-26-10 of this code).
Exempt and temporary signs (sections 4-4-6 and 4-4-7 of this chapter).
Freestanding signs for permitted nonresidential uses in residential districts, as stipulated below:
1. Number Of Signs: One sign shall be allowed for each residential lot, which shall conform to the provisions herein established.
2. Surface Area: Each side of the freestanding sign shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet. "V" shaped freestanding signs shall be prohibited.
3. Height: Not to exceed six feet (6') above ground level.
4. Location: Freestanding signs for permitted nonresidential uses shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from any property line. The area surrounding
the base of a freestanding sign shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of the landscaping and tree preservation ordinance (section 5-
26-10 of this code).
Nameplate, not exceeding one square foot in area, affixed to a wall or door of each one- and two-family dwelling unit, indicating the name or address
of the occupant. Said signs shall indicate only the name and address of permitted occupations within the district. Attached signs shall not extend
more than six inches (6") from the face of the building.
Residential subdivision sign, not exceeding twenty four (24) square feet and not more than four feet (4') in height. One sign shall be permitted at
each major entrance to the subdivision. Content of the sign shall be limited to only the name of the subdivision or development. The area
surrounding the base of the sign shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of the landscaping and tree preservation ordinance (section
5-26-10 of this code). (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-2005)
4-4-10: COLLEGE/UNIVERSITY (C/U) DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
All signs erected in the C/U district shall be subject to the provisions of subsection 5-6A-4(D) of this code. (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-2005)
4-4-11: B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
(A) Permitted Sign Types:
Awning and canopies, which shall not exceed one square foot for every linear foot of wall frontage. Surface area for awnings and canopies are counted
towards the total surface area allotment for wall signs. Such signs shall be erected so that the lowest portion is at least seven feet (7') above the
ground.
Exempt and temporary signs (sections 4-4-6 and 4-4-7 of this chapter).
Freestanding signs, in accordance with the bulk requirements stipulated below.
Sandwich board signs, no more than one sign per business is permitted, must be located entirely or partially on the sidewalk in front of the business,
allowing at least four feet (4') of sidewalk clearance and shall not exceed ten (10) square feet or exceed four feet (4') in height. Signs shall not be
displayed before sunrise and shall be taken down by sunset. Any signs encroaching any public right of way, must comply with the indemnity policy set
forth in subsection 4-4-4(J) of this chapter. Sandwich board signs shall be professionally made and maintained in good condition. Signs shall be of an
A-frame design and properly weighted so as to not create a windblown hazard. Signs shall not have any nails, tacks, wires, or sharp metal edges
protruding therefrom. Sandwich board signs must be located on the ground and not be attached to any structure or person.
Wall signs, in accordance with the bulk requirements stipulated below.
Window signs, which shall be limited to no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total window display area.
(B) Bulk Requirements For Freestanding And Wall Signs:
1. Number Of Signs Per Lot: No more than one freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot, except an additional sign shall be permitted where the lot
has frontage on two (2) arterial roads and the signs are at least two hundred feet (200') from each other. Each building is allowed a wall sign per
each roadway frontage.
2. Surface Area: Each side of the freestanding signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet. "V" shaped freestanding signs shall be prohibited. Wall
signs shall not exceed one square foot per linear foot of building frontage.
3. Height: No freestanding sign shall be erected to exceed a height of ten feet (10') above ground level.
4. Location: Monument freestanding signs shall be set back at least five feet (5') from any property lines. Pylon or pole freestanding signs shall be set
back at least ten feet (10') from any property lines. Attached signs shall not extend more than twelve inches (12") from the face of the building. The
area surrounding the base of freestanding signs shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of the landscaping and tree preservation
ordinance (section 5-26-10 of this code). (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-2005)
4-4-12: B-2 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
(A) Permitted Types:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 110/460
Awning and canopies, which shall not exceed one square foot for every linear foot of wall frontage. Surface area for awnings and canopies are counted
towards the total surface area allotment for wall signs. Such signs shall be erected so that the lowest portion is at least seven feet (7') above the
ground.
Exempt and temporary signs (sections 4-4-6 and 4-4-7 of this chapter).
Freestanding signs, in accordance with the bulk requirements stipulated below.
Sandwich board signs, no more than one sign per business is permitted, must be located entirely or partially on the sidewalk in front of the business,
allowing at least four feet (4') of sidewalk clearance and shall not exceed ten (10) square feet or exceed four feet (4') in height. Signs shall not be
displayed before sunrise and shall be taken down by sunset. Any signs encroaching any public right of way, must comply with the indemnity policy set
forth in subsection 4-4-4(J) of this chapter. Sandwich board signs shall be professionally made and maintained in good condition. Signs shall be of an
A-frame design and properly weighted so as to not create a windblown hazard. Signs shall not have any nails, tacks, wires, or sharp metal edges
protruding therefrom. Sandwich board signs must be located on the ground and not be attached to any structure or person.
Wall signs, in accordance with the bulk requirements stipulated below.
Window signs, which shall be limited to no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total window display area.
(B) Bulk Requirements For Freestanding And Wall Signs:
1. Number Of Signs Per Lot: No more than one freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot, except an additional sign shall be permitted where the lot
has frontage on two (2) arterial roads and the signs are at least two hundred feet (200') from each other. Each building is allowed a wall sign per
each roadway frontage.
2. Surface Area: Each side of the freestanding signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. Properties with frontage along Ogden Avenue, Route 53
and Maple Avenue that have at least a street frontage of one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be allowed each side of the freestanding signs not to
exceed one hundred (100) square feet. "V" shaped freestanding signs shall be prohibited. Wall signs shall not exceed one square foot per linear foot
of building frontage.
3. Height: No freestanding sign shall be erected to exceed a height of twenty feet (20') above ground level.
4. Location: Monument freestanding signs shall be set back at least five feet (5') from any property lines. Pylon or pole freestanding signs shall be set
back at least ten feet (10') from any property lines. Attached signs shall not extend more than twelve inches (12") from the face of the building. The
area surrounding the base of freestanding signs shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of the landscaping and tree preservation
ordinance (section 5-26-10 of this code). (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-2005)
4-4-13: B-3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
(A) Permitted Types:
Awning and canopies, which shall not exceed one square foot for every linear foot of wall frontage. Surface area for awnings and canopies are counted
towards the total surface area allotment for wall signs. Such signs shall be erected so that the lowest portion is at least seven feet (7') above the
ground.
Exempt and temporary signs (sections 4-4-6 and 4-4-7 of this chapter).
Freestanding signs, shall be permitted only for business establishments directly accessible by automobile and that has at least four (4) parking spaces
on premises where such freestanding sign is displayed, and constructed in accordance with the bulk requirements stipulated below.
Menu boards for restaurants and taverns shall be permitted on the facade of the front wall of the business. Menu boards shall not exceed nine (9)
square feet in area. Menu boards may include menus or notices of special events in the community. All menu board signs shall be enclosed in a glass
frame.
Projecting signs, one sign shall be permitted for each first floor business. It shall not project more than thirty six inches (36") from the facade and must
be at least six inches (6") away from the facade. The sign shall not exceed five (5) square feet in area and must be at least seven feet (7') above the
sidewalk. Projecting signs shall not be illuminated. Only the name of the business may be displayed. Second floor businesses may also have a
projecting sign, but must be at least within two feet (2') of the first floor door access to the business.
Sandwich board signs, no more than one sign per business is permitted, must be located entirely or partially on the sidewalk in front of the business,
allowing at least four feet (4') of sidewalk clearance and shall not exceed ten (10) square feet or exceed four feet (4') in height. Signs shall not be
displayed before sunrise and shall be taken down by sunset. Any signs encroaching any public right of way, must comply with the indemnity policy set
forth in subsection 4-4-4(J) of this chapter. Sandwich board signs shall be professionally made and maintained in good condition. Signs shall be of an
A-frame design and properly weighted so as to not create a windblown hazard. Signs shall not have any nails, tacks, wires, or sharp metal edges
protruding therefrom. Sandwich board signs must be located on the ground and not be attached to any structure or person.
Wall signs, provided the wall signs have an opaque background and are constructed in accordance with the bulk requirements stipulated below.
Window signs, which shall be limited to no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total window display area.
(B) Bulk Requirements For Freestanding And Wall Signs:
1. Number Of Signs Per Lot: No more than one freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot, except an additional sign shall be permitted where the lot
has frontage on two (2) arterial roads and the signs are at least two hundred feet (200') from each other. Each building is allowed a wall sign per
each roadway frontage.
2. Surface Area: Each side of the freestanding signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. Properties with frontage along Ogden Avenue or Route 53,
which have a street frontage of at least one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be allowed each side of the freestanding signs not to exceed one hundred
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 111/460
(100) square feet for signs on the Ogden Avenue or Route 53 property sides only. "V" shaped freestanding signs shall be prohibited. Wall signs shall
not exceed one square foot per linear foot of building frontage.
3. Height: No freestanding sign shall be erected to exceed a height of ten feet (10') above ground level. For properties with frontage on Ogden Avenue
or Route 53, freestanding signs shall not exceed twenty feet (20') above ground level on the Ogden Avenue or Route 53 property sides only.
4. Location: Monument freestanding signs shall be set back at least five feet (5') from any property lines. Pylon or pole freestanding signs shall be set
back at least ten feet (10') from any property lines. Attached signs shall not extend more than twelve inches (12") from the face of the building. The
area surrounding the base of the sign shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of the landscaping and tree preservation ordinance
(section 5-26-10 of this code). (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-2005)
4-4-14: O OFFICE, O-R OFFICE-RESEARCH AND I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS REGULATIONS:
(A) Permitted Types:
Awning and canopies, which shall not exceed one square foot for every linear foot of wall frontage. Surface area for awnings and canopies are counted
towards the total surface area allotment for wall signs. Such signs shall be erected so that the lowest portion is at least seven feet (7') above the
ground.
Development entrance signs, which shall be monument signs not to exceed fifty (50) square feet and a height of ten feet (10'). Such sign shall indicate
only the name of the subdivision or development. Such sign shall not be located in any public right of way and shall comply with the vision clearance
requirements in subsection 4-4-4(P) of this chapter. The area surrounding the base of the sign shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of
the landscaping and tree preservation ordinance (section 5-26-10 of this code).
Exempt and temporary signs (sections 4-4-6 and 4-4-7 of this chapter).
Freestanding signs, in accordance with the bulk requirements stipulated below.
Wall signs, in accordance with the bulk requirements below.
Window signs, which shall be limited to no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total window display area.
(B) Bulk Requirements For Freestanding And Wall Signs:
1. Number Of Signs Per Lot: No more than one freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot, except an additional sign shall be permitted where the lot
has frontage on two (2) arterial roads and the signs are at least two hundred feet (200') from each other. Each building is allowed a wall sign per
each roadway frontage.
2. Surface Area: Each side of the freestanding signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. Properties adjacent to the I-88 corridor shall be allowed
freestanding signs located directly adjacent to I-88 not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet. Freestanding signs exceeding fifty (50) square feet
on I-88 corridor properties shall be prohibited in the front yard of those properties. "V" shaped freestanding signs shall be prohibited. Wall signs shall
not exceed one square foot per linear foot of building frontage. Properties adjacent to the I-88 corridor shall be allowed wall signs facing I-88 only not
to exceed two (2) square feet per linear foot of building frontage.
3. Height: No freestanding sign shall be erected to exceed a height of ten feet (10') above ground level. Freestanding signs on properties adjacent to
the I-88 corridor shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') above ground level. Freestanding signs exceeding ten feet (10') in height shall be prohibited in
the front yard of those properties.
4. Location: Freestanding signs shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from any property lines. Attached signs shall not extend more than twelve
inches (12") from the face of the building. The area surrounding the base of the sign shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of the
landscaping and tree preservation ordinance (section 5-26-10 of this code). (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-2005)
4-4-15: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The building commissioner may seek revocation of a permit for alleged violation of any provision of this chapter. He shall do so by mailing written notice by
certified or registered mail to the permittee. Said notice shall specify the alleged violations of this chapter relied upon and shall contain the time, date and
place of the hearing before the president and board of trustees of the village. Said hearing shall be no sooner than five (5) days from the date of mailing.
The notice shall also specify that the person or organization may be represented by counsel with the right to confront and cross examine adverse
witnesses.
Hearing regarding revocation:
(A) At the hearing, the aggrieved permittee may be represented by counsel with the right to confront and cross examine witnesses against him.
(B) Testimony shall be taken upon oath or affirmation, first of witnesses in support of the revocation of the permit; the aggrieved permittee may then testify
and present witnesses on his/her behalf.
(C) The findings and order of the president and board of trustees shall within ten (10) days of the conclusion of the hearing be forthwith sent to the
permittee by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, at the address listed on the permittee's application.
(D) If the permit is revoked, it will become effective immediately upon service on the permittee or upon mailing, whichever occurs sooner, unless a court of
competent jurisdiction rules otherwise, or appealed pursuant to subsection 4-4-16(B) of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 112/460
4-4-16: ADMINISTRATION AND PENALTIES:
(A) Enforcement: The building commissioner and building inspector are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Right Of Appeal: Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the building commissioner or building inspector may appeal to the corporate
authorities by serving written notice on the village clerk.
The building commissioner or building inspector shall take no further action on the matter pending the corporate authorities' decision, except for unsafe
signs which present an immediate and serious danger to the public.
This appeal shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of said corporate authorities, and that body may affirm, reverse, or modify the action
of the building commissioner or building inspector, or it may grant a variance to this chapter, subject to the provision of subsection (C) of this section.
(C) Grant Of Variance: The corporate authorities may grant a variance to this chapter, where said body finds that strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, but in no case shall a variance be granted for more than twenty five percent
(25%) increase in size, height, sign face area, or square footage, nor for more than twenty five percent (25%) decrease in required setback or for any
increase in number of signs or any change in sign illumination without a public hearing before the corporate authorities in compliance with subsection
4-4-4(O) of this chapter. Said variance shall run with the land which is the subject of the variance request, and the corporate authorities reserve the
right to grant said variance for a term of years or other term of limited duration. All requests or petitions for such variance shall be heard only after
application for same has been made by a petitioner on form for same to be supplied by the village and plans depicting proposed signage have been
provided to the village. Said application forms shall include information determined from time to time by the village building and zoning
commissioner/director of community development to be relevant, necessary and germane.
(D) Penalties: Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance, and every such person
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day such violation shall continue, and shall be subject to the penalty provided hereunder for each
and every separate offense. (Ord. 2005-3891, 1-17-2005)
Footnote 1: See title 5 of this code.
Footnote 2: See chapter 2 of this title.
Chapter 5
FIRE CODE
4-5-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire
or explosion, and for the prevention and control of fire, the 2015 edition of the international fire code. The provisions of aforesaid code are incorporated
herein by reference and are further clarified in this chapter. The clarified provisions together with the aforesaid code and other provisions specifically
adopted herein shall be collectively known as the VILLAGE OF LISLE FIRE PREVENTION ORDINANCE of which one copy of the aforesaid code is on file
in the office of the village clerk, and is available for public use, inspection and examination. From the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the
provisions of the aforesaid code, as clarified by this chapter, shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2016-4628, 1-4-2016)
4-5-2: BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION ESTABLISHED:
A bureau of fire prevention is hereby established for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. Said bureau of fire prevention shall be composed of the
community development director as chairman, and the chief of the Lisle/Woodridge fire protection district, or their designated representatives. (Ord. 98-
2978, 4-20-1998)
4-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION OR CHIEF OF THE FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU OR FIRE OFFICIAL OR FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU: The
community development director of the village of Lisle or his designee.
CORPORATE COUNSEL: The attorney for the village of Lisle, DuPage County, Illinois.
FIRE PREVENTION CODE OR CODE: The village of Lisle fire prevention ordinance in its entirety, including the codes adopted by reference herein.
MUNICIPALITY: The village of Lisle, DuPage County, Illinois. (Ord. 98-2978, 4-20-1998)
4-5-4: PROHIBITIONS EXCEPT BY SPECIAL PERMIT:
(A) Prohibited Storage Of Explosives And Blasting Agents: The storage, handling and use of explosives and blasting agents are hereby prohibited within
the corporate limits of the village except by special permit issued by the Lisle/Woodridge fire protection district.
(B) Prohibited Storage Of Flammable Liquids: The storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited within the corporate limits of the
village except by special permit issued by the Lisle/Woodridge fire protection district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 113/460
(C) Restricted Bulk Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases: The bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases in excess of five hundred (500) gallons' water
capacity is hereby prohibited within the corporate limits of the village, except by special permit issued by the Lisle/Woodridge fire protection district.
(D) Motor Vehicle Routes For Transporting Explosives And Blasting Agents: Vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents are hereby prohibited
within the corporate limits of the village without a special permit issued by the Lisle/Woodridge fire protection district, with the exception of Interstate 88,
Interstate 355, Illinois Route 53, U.S. Route 34, Maple Avenue, Warrenville Road, and Yackley/College Road.
(E) Motor Vehicle Routes For Transporting Hazardous Chemicals And Other Dangerous Articles Including Liquefied Petroleum Gases And Combustible
And Flammable Liquids: Vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or other dangerous articles are hereby prohibited within the corporate limits of the
village without a special permit issued by the Lisle/Woodridge fire protection district with the exception of Interstate 88, Interstate 355, Illinois Route 53,
U.S. Route 34, Maple Avenue, Warrenville Road, and Yackley/College Road. Additionally, no tank vehicles shall be parked for over one hour or left
unattended at any time within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 98-2978, 4-20-1998)
4-5-5: AMENDMENTS:
The fire code of the village of Lisle, as hereinbefore adopted, is amended in the following respects:
101.1 Title. Insert the village of Lisle as name of the jurisdiction.
103.0 Department Of Fire Prevention. Delete section in its entirety.
105.6.45 Temporary Membrane Structures And Tents. Amend section to read:
An operational permit is required to operate an air-supported temporary membrane structure, a temporary stage canopy or a tent requiring a permit
under section 4-9-1 of the village of Lisle code. Delete exceptions.
105.7.18 Temporary Membrane Structures And Tents. Amend section to read:
A construction permit is required to erect an air-supported temporary membrane structure, a temporary stage canopy or a tent requiring a permit
under section 4-9-1 of the village of Lisle code. Delete exceptions.
108.1 Board Of Appeals Established. Amend section to read:
The village of Lisle board of trustees shall serve as the fire code board of appeals.
111.1 Order. Amend section to read:
Where the fire code official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code, or in a
dangerous or unsafe manner, the building code official is authorized to issue a stop work order.
Section 202 Definitions. Amend definition of High-Rise Building to read:
High-Rise Building. A building with an occupied floor located more than 50 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
307.6 Add the following section:
307.6 Open Burning Prohibited. Open burning of materials prohibited under village of Lisle code 8-3-1 is not permitted.
316.7 Add the following section:
316.7 Truss Markers. A truss marker emblem shall be provided at the fire department key box location on all new commercial building construction
that contain floor and/or roof trusses. The emblem shall be of a bright and reflective color, or made of reflective materials, in a shape and format
acceptable to the fire code official.
503.1.1 Buildings And Facilities. Delete section, including exceptions, in its entirety and replace with:
503.1.1 Required Fire Lanes. Public or private access shall be provided to each building so that the first responding fire department pumper unit will
be able to be so located that all points of the interior of the building may be reached by one hundred fifty (150) feet of initial attack hose. Where the
size or height of the building does not allow this regulation to be met, an approved interior standpipe system equipped with fire department hose
connections approved by the code official may be allowed as an exception. The standpipe system shall be connected to a public water system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 114/460
506.3 Add the following section:
506.3 Hazardous Material Data. Where minimum reportable hazardous materials exist in a building, the emergency access key box shall contain
information as to the location of the required MSDS information within the building.
507.3 Fire Flow. Amend section to read:
507.3 Fire Flow. This section, in conjunction requirements of appendix B and C of this code, defines water supplies for fire department use for new
construction buildings and structures. All new buildings, structures, or developments shall be served by a public water supply system meeting this
criteria.
507.5.1 Where Required. Delete text including exceptions and replace with:
In conjunction with the fire hydrant spacing requirement of appendix C of this code, hydrants shall be located along public streets so that no portion
of a building will be over 300 feet from a fire hydrant. Where this is not possible, additional hydrants shall be located on the premises accessible to
motorized fire apparatus.
One hydrant shall be located at each street intersection and intermediate hydrants shall be provided where distance between intersections exceeds
400 feet.
In apartments, townhouses, condominiums, town/row or cluster housing areas where streets or parking lots dead end, hydrants shall be placed along
the access route.
At least two (2) fire hydrants shall be located within 300 feet of the building. Hydrants shall be located no closer than 25 feet to a building.
Additional fire hydrants shall be provided within 500 feet of the building so that the fire flow required divided by 1,000 will equal the number of
hydrants available.
Hydrants should be located approximately ten (10) feet from all-weather roadways. If this cannot be done, the closest part of the hydrant shall be set
back at least five (5) feet from the curb.
Access to fire hydrants shall be from all-weather roadways adequate in width, clearance and strength for firefighting purposes. Such routes including
private roadways, shall be maintained accessible during all seasons of the year. Legal provisions will be required for private roads.
Fire hydrants used in conjunction with water supplies shall meet the standards of the American Water Works Association standard no. C-502, and
shall have two (2-1/2) inch and one (4-1/2) inch outlets with auxiliary gate valves on the hydrant branch line. Threads shall be American national
standard. Pumper outlets shall face roadways.
Fire hydrants shall be protected from accidental damage by approved methods when located in areas subject to vehicular damage.
Where non-pressurized water systems are allowed, supplies shall be located not less than 300 feet from the building. Access to the supply shall be
by an all-weather roadway.
Water supplies including hydrant distribution for fully sprinklered buildings need only meet the design standard of NFPA 13, 2013 edition. Water
supplies for sprinkler systems may be supplied in accordance with NFPA 13, sprinkler systems, 2013 edition or in an equivalent manner.
603.3.1 Fuel Oil Storage In Outside, Above Ground Tanks. Delete text and replace with:
Above ground fuel oil storage is not permitted.
703.5 Add new section:
703.5 Hazardous Areas. All storage rooms, mechanical rooms, boiler rooms, electrical closets, fuel storage areas, janitors' closets, maintenance
shops, and kitchens shall be separated from other building areas by assemblies having a fire resistance rating of not less than one-hour with
appropriate protection of openings into the rooms.
Exception: Kitchen areas completely open and unobstructed to the adjacent dining and serving area on at least one side, and configured in such a
way so that a kitchen fire would be immediately known to all occupants of dining and serving area, and located within fire areas equipped with a
complete automatic fire suppression system, are exempt from the above requirement.
703.6 Add new section:
703.6 Tenant Separation. In multiple tenant occupancies, each tenant space shall be separated from other tenant spaces and exit access corridors
by walls, partitions, and floor-ceiling assemblies having at least one-hour approved fire resistance rating.
Exception: Shared office use tenant spaces not greater than 3,500 square feet in total gross area, located within buildings equipped with code
compliant automatic suppression and automatic fire alarm systems, shall be exempt from this requirement subject to compliance with all of the
following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 115/460
1. All individual rooms within the space shall be used as business offices only. Beauty shops, clinics, educational uses, labs, print shops, doctor's
offices, retail and similar uses are not permitted in a shared office suite.
2. All shared office suites shall provide and maintain a common entry and common use general office area or lobby. Toilet facilities shall be
provided in conformance with requirements of the latest Illinois plumbing code.
3. Individual offices within the suite shall not be less than 100 square feet in area and shall comply with all environmental requirements for light and
ventilation.
4. A building or occupancy permit shall be obtained to establish the shared office suite as a permitted use. Thereafter, each tenant within the suite
shall obtain a separate occupancy permit in conformance with the requirements of sections 5-18-4 and 4-13-2 of the village code.
5. An office directory of current tenants shall be provided and maintained at the front entry to the shared office suites.
903.2 Where Required. Delete exception to this section.
903.2.1.1 Group A-1. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group A-1 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
903.2.1.2 Group A-2. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group A-2 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
903.2.1.3 Group A-3. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group A-3 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
903.2.1.4 Group A-4. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group A-4 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
903.2.3 Group E. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group E occupancies. Delete exception.
903.2.4 Group F-1. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group F-1 and F-2 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
903.2.6 Group I. Delete exceptions.
903.2.7 Group M. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group M occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
903.2.8 Group R. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group R-1, R-2 and R-4 occupancies. R-3 occupancies shall be
regulated under the 2015 international residential code.
903.2.9 Group S-1. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group S-1 occupancies.
903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas used as repair garages.
903.2.10 Group S-2 Enclosed Parking Garages. Amend section to read:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 116/460
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group S-2 occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area. All parking
garages, open or enclosed, shall be equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system.
903.2.10.1 Commercial Parking Garages. Amend section to read:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas used as commercial parking garages.
903.2.11.3 Buildings 55 Feet Or More In Height. Delete exceptions.
903.2.13 Add the following section:
Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all fire areas containing group B occupancies exceeding 5,000 square feet in area.
903.2.14 Add the following section:
Wood Frame Construction.
An automatic fire suppression system shall be provided throughout all wood frame buildings used for other than single family or duplex residential
use. Variations from this section may be considered by the board of appeals subject to the properties' compliance with the following:
(a) That the subject wood frame building is less than two thousand square feet (2,000') in gross floor area including all floors.
(b) That the subject wood frame building is separated by more than thirty (30) feet from all other buildings on surrounding properties.
(c) That the subject wood frame building is within three hundred feet (300') of at least two (2) separate fire hydrants.
(d) That the furnace room and storage room in the subject wood frame building be enclosed with one hour fire rated construction and a self-closing
forty-five (45) minute rated door.
(e) That the subject wood frame building be used for no use other than, or more hazardous than, an office use.
(f) That a complete automatic fire alarm system, including a fire alarm control panel, pull boxes located at the exit doors, audio-visual signaling
devices, heat detectors located in each room or space, and a direct tie to an approved central station be installed.
(g) That the subject wood frame building have two (2) direct exits to the outside.
(h) That the subject wood frame building complies with all other village codes for the proposed use.
903.3.1 Standards. Amend section to read:
Sprinkler systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.1, unless otherwise permitted by other chapters of this code, as
applicable. All sprinkler systems shall be designed with a 10psi or 10% safety factor, whichever is greater. Flexible sprinkler heads are not permitted.
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt Locations. Delete exemptions #3 and #4.
903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R Sprinkler Systems. Delete section in its entirety.
903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems. Delete section in its entirety.
903.3.5 Water Supplies. Text revised so as to require compliance with the Illinois plumbing code in place of the international plumbing code.
903.3.5.3 Add new section:
Water Supply Test.
As part of the sprinkler plan review submittal, test results from a current water supply test shall be provided. The test shall have been performed
within one year of the date of plan submittal. All tests shall be witnessed and documented by the village of Lisle public works department.
903.3.5.1 Domestic Service. Delete text and replace with:
Domestic water service lines shall be permitted to serve limited area sprinkler systems only.
903.3.5.2 Residential Combined Services. Delete section in its entirety.
907.1.3 Equipment. Amend section to read:
Systems and components shall be listed and approved for the purpose for which they are installed. All new fire alarm systems shall be addressable
type systems only. All new fire alarm systems shall be hardwired. Wireless systems are not permitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 117/460
907.2.1 Group A. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group A occupancies. Delete exception.
907.2.2 Group B. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group B occupancies. Delete exception.
907.2.3 Group E. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group E occupancies. Delete exceptions.
907.2.4 Group F. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group F occupancies. Delete exception.
907.2.5 Group H. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group H occupancies.
907.2.6 Group I. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group I occupancies. Delete exceptions.
907.2.7 Group M. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group M occupancies. Delete exceptions.
907.2.8 Group R-1. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group R-1 occupancies.
907.2.9 Group R-2. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group R-2 occupancies.
907.2.10 Group R-4. Amend section to read:
An approved automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all group R-4 occupancies.
907.2.11 Single- And Multiple-Station Smoke Alarms. Amend section to read:
Smoke detection devices of a type approved by the fire inspector shall be provided in all buildings equipped with an automatic fire alarm system.
Devices shall be located as determined necessary to provide early fire detection based upon the use and as required under applicable provisions of
NFPA 72.
907.2.24 Add the following section:
Where Required-Retroactive In Existing Buildings And Structures.
Fire alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in existing buildings in accordance with requirements of the life safety code (NFPA 101) as
adopted and amended by the village of Lisle.
New fire alarm systems installed in all existing use group R-2 occupancies, as required under applicable provisions of the life safety code, shall be
installed in conformance with the following specifications:
1. The fire alarm control panel (FACP) shall be located at the point of fire department entry, or may be remotely located provided an approved
remote annunciator with silence and reset capability is installed in its place.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 118/460
2. Manual pull stations shall be installed throughout the building in accordance with NFPA 72.
3. System smoke detectors shall be installed in all sleeping rooms, in all public corridors and stairwells, above the FACP, in all elevator shafts, in all
elevator lobbies, and in other areas as deemed necessary by the fire code official.
4. System heat detectors shall be installed in all public storage areas, in all mechanical/electrical/janitors closets, in all elevator shafts, in all closets
in excess of 50 square feet located within dwelling units, in other areas as deemed necessary by the fire code official.
5. Combination smoke and heat detectors shall be installed in the general living space of all dwelling units and in other areas as deemed
necessary by the fire code official. These devices shall be wired so as to act as a local smoke detector and a system heat detector for the dwelling
unit.
6. Audio/visual notification devices shall be installed throughout all public areas as per NFPA 72, as required by provisions of the Illinois
accessibility code, and in other areas as deemed necessary by the fire code official.
7. An audible notification device (sounder) shall be installed in each dwelling unit. Additional sounders may be necessary, or replaced with a/v
devices as approved by the fire code official, to achieve the required audio decibel levels in all areas of the unit.
907.8.6 Add the following section:
907.8.6 Battery Back-Up. All fire alarm systems shall be designed and installed with battery back-up power capable of 60 hours of standby followed
by 5 minutes of alarm.
907.10 Add the following section:
907.10 High-Rise Buildings. In buildings having floors used for human occupancy located more than 50 feet above the lowest level of fire
department vehicle access that are occupied for human occupancy, a separate zone by floor shall be provided for all of the following types of alarminitiating
devices where provided:
1. Smoke detectors.
2. Sprinkler water-flow devices.
3. Manual fire alarm boxes.
4. Other approved types of automatic fire detection devices or suppression systems.
907.11 Add the following section:
907.11 Outside Alerting Devices. All fire alarm and fire suppression systems shall have an outside alerting device (strobe) of a type and at a
location approved by the fire code official.
907.12 Add the following section:
907.12 Tenant Space Light. Each tenant space in a multiple tenant building shall have a light visible in a public access area indicating which tenant
space the activated detector is in or identified on an accessible enunciator or control panel. If tenant lights are used, then a strobe light shall be
installed above each designated apartment or tenant space entry door. The indicator light shall operate upon activation of a detector within the tenant
space.
912.2.1.1 Add the following section:
912.2.1.1 Approved Location. A fire department connection serving sprinkler systems and/or standpipe systems shall be located within seventy five
(75') feet of a fire hydrant.
913.2.3 Add the following section:
913.2.3 Back-Up Power. All required fire pumps shall be equipped with back-up generators to protect against interruption of service in the event of
an electrical power outage.
914.3.1 Automatic Sprinkler System. Delete exceptions.
915.2.1 Dwelling Units. Delete text and replace with:
Carbon monoxide detection shall be installed in dwelling units outside of each separate sleeping area within 15' of the bedrooms. Where a fuelburning
appliance is located within a bedroom or its attached bathroom, carbon monoxide detection shall be installed within the bedroom.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 119/460
Chapter 10 - Means Of Egress. Delete chapter in its entirety and replace with:
1001.1 General. All means of egress systems for new buildings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with requirements of the current village
of Lisle building code. All means of egress in existing buildings shall comply and be maintained in accordance with requirements of the current life safety
code (NFPA 101) as adopted and amended by the village of Lisle.
1103.7.6 Group R-2. Delete text and replace with:
Fire alarm systems shall be installed in existing group R-2 occupancies in accordance with section 907.2.24 of this code as amended.
3103.2 Approval Required. Delete section in its entirety, including exceptions, and replace with:
3103.2 Approval Required. No tent or membrane structures shall be erected, operated or maintained for any purpose prior to first obtaining a permit
in accordance with section 4-9-1 of the village of Lisle code.
5804.2 Outdoor Storage. Delete text and replace with:
Outdoor storage of flammable gases in amounts exceeding the maximum allowable quantity per control area indicated in table 5003.1.1(3) is not
permitted.
5904.2 Outdoor Storage. Delete text and replace with:
Outdoor storage of flammable gases in amounts exceeding the maximum allowable quantity per control area indicated in table 5003.1.1(1) is not
permitted.
6003.2 Outdoor Storage And Use. Delete section, including subsections, in its entirety and replace with:
6003.2 Outdoor Storage And Use. Outdoor storage and use of highly toxic and toxic materials is not permitted.
6004.3 Outdoor Storage And Use. Delete section, including subsections, in its entirety and replace with:
6004.3 Outdoor Storage And Use. The outdoor storage and use of highly toxic and toxic compressed gases is not permitted.
6404.2 Outdoor Storage. Delete section, including subsections, in its entirety and replace with:
6404.2 Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage of pyrophoric materials is not permitted.
6604.2 Outdoor Storage. Delete section, including subsections, in its entirety and replace with:
6604.2 Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage of unstable (reactive) materials is not permitted.
6704.2 Outdoor Storage. Delete section, including subsections, in its entirety and replace with:
6704.2 Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage of water reactive solids and liquids is not permitted.
(Ord. 2016-4628, 1-4-2016)
4-5-6: DANGEROUS CONDITIONS:
In case there shall be, in the opinion of the fire official, a danger to life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage,
handling or use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, or from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use and/or occupancy of buildings
or premises, the fire official shall secure such necessary labor and machinery, equipment and devices and cause the necessary work to be done to render
occupants and property temporarily safe, whether or not the procedures prescribed in this section are implemented.
(A) Where practical and time constraints permit, the owner, occupant or other person in control of the area where the dangerous condition exists shall be
notified of the dangerous condition, and shall have the option of making the condition safe.
(B) If necessary to preserve the health, welfare and safety of the general public, the fire official shall take all necessary and proper action to remove or
mitigate the dangerous condition or emergency, including engaging contractors at a fee. The owner, occupants, and other persons in control of the area
where the dangerous condition exists shall be jointly and severally liable for any costs incurred by the village and Lisle/Woodridge fire district in
connection with their removal or mitigation of the dangerous condition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 120/460
(C) The fire official of the village shall cause proper action to be taken against the owner of the premises, and the occupants if different from the owners,
for the recovery of costs incurred by the village and the Lisle/Woodridge fire protection district in the performance of their duties under this section.
(Ord. 98-2978, 4-20-1998)
4-5-7: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
(A) Any person who violates any provision of this fire prevention ordinance or who fails to comply with any of the requirements hereof shall be subject to a
fine as established by the annual fee ordinance in the case of a first violation, and by a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance for each and
every subsequent violation. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation.
(B) The application of the above penalty shall not prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 98-2978, 4-20-1998)
Chapter 6
ELEVATOR SAFETY CODE
4-6-1: ADOPTION:
For the purpose of assuring that conveyances are correctly and safely installed and operated within the Village of Lisle, and in order to regulate the design,
installation, construction, operation, inspection, testing, maintenance, alteration, and repair of conveyances, including, but not limited to, elevators,
dumbwaiters, escalators, moving sidewalks, platform lifts, stairway chairlifts, and automated people movers, there is hereby adopted by the Village the
following codes, standards, and recommended practices:
(A) American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), Three Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5990:
1. Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1-2013/CSA B44-2013) and Performance Based Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators
(ASME A17.7-2007/CSA B44.7-07);
2. Guide for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators, and Moving Walks (ASME 17.2-2010);
3. Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.3-2005), but only as required under section 35(h) and (i) of the State of Illinois
Elevator Safety Act and subsection (d) of section 1000.60 of the Illinois General Assembly's Administrative Code;
4. Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts (ASME A18.1-2011);
5. Standard for the Qualification of Elevator Inspectors (ASME QE1-2013).
(B) American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), 1801 Alexander Bell Drive, Reston, VA 20191-4400: Automated People Mover Standards (ANSI/ASCE/T
& D1 21-13).
All the above codes, standards and recommended practices are incorporated as of the date specified and include no later editions or amendments, and
are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed
in section 4-6-3 of this chapter, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the Village.
One copy of all referenced documents has been and is now filed in the Office of the Village Clerk. (Ord. 2018-4778, 8-6-2018)
4-6-2: INSPECTIONS; FEES:
(A) No passenger or freight elevator shall be operated until it is tested, inspected and approved as to its safety. An application fee, to compensate the
Village for initial inspection services, in an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance per elevator, shall be due and payable prior to the
issuance of building permits.
(B) For each conveyance, there shall be an annual inspection fee in the amount as established by the annual fee ordinance payable June 1 of each year.
(C) Inspection and testing shall be conducted by an elevator inspector authorized by the Community Development Director. After making the inspection,
the inspector shall affix a certificate of inspection to the elevator. If the inspector finds that the elevator is unsafe, he shall order that the elevator not be
used until the deficiencies are corrected. The inspector shall immediately report a finding of lack of safety to the Community Development Director who
shall immediately give notice of the unsafe elevator to the owner. (Ord. 2018-4778, 8-6-2018)
4-6-3: AMENDMENTS:
The Elevator Safety Code of the Village, as hereinbefore adopted, is amended in the following respects:
(A) All elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, moving sidewalks, platform lifts, stairway chairlifts, and automated people movers regulated by this code,
except those conveyances in single-family dwellings, shall be tested and inspected as to its safety at least twice within a one year period; such
inspections to be at least five (5) months apart.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 121/460
(B) All conveyances shall have the inspector's certification clearly posted within the elevator car or lift, or shall be displayed near the main entrance to the
conveyance, within clear view of users of the conveyance.
(C) All upgrades required by application of the safety code for existing elevators and escalators must be completed no later than January 1, 2009, except
that upgrades to the hydraulic cylinder system and the firefighter control system must be completed by January 1, 2011. (Ord. 2018-4778, 8-6-2018)
4-6-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It shall be a violation of this chapter to:
(A) Fail to pay the application or inspection fee;
(B) Fail to affix the inspector's certification within the elevator;
(C) Operate or allow to be operated an elevator prior to initial inspection and approval;
(D) Operate or allow to be operated an elevator found unsafe by the elevator inspector;
(E) Operate or allow to be operated an elevator not in compliance with the codes, standards, and recommended practices set forth in this chapter; or
(F) Resist or oppose the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter.
Any person violating or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, including the Safety Codes adopted by reference and
made a part hereof, shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense; and any builder or contractor who shall construct any building in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and any architect
who shall design, draw plans for or have supervision of such building, or who shall permit it to be constructed, and any owner of such property where the
conveyance exists and who allows its operation and use shall be liable for the penalties provided and imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 2018-4778, 8-6-2018)
Chapter 7
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
4-7-1: ADOPTION:
There is hereby adopted by the Village, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, movement, renovation,
replacement, repair and maintenance of aquatic recreation facilities, pools and spas, the 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, except such
portions as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended by section 4-7-2 of this chapter, of which not less than three (3) copies have been and now are
filed in the Office of the Village Clerk and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which
this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the Village. (Ord. 2019-4814, 3-18-2019)
4-7-2: AMENDMENTS:
The Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the Village, as hereinabove adopted, is amended in the following respects:
(A) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, is amended to:
1. Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Lisle
2. Delete section 102.7 and replace with:
102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 11 and such
codes and standards shall be considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences
occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall be the minimum requirements. Whenever a
reference is made to the International Plumbing Code, such reference shall be deemed to refer to the Illinois Plumbing Code as amended and
adopted by the Village of Lisle.
3. Delete section 105.5.3 and replace with:
105.5.3 Expiration.
If the work described in any building permit has not begun within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance thereof, or if the permitted work is
suspended or abandoned for more than ninety (90) days, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the building official and written notice thereof
shall be given to the persons affected.
If the work described in any building permit has not been completed within two (2) years of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and
be canceled by the code official and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described
in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a building permit extension has been obtained along with payment of the required extension
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 122/460
permit fee.
At the discretion of the code official, such extension permit may be based on the original application or may require submission of a new application.
The extension permit shall include limitations on time allowed for substantial completion of the work, and provisions for a reasonable cash security
deposit to ensure completion within the time limit set.
4. Section 105.6.2. Insert: Village of Lisle Annual Fee Ordinance
5. Delete section 105.6.3 and replace with:
105.6.3 Fee refunds. Refunding of fees shall be in accordance with the Village of Lisle Annual Fee Ordinance.
6. Delete section 107.4 and replace with:
107.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter, or repair a pool or spa in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as established by the Village of Lisle Annual
Fee Ordinance, at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
7. Delete section 107.5 and replace with:
107.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official, work on any system that is being performed contrary to the provisions of this code or in a
dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the
owner's authorized agent, or to the person performing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume.
Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping work. Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine as established by the Village of Lisle Annual Fee Ordinance.
8. Delete section 108.2
9. Delete section 108.2.1
10. Delete section 108.2.2
11. Delete section 108.2.3
12. Delete section 108.2.4
13. Delete section 108.2.5
14. Delete section 108.2.6
15. Delete section 108.3
16. Delete section 108.4
17. Delete section 108.4.1
18. Delete section 108.5
19. Delete section 108.6
20. Delete section 108.6.1
(B) Chapter 2, Definitions, is amended to:
1. Add or amend the following definitions:
Code Official: the Development Services Director or individual designated by the Development Services Director.
(C) Chapter 3, General Compliance, is amended to:
1. Delete exception #2 of section 305.1
(D) Chapter 11, Referenced Standards, is amended to:
1. Delete International Plumbing Code and replace with:
Illinois Plumbing Code as amended and adopted by the Village of Lisle.
(Ord. 2019-4814, 3-18-2019)
Chapter 8
NUMBERING BUILDINGS
4-8-1: NUMBERING SYSTEM ADOPTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 123/460
All buildings in the village shall be numbered as hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 37, 3-18-1958; amd. Ord. 86-1482, 10-6-1986)
Buildings fronting on the west side of streets running north and south and on the north side of streets running east and west shall bear even numbers; and
buildings fronting on the east side of streets running north and south, and on the south side of streets running east and west shall bear odd numbers. (Ord.
37, 3-18-1958)
4-8-2: MAPS ON FILE:
Maps and plats showing the number assigned to each building, lot and parcel of property in the village are on file in the village hall, and the numbers on
such maps and plats are hereby adopted and assigned as the official numbers to designate the street addresses of the respective buildings, lots and
parcels shown thereon. (Ord. 37, 3-18-1958)
4-8-3: NUMBERS ASSIGNED:
The building and zoning commissioner, upon request, shall furnish the owner of all existing buildings with the number assigned to such building, as shown
upon said maps and plats, and upon application for a building permit, the building commissioner shall assign a number for the building to be erected,
pursuant to such permit. (Ord. 86-1482, 10-6-1986)
4-8-4: NUMBERS REQUIRED:
Owners and occupants of all buildings in the village are hereby required to procure from the village the numbers assigned to their respective buildings, and
to paint and otherwise affix to the front door adjacent to the street or to some other conspicuous place on the building and visible from the public right of
way, said numbers in plain and legible figures, not less than three inches (3") in height, and to maintain said numbers ingood condition. Additionally,
owners of all nonresidential buildings must affix said numbers to any rear or service doors. (Ord. 86-1482, 10-6-1986)
4-8-5: AMORTIZATION SCHEDULE:
All owners and occupants of all buildings existing in the village on May 1, 1987, shall conform said building to the provisions set forth herein by no later
than September 1, 1987. (Ord. 86-1482, 10-6-1986)
4-8-6: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH CHAPTER:
Any owner or occupant failing or refusing to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be fined as established
by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day that such violation continues. (Ord. 96-2776,
5-20-1996)
Chapter 9
TENTS
4-9-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
(A) Except as is set forth in sections 5-3-4, 5-4-4, 5-5-4 and 5-6-4 of this code, no person or organization shall proceed to construct or erect a tent or make
alterations to an existing tent without first having obtained a permit therefor, said permit issued and signed by the building official upon approval of the
application.
Exceptions:
1. Tents less than two hundred (200) square feet in area and with a capacity or so used to accommodate ten (10) or less persons.
2. Fabric canopies open on all sides and less than seven hundred (700) square feet in area.
3. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.
4. Funeral tents and curtains or extensions attached thereto, when used for funeral services.
Should any work for which a permit is required be commenced or be done before such permit is issued and obtained, the required permit may be
issued for such and subsequent work, however, the amount of the required fee as provided herein for all work shall be double that otherwise so
provided. The issuance of such permit does not act to bar any other penalty, liability or action otherwise provided for in this chapter or village code
but shall be in addition thereto.
Application for a permit shall be in writing in a form supplied by the building official. Such applications shall include a site plan indicating the
proposed tent location including dimensions from the tent to surrounding buildings and property lines, a basic floor plan depicting the proposed use
and configuration of the interior of the tent, and a certificate of flame resistance for the tent. Approval of the permit application and subsequent
issuance of thetent permit shall serve to authorize inspection of the tent by village officials. The building official may require such additional
information as he deems necessary to substantiate the safety of the proposed use of any material or assembly.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 124/460
(B) Fees for the permits are as follows: Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the annual fee ordinance as amended from time to time by the village
of Lisle. (Ord. 2007-4166, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-17-2008)
4-9-2: LOCATION:
Tents shall be located so as to provide safe means of egress around the tent and so as to minimize potential spread of fire from one structure to another.
Tents may be constructed and used as temporary shelter only subject to conformance with the following requirements:
(A) No tent shall be constructed closer than ten feet (10') to a property line or building.
(B) All adjacent tents shall be spaced a minimum of ten feet (10') between stake lines but not less than the required width for egress between tents.
Exception: Tents, each not exceeding one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in area and located in fairgrounds or similar open spaces, shall
not be required to be separated from each other, provided that safety precautions meet the approval of the authority having jurisdiction. (Ord. 2007-
4166, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-17-2008)
4-9-3: CONSTRUCTION:
Specific requirements for tents other than air supported tents:
(A) All supporting members shall be of sufficient size and strength to support the structure.
(B) The poles and their supporting guys, stakes, fastenings, etc., shall be of sufficient strength and attached so as to resist a minimum wind pressure of
twenty (20) pounds per square foot of projected areas of the tent.
(C) Tents shall be adequately guyed, supported, and braced to withstand a minimum pressure of suction of ten (10) pounds per square foot.
(D) Pull down ropes on center poles and side poles on push-pull tents shall be provided. (Ord. 2007-4166, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-17-2008)
4-9-4: CAPACITY AND EGRESS SAFETY STANDARDS:
(A) General:
1. The permitted capacity within any tent shall not exceed one person per ten (10) square feet (net) of floor area.
2. The occupant load in bench seating areas shall be determined at one person per eighteen inches (18") of seating.
(B) Egress; General Requirements:
1. General: Each tent shall provide at least one means of exit for every two hundred (200) people, but in no event shall any tent provide less than two
(2) exits. Further, said exits shall be located in a position remote one from the other. Battery backup illuminated exit signs shall be provided to identify
each required exit when serving an occupant load of one hundred (100) or more persons. Additional directional signs may be required so as to
indicate the proper direction of egress.
2. Exits: No turnstiles, revolving doors, or other devices to restrict the movement of persons shall be installed at any required exit in such a manner as
to interfere with the exit facilities. Doorways or openings serving as required exits or passageways shall be not less than thirty four inches (34") in
clear width, nor less in width than the required width of the exit access served. Where several ways serve as an exit access, each shall have a width
suitable for the traffic but not less than thirty four inches (34") in clear width.
3. Arrangement Of Means Of Egress: Aisles at seating areas shall be provided and maintained in conformance with current requirements of the
building code. Aisles from seating arrangements that do not lead directly to an exit discharge shall discharge into an unobstructed space leading
directly to one or more exit discharges, and shall be so arranged as to be conveniently accessible to every occupant; and such space shall have a
clear width not less than the required width of the exit to which it leads, but in no case less than five feet (5'). A maximum one hundred foot (100')
travel distance to an approved exit is allowed.
4. Illumination Of Means Of Egress: Tents used as places of assembly shall be kept adequately illuminated at all times when such structures are
occupied by the public. Artificial light shall be provided whenever natural light is less than one foot-candle measured at the means of egress walking
surface.
(C) Seating:
1. All seating shall be configured in conformance with the current requirements of the village of Lisle building code.
(D) Guards And Rails:
1. Guards and railings shall be provided in conformance with the current requirements of the village of Lisle building code. (Ord.2007-4166, 12-17-
2007, eff. 1-17-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 125/460
4-9-5: FIRE SAFETY STANDARDS:
(A) General:
1. All applicable provisions of the village of Lisle building code, life safety code, fire code, and electrical code, as they pertain to fire and life safety, are
incorporated herein.
(B) Fire Hazard:
1. The ground enclosed by any structure used in connection with a place of assembly, and for a reasonable distance, but not less than ten feet (10')
outside of such structure or structures, shall be cleared of all flammable or combustible material or vegetation. The premises shall be kept free from
such flammable or combustible materials during the period for which the premises are used by the public.
2. No hay, straw, shavings, or similar combustible materials shall be permitted within any structure used for public assembly.
3. No excessive amount of combustible material, other than tables and chairs serving the occupants of a tent, are permitted inside or within ten feet
(10') of a tent used for assembly purposes.
4. Smoking and open flames are prohibited inside or within ten feet (10') of a tent.
(C) Fire Extinguishing Equipment:
1. Fire extinguishing equipment of approved types shall be furnished and maintained by the person operating, conducting, or promoting any place of
assembly, and in all tents housing food cooking or warming equipment, in such amount and in such locations as may be directed by the authority
having jurisdiction.
(a) Fire extinguishers shall be provided for every three thousand (3,000) square feet of enclosed surface, or fraction thereof.
(b) Fire extinguishing equipment shall be maintained in good working order in accordance with the standard for portable fire extinguishers, NFPA 10.
(c) Employees of places of assembly shall be properly trained to operate fire extinguishing equipment and shall be required to exhibit their skill when
requested by the authority having jurisdiction.
(D) Emergency Communications: One or more methods of fire emergency communication, as approved by the authority having jurisdiction, shall be
provided for tents having a capacity of one hundred (100) or more people.
(E) Electrical: The electrical system and equipment shall be isolated from the public by proper elevation or guarding, and all electrical fuses and switches
shall be installed in approved enclosures. Cables on the ground in areas traversed by the public shall be placed in trenches or protected by approved
covers. All electrical equipment shall be UL listed for the service conditions.
(F) Flame Resistance Of Tent Material:
1. All tent fabric shall meet the requirements of the small scale test contained in the standard methods of fire tests for flame resistant textiles and films,
NFPA 701.
2. The building official may require a certificate or other evidence of approval by a laboratory of recognized standing, or he may accept the report of
tests made by other inspection authorities as evidence that the tent fabric materials have the required flame resistance.
3. The building official may also require confirmatory field tests using specimens from the original material affixed at the time of manufacture to the
exterior of the tent. The test specimen shall consist of a full width of material which has been cut into test strips one and one-half inches by four
inches (11/2" x 4"). (Ord. 2007-4166, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-17-2008)
4-9-6: BLEACHERS, FOLDING AND TELESCOPIC SEATING, AND GRANDSTANDS:
(A) General:
1. All bleachers, folding and telescopic seating, and grandstands shall be constructed, installed, and maintained in conformance with the currently
adopted edition of ICC 300, standard on bleachers, folding and telescopic seating, and grandstands as referenced by the village of Lisle building
code. (Ord. 2007-4166, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-17-2008)
4-9-7: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
(A) The community development director, or his designee, may revoke a tent permit for violation of any of the regulations listed herein. Immediately upon
such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the building official to the holder of the permit by certified or registered mail, or in person. Upon
receipt of said notice of revocation, all use of said tent shall cease, and the holder of the permit shall immediately remove the tent from the premises
and restore the premises to its original condition. (Ord. 2007-4166, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-17-2008)
4-9-8: MEANS OF APPEAL OR VARIATION:
(A) Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official or request a variation from the terms of this code before the board of appeals.
An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 126/460
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used. The board of appeals shall grant variations
from the strict application of any of the requirements of this code in the case of exceptional conditions, whereby such strict application would result in
practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of reasonable use of the land or building involved. In granting any variation,
the board of appeals shall prescribe any conditions that it deems to be necessary or desirable. The board shall affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of
the code official by a majority vote. The board of appeals shall be the village of Lisle president and board of trustees and the chairman of the board of
appeals shall be the president, also known as the mayor, of the village of Lisle. (Ord. 2007-4166, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-17-2008)
4-9-9: PENALTIES:
Any party violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed for each day in which the violation occurs or continues to occur. (Ord. 2007-4166, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-17-2008)
Chapter 10
MECHANICAL CODE
4-10-1: ADOPTION:
There is hereby adopted by the village, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems that certain mechanical code
known as the international mechanical code recommended by the International Code Council, particularly the 2015 edition thereof, and the whole thereof,
save and except such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended, of which not less than three (3) copies have been and now are filed in the
office of the village clerk and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter
shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the village. (Ord. 2016-4655, 5-16-2016)
4-10-2: AMENDMENTS:
The mechanical code of the village, as hereinbefore adopted, is amended in the following respects:
101.1 Title. Amend section to read:
These regulations shall be known as the mechanical code of the village of Lisle, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
101.5 Add new section to read:
101.5 Referenced Codes. Delete all reference within this code to the international plumbing code and replace with the village of Lisle plumbing code.
103.1 General. Amend section to read:
For purposes of this code the code official is the building official or his designee.
103.2 Appointment. Delete section in its entirety.
103.3 Deputies. Delete section in its entirety.
106.4.3 Expiration. Amend section to read:
If the work described in any mechanical permit has not begun within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance thereof, or the work has stopped for
any ninety (90) day period, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the code official and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons
affected. If the work described in any mechanical permit has not been substantially completed within two (2) years of the date of issuance thereof,
said permit shall expire and be canceled by the code official and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice
that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a special building permit has been obtained. At the discretion
of the code official, such special permit may be based on the original application or he may require submission of a new application. This special
permit may include limitations on time allowed for substantial completion of the work, and provisions for reasonable performance bond to insure
completion within the time limits set.
106.5 Fees. Delete section in its entirety and replace with:
106.5 Fees. A fee for each plan examination; mechanical permit and inspection shall be paid in accordance with the schedule included in section 4-
1-3 of the village code. No plan review fees will be refunded. For all mechanical projects wherein no work has occurred within the prescribed
deadline, the mechanical permit shall be terminated and fifty percent (50%) of the required permit fees shall be refunded. For all mechanical projects
wherein work has begun and has stopped for any reason, no part of the required mechanical permit fee will be refunded upon expiration of the
mechanical permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 127/460
108.4 Violation Penalties. Amend section to read:
Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair
mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance, or by imprisonment not
exceeding thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
108.5 Stop Work Orders. Amend section to read:
Upon notice from the code official that mechanical work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner,
such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or the owner's agent, or to the
person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official
shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine as established
by the annual fee ordinance. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 109 Means Of Appeal. Delete section in its entirety and replace with:
109.1 Means Of Appeal Or Variation. Any person shall have the right to appeal the decision of the code official or request a variation from the terms
of this code before the board of appeals. An application for appeals shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be
used. The board of appeals shall grant variations from the strict application of any of the requirements of this code in the case of exceptional
conditions, whereby such strict application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of reasonable use
of a mechanical system or building. In granting any variation, the board of appeals shall prescribe any conditions that it deems to be necessary or
desirable. The board shall affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the code official by a majority vote. The board of appeals shall be the village of
Lisle president and board of trustees and the chairman of the board of appeals shall be the president, also known as the mayor, of the village of
Lisle.
201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes. Amend section to read:
In the event that any definition listed in this code conflicts with any definition in any other village of Lisle code or ordinance, such definitions shall
have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes or ordinances.
301.16 Flood Hazard. Amend section to read:
All mechanical equipment located in a special flood hazard area shall be installed in conformance with requirements of the village of Lisle stormwater
and floodplain regulations.
307.2.2.1 Add new section to read:
307.2.2.1 Materials In Fire Resistive Construction. All condensate disposal system piping installed in a building of non-combustible construction or
which penetrates a fire rated wall, floor, or ceiling shall be metallic.
602.4 Flood Hazard. Amend section to read:
All duct and plenum spaces located in a special flood hazard area shall be installed in conformance with requirements of the village of Lisle
stormwater and floodplain regulations.
603.13 Flood Hazard Areas. Delete section in its entirety.
607.5 Where Required. Amend section to read:
Fire dampers, smoke dampers, combination dampers and ceiling radiation dampers shall be provided at the locations prescribed in this section and
in the village of Lisle building code and fire prevention code. Where an assembly is required to have both fire dampers and smoke dampers,
combination dampers or a fire damper and a smoke damper shall be required.
(Ord. 2016-4655, 5-16-2016)
Chapter 11
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
4-11-1: ADOPTION:
There is hereby adopted by the Village, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the maintenance of existing buildings, structures and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 128/460
properties, including enforcement programs and penalties, that certain Property Maintenance Code known as the 2015 International Property Maintenance
Code, and the whole thereof, including appendix A, save and except such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended by section 4-11-2 of this
chapter, of which not less than three (3) copies have been and now are filed in the Office of the Village Clerk and the same are hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within
the Village. (Ord. 2019-4818, 4-15-2019)
4-11-2: AMENDMENTS:
The Property Maintenance Code of the Village, as hereinabove adopted, is amended in the following respects:
(A) Chapter 1, Administration, is amended to:
1. Delete section 101.1 and replace with:
101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the property maintenance code of the village of Lisle hereinafter referred to as the property
maintenance code or "this code".
2. Delete section 102.3 and replace with:
102.3 Application Of Other Codes: Any repairs, additions, or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with
the procedures and provisions of the codes and ordinances of the Village of Lisle.
3. Delete section 103.5 and replace with:
103.5 Fees: The fees for activities and services performed by the department carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated in
the annual fee ordinance.
4. Delete section 106.4 and replace with:
106.4 Violation penalties: Any person who shall violate any provisions of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements
thereof, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance, at the discretion of the court. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
5. Delete Section 111.2
6. Delete Section 111.2.1
7. Delete Section 111.2.2
8. Delete Section 111.2.3
9. Delete Section 111.2.4
10. Delete Section 111.2.5
11. Delete Section 111.3
12. Delete Section 111.4
13. Delete Section 111.4.1
14. Delete Section 111.5
15. Delete Section 112.4 and replace with:
112.4 Failure to comply: Any person who shall continue any work after having been served a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance.
(B) Chapter 2, Definitions, is amended to:
1. Add or amend the following definitions:
Dwellings: (See section PM-201.5.)
Rooming House: A building arranged or used for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one-family dwelling or a
two-family dwelling.
Multiple Family Dwelling: A building containing more than two dwelling units and not classified as a one or two family dwelling.
Rooming Unit: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for sleeping and/or living, but not for cooking
purposes.
Dormitory: A space in a building where group sleeping accommodations are provided in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms, for
persons not members of the same family group.
Hotel: Any building containing six or more guest rooms, intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or
which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.
One Family Dwelling: A building containing one dwelling unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 129/460
Board of appeals: The Mayor and Village Board of Trustees
Code Official: the Development Services Director or individual designated by the Development Services Director.
(C) Chapter 3, General Requirements, is amended to:
1. Delete section 302.4 and replace with:
302.4 Weeds: All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weed or plant growth as required by chapter 4, title 8 of the village of
Lisle code.
2. Delete section PM-304.14 and replace with:
Section 304.14. Insect screens Insert: May 1st to October 31st.
(D) Chapter 5, Plumbing Facilities And Fixture Requirements, is amended to:
1. Delete Section 502 Required Facilities
2. Delete Section 503 Toilet Rooms
(E) Chapter 6, Mechanical And Electrical Requirements, is amended to:
1. Section 602.3. Heat supply Insert: October 1st to May 1st
2. Section 602.4. Occupiable work spaces Insert: October 1st to May 1st
(F) Appendix A, Boarding Standard, is hereby adopted and amended to:
1. Add exception to section A101:
Section A101 shall not apply when board-up is ordered by the Village of Lisle or Lisle Woodridge Fire Protection District as an emergency measure.
2. Add exception to section A102:
Section A102 shall not apply when board-up is ordered by the Village of Lisle or Lisle Woodridge Fire Protection District as an emergency measure.
3. Add exception to section A103:
Section A103 shall not apply when board-up is ordered by the Village of Lisle or Lisle Woodridge Fire Protection District as an emergency measure.
(Ord. 2019-4818, 4-15-2019)
4-11-3: MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY OCCUPANCY PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS:
(A) Purpose: The Village Board of Trustees hereby establishes the following occupancy permit and inspection program of multiple-family residential rental
properties so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the people of the Village, and
To protect the public health and safety by ensuring rental units comply with minimum housing standards of Village ordinances; and, to correct and
prevent housing conditions that adversely affect or are likely to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare and health, including the physical,
mental and social well being of persons occupying the dwellings;
To protect the character and stability of residential areas; to facilitate the enforcement of minimum standards for the maintenance of existing residential
buildings; and, to preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the Village;
To promote proper occupancy of dwellings by requiring compliance with minimum space standards per occupant for each dwelling unit.
(B) Definitions:
CONDOMINIUMS: Property subject to the Condominium Property Act.
DWELLING UNIT OR UNIT: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one single "family" as defined by section 5-1-7 of this
Code, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. Storage areas or lockers in, connected, or adjacent to an
individual unit are included as part of a "dwelling unit" or "unit" for the purposes of this section.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (Hereinafter MRP): A building or buildings on one parcel of property containing more than
three (3) rental dwelling units.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity.
TOWNHOUSE: Type of dwelling unit normally having two (2), but sometimes three (3), stories; usually connected to a similar structure by a common
wall, and commonly sharing and owning in common the surrounding grounds, sometimes also known as a row house, i.e., horizontally attached and
vertically separated.
(C) Multiple-Family Residential Rental Property Dwelling Unit Occupancy Permits Required:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 130/460
1. It is unlawful for any person to occupy within the Village a vacant MRP dwelling unit without first obtaining an occupancy permit as provided in this
section.
2. It is unlawful for a person to occupy an MRP dwelling unit, or for any owner or property agent to allow anyone to occupy an MRP dwelling unit which
is without an occupancy permit as provided in this section.
3. This section shall not apply to the following structures:
(a) Single-family residences.
(b) Multiple-family residential rental property with four (4) or less rental dwelling units if the property is owner occupied.
(c) Owner occupied townhouses and condominiums.
(d) Hotels, motels, and other structures which rent rooms to occupants which are primarily transient in nature, and making use of the facilities for a
period of less than thirty (30) days.
(e) Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses licensed and inspected by the State or the Federal government, including, but not limited to, nursing
homes, retirement centers and rest homes.
(D) Owner Registration: No occupancy permit required by this section shall be issued unless a true and correct written application is on file with the
Community Development Director. A complete application shall be filed prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit. Application forms may be
obtained from the Community Development Director and shall contain such information as the Community Development Director may, from time to
time, require, including, but not limited to:
1. Full legal name, address, and telephone numbers of each and any owner of the MRP. When the owner is a land trust, the application shall include
the full legal name, address, and telephone numbers of each person(s) holding a beneficial interest and/or power of direction therein.
2. Full legal name, address, and telephone numbers of any person appointed as managing agent of the MRP. If the managing agent is other than a
natural person, the above information shall also be provided for that employee of the managing agent specifically assigned to the MRP.
3. The address of the MRP.
4. The number of dwelling units within the MRP.
5. In the case of an owner of an MRP who is not a resident of the Village, the full legal name, address, work and home telephone numbers of his or her
agent with authority for receipt of service or notice of violation of the provisions of this section.
6. The following statement granting consent to inspections:
By signing this registration application owner consents to permit the Village of Lisle through its inspectors to enter upon the MRP for purposes of
making the inspections required and/or permitted under Title 4, Chapter 11 of the Village of Lisle Code, including the right to inspect unoccupied
individual dwelling units.
(E) Permit Fees: Upon issuance of each occupancy permit, the Village shall charge the owner of the MRP a fee as established by the annual fee
ordinance per permit. The fee shall be paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of invoice. The fee shall be waived if the actual inspection was not
performed by the Village. If the owner fails to pay as required, the Village shall not issue further permits until full payment is made.
(F) Dwelling Unit Inspections Required:
1. Compliance Required: Every MRP shall be owned, operated and maintained in full compliance with all applicable ordinances of the Village.
2. Inspections: Upon vacancy of each dwelling unit, the MRP owner shall obtain an occupancy permit prior to reoccupancy in accordance with this
section.
3. Dwelling Unit Standards: Dwelling units of MRPs will be inspected for compliance with the Village ordinance. Inspections will include, but are not
limited to, matters pertaining to the standards listed below:
(a) Occupancy limited to single-family as defined by section 5-1-7 of this Code.
(b) Properly working smoke detectors, heat detectors and sprinklers where applicable.
(c) No doors or windows missing or broken and all hardware proper and operable and no screens missing, broken or inoperable.
(d) Ceilings, walls and floors with no evidence of structural or material failure.
(e) All ceiling, wall and floor finishes free of unsafe materials or defects.
(f) All electrical fixtures and outlets operate properly, cover plates properly installed, no bad wiring or improper use of extension cords, electrical
panel clear, accessible and clearly labeled.
(g) All plumbing fixtures and piping operate properly free of leaks, obstructions and defects; and valves properly operable, hot water one hundred ten
degrees Fahrenheit (110F) available.
(h) All appliances, including, but not limited to, the furnace, hot water heater, electrical boxes, washer, dryer, oven, range, dishwasher and garbage
disposal properly operable and connected and have proper clearances pursuant to requirements of utility companies and code.
(i) No accumulation of garbage, refuse or combustible materials.
(j) No insect or rodent infestation.
(k) No modification of the MRP or any unit in violation of Village ordinances or building permits or codes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 131/460
(G) Dwelling Unit Inspection Procedure:
1. Inspection Procedure: On every first business day of the month, each owner of an MRP shall provide to the Village a report which lists all units
currently vacant or expected to become vacant within the applicable month. The list shall include expected vacancy dates.
Within two (2) business days after receipt of the report, the Village shall designate which units it anticipates inspecting ("inspection units") and which
units will be granted permits upon receipt of an inspection form ("form units").
Upon notice to the managing agent, the Village shall issue occupancy permits for dwelling units it has designated as form units immediately upon
receipt of an inspection form properly signed.
The Village shall inspect each inspection unit, and shall inspect each form unit except those form units for which the owner has provided an
inspection form. Inspections shall be made within two (2) business days after receipt of the owner's request for an inspection but not later than the
last business day of each month.
In the event that an inspection unit remains or becomes occupied prior to the Village inspection, the Village shall designate an alternate unoccupied
unit, if available, to be inspected by the Village.
If there are not enough alternate unoccupied units to replace each inspection unit which has remained or has become occupied prior to Village
inspection, the owner shall, for that month, make all unoccupied units available for inspection.
If there are no units made available for inspection within any ninety (90) day period, the Village shall not issue any occupancy permits for the MRP
until it inspects the next available vacant unit.
2. Inspection Form:
(a) The owner may, at its discretion, submit to the Village an inspection form for units designated by the Village. The inspection form shall be in the
following form:
VILLAGE OF LISLE
MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY
INSPECTION FORM/OCCUPANCY PERMIT
TENANTS RIGHTS: Tenants may register complaints and request
inspections for any matter covered by Village of Lisle code. Ownership
must comply with code. If problems or questions, call Development
Services Department
Owner
Village of Lisle, Development Services Department
925 Burlington Avenue, Lisle, IL 60532
Phone (630) 271-4150 Fax (630) 271-4155
Address
Dwelling Unit Telephone Fax
Address/Unit No. Manager
Date Vacant Address
Available for Inspection Telephone Fax
No.
Pass
Fail
Item No.
Pass
Fail
Item
1 The incoming tenant has been advised that the
Village limits occupancy to a single family as defined
by Village Code 5-1-7.
7 All plumbing fixtures and piping operate properly and
are free of leaks, obstructions and defects. All valves
are properly operable and hot water (110F) is
available.
2 Smoke detectors, heat detectors and sprinklers
(where applicable) are working properly.
8 All appliances, including, but not limited to, the furnace,
water heater, electrical boxes, washer, dryer, oven
range, dishwasher and garbage disposal are properly
operable and connected and have proper clearances
pursuant to requirements of utility companies and
code.
3 Doors or windows are not missing or broken, and all
hardware is operable, and no screens are missing,
broken or inoperable.
9 There is no accumulation of garbage, refuse or
combustible materials.
4 Ceilings, walls and floors do not have evidence of
structural or material failure.
10
There is no insect or rodent infestation.
5 All ceiling, wall and floor finishes are free of unsafe
materials or defects.
11
There has been no modification of the MRP or any Unit
in violation of the Village ordinances, codes or permits.
6 All electrical fixtures and outlets operate properly,
cover plates are properly installed. There is no
evidence of bad wiring or improper use of extension
cords. The electrical panel is clear, accessible and
clearly labeled.
12
Other:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 132/460
Comments/Corrections Required (Unless These Violations Are Corrected Within 60 Days The Owner Will Be Cited)
Affirmation: I hereby affirm and certify that inspection has been completed and that the above statements are true and I understand that any
intentionally false statement made on this Inspection Form is an offense punishable by a fine of up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
false statement. By signing this registration application owner consents to permit the Village of Lisle and its inspectors to enter upon any and all
applicable portions of the MRP for purposes of making the inspections required and/or permitted under Title 4, Chapter 11 of the Village of Lisle
Code, including the right to inspect unoccupied individual dwelling units.
Owner/Manager: Incoming Tenant:
Date: Date:
Occupancy Permit: This certifies that the dwelling unit covered under this permit meets and complies with all applicable Lisle codes at the time of
inspection.
Inspector: Date Inspected: Inspection Waived:
Fee: Fee Waived:
3. Facsimile Notices: Notice of vacancies and correspondence between the Village and the owners or their designees shall be in writing. If sent via
facsimile the notice shall be deemed received if the sender has documented confirmation that the fax transmission was properly transmitted.
4. Permit Issuance Or Remedial Action: Upon inspection of a dwelling unit the Village shall immediately issue an occupancy permit if the inspection
discloses no violations of the codes or ordinances of the Village.
(H) Violations:
1. Whenever, upon Village inspection of a dwelling unit, it is determined that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of the provisions of this
section or any other applicable ordinance of the Village including, but not limited to, the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, as
incorporated into Village ordinances, the Village shall serve the owner with a notice of violation. Said notice shall include the following:
(a) Description of the property sufficient for identification;
(b) A statement listing the violations of applicable ordinances;
(c) A statement of the date upon which the reinspection will occur; and
(d) An explanation that if upon completion of the reinspection the requirements of applicable Village ordinances have not been met, the dwelling unit
shall not be occupied or reoccupied.
Such notice shall state that unless the violations are corrected within sixty (60) days, the owner shall be cited. Notice pursuant to this section may
be sent by facsimile, U.S. certified mail or hand delivered to the party designated in the application to receive notices and process.
2. At the end of the time allowed for correction of any violation cited or within two (2) business days after written notice from the owner that the violation
has been corrected, the dwelling unit shall be reinspected by the Village. If the dwelling unit meets the requirements of the applicable ordinances, an
occupancy permit shall be issued. If it is determined that the conditions have not been corrected, or they are not in the process of being corrected to
the satisfaction of the Community Development Director, or his designee, the Village may issue an ordinance citation. If the Village does not
reinspect the unit within the applicable time period and if a proper inspection form is supplied by the owner, an occupancy permit shall be issued.
3. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a dwelling unit is found to be unfit for human occupancy or if there are major life/safety violations, the affected
dwelling unit(s) must remain vacant until the conditions causing the violations are corrected and the reinspection in accordance with reasonable
emergency deadlines set by the Community Development Director, or his designee, has been successfully completed.
4. If any owner, property agent, occupant or other person in control of an MRP or a dwelling unit contained therein fails or refuses to consent to free
access and entry to the property or dwelling unit under his control for any inspection pursuant to this section, the Village may apply to the Circuit
Court for a search warrant or other appropriate court order authorizing such inspections.
5. The following shall constitute violations of this section:
(a) Failure of the owner or owners of an MRP to report vacancies as required by this section.
(b) Failure of the occupants of an MRP to vacate such property within sixty (60) days after receiving notice from the Village that such occupancy is
not properly permitted pursuant to this section.
(c) Failure of the owner of the MRP to vacate all tenants from a dwelling unit lacking an occupancy permit if required by this section within sixty (60)
days after notification of the Village to do so.
(d) Failure of the owners of the MRP and all dwelling units to maintain the structure and premises in compliance with applicable codes and
ordinances.
(e) Knowingly submitting to the Village a false statement on a vacancy report or inspection form.
(I) Owner Liability For Acts And Omissions: Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any provision of this section by any
officer, director, manager, trustee, employer, agent or managing agent of any owner shall be deemed to be the act of such owner and such owner shall
be punishable in the same manner if such act or omission had been done or omitted by owner personally.
(J) Auditing: If there is a reasonable suspicion of a violation of this section, the owner and manager of an MRP, upon reasonable notice from the Village,
shall allow the Village to audit its vacancy and occupancy records relevant to compliance with this section. No permits shall be issued during any period
in which an owner or manager refuses such an audit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 133/460
(K) Penalties: Any person who shall violate any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as established by the annual
fee ordinance, at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 2019-4818, 4-15-2019)
Chapter 12
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
4-12-1: ADOPTION:
There is hereby adopted by the village of Lisle for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, equipment, use and
occupancy, location and maintenance of building construction in accordance with proper energy conservation methods, including permits and penalties
that certain energy code known as the international energy conservation code (IECC) being particularly the 2015 edition thereof, and the whole thereof,
save and except such portions as deleted, modified or amended by the state of Illinois, of which not less than three (3) copies have been and now are filed
in the office of the village clerk and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this
chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the village. (Ord. 2016-4630, 2-1-2016)
4-12-2: AMENDMENTS:
The 2015 energy conservation code has been adopted by the state of Illinois. The village of Lisle has not adopted any local amendments to the 2015
energy conservation code. (Ord. 2016-4630, 2-1-2016)
4-12-3: APPEALS:
The procedures for a variation or appeal from this code shall be the same as those set forth in the building code of the village. (Ord. 2016-4630, 2-1-2016)
4-12-4: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord.
2016-4630, 2-1-2016)
Chapter 13
LIFE SAFETY CODE
4-13-1: ADOPTION:
There is hereby adopted by the village for the purpose of establishing minimum requirements for the design, operation, and maintenance of both new and
existing buildings and structures for safety to life from fire and similar emergencies, that certain code known as the life safety code specifically identified as
national fire protection agency (NFPA) 101, 2003 edition. The provisions of the aforesaid code are incorporated herein by reference and are further
clarified in this chapter together with other provisions specifically adopted herein shall be collectively known as the village of Lisle life safety code of which
three (3) copies of the aforesaid code have been on file for at least fifteen (15) days prior to the adoption hereof and are now on file in the office of the
village clerk, and have been there kept available for public use, inspection and examination, and at the same time are hereby adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length herein. From the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions of the aforesaid code, as clarified by this chapter,
shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2006-4044, 8-7-2006)
4-13-2: AMENDMENTS:
The life safety code of the village, as hereinbefore adopted, is amended as follows: (Ord. 2006-4044, 8-7-2006)
Chapter 3, Definitions, is amended to:
3.3.60.2 Existing Operational Fire Alarm System. An existing fire alarm system continuously monitored by an approved central station and equipped
with: pull stations at each required exit door, hard wired smoke detection devices in all common areas of the building, approved hard wired fire detection
devices in the living area of each dwelling unit, smoke detection and notification devices installed in conformance with section 31.3.4.5.1 of this code, and
audio notification from the fire alarm panel capable of providing a minimum 70 decibels of sound in all common and most remote sleeping room of each
dwelling unit.
3.3.60.3 Existing Non-Conforming Fire Alarm System. An existing fire alarm system permitted and installed in conformance with the requirements of
the applicable fire alarm and/or building code at the time of installation and approved by the authority having jurisdiction over such installations at that time.
Fire alarm systems installed in buildings not under the jurisdiction of the village of Lisle at time of installation shall not be considered to be legal existing
non-conforming systems unless expressly accepted and approved as part of an annexation agreement.
3.3.60.4 Substantial Repair Or Upgrade. Any change, repair, or modification to an existing fire alarm system involving replacement of an obsolete fire
alarm panel, replacement of system devices beyond routine replacement of individual defective devices, or expansion of the existing system, constitutes a
substantial repair or upgrade to the system. Existing fire alarm system components shall not be repaired, modified, or reconfigured in such a way so as to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 134/460
extend their useful life for the purpose of avoiding necessary improvements to the fire alarm system. Individual alarm components that are damaged due to
an electrical disturbance or abnormality, a leak in the building envelope, a leak in the plumbing system, or which are accidentally physically damaged may
be repaired or replaced and shall not constitute a substantial repair or upgrade to the existing system.
(Ord. 2008-4196, 4-21-2008)
Chapter 4, General, is amended to:
1. Amend section 4.4.1 to delete subsection (2).
2. Delete section 4.4.3 in its entirety.
3. Add section 4.6.1.4:
Where conflicts between this code and the adopted building code of the village of Lisle are found to exist, then the most restrictive code requirement
shall apply.
4. Delete section 4.6.2 and add:
Previously Approved Features. Where another provision of this code exempts a previously approved feature from a requirement, the exemption shall
not be permitted where the following conditions exist unless exempted by the authority having jurisdiction as permitted under section 4.6.4.
(1) The area is being modernized, renovated, or otherwise altered.
(2) A change of occupancy has occurred.
5. Delete section 4-6-12 and add:
Changes Of Occupancy. In any building or structure, whether or not a physical alteration is proposed or required, a change from one occupancy
classification to another shall be permitted only where such a building, structure, or portion thereof conforms with the requirements of this code that
apply to new construction for the proposed new use. A change of building occupancy within the same occupancy classification shall require
compliance with all code requirements for existing use classification. In either case, occupancy of the subject area shall be permitted only following
issuance of a new certificate of occupancy by the authority having jurisdiction after approval of the required permit and inspection of the premises.
Chapter 5, Performance-Based Option, is deleted in its entirety.
Chapter 7, Means Of Egress, is amended to:
1. Delete section 7.2.1.5.7. (2) and replace with:
An automatic release that is activated with the initiation of the building fire alarm system, upon loss of power controlling the lock or locking
mechanism, and upon a signal from a central fire department command station shall be provided to unlock all stair enclosure doors to allow re-entry.
2. Delete section 7-2.1.5.7.1. (2) and replace with:
There shall be not more than two stories intervening between stories where it is possible to leave the stair enclosure to access another exit.
3. Amend section 7-2.1.5.7.1 to add subsection:
(6) Stairway discharge doors located at the level of exit discharge shall be openable from the egress side and may only be locked from the
opposite side.
4. Delete section 7-2.1.5.7.2. (1)
5. Delete section 7.4.1.6 and add:
All newly constructed or substantially renovated elevator lobbies, shall have access to at least two separate and remote exits. Elevator lobbies in
existence prior to the adoption of this code are permitted access to one exit provided all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The building in which the lobby is located is equipped with a fully operational fire suppression system.
(2) The building is equipped with a fully operational fire alarm system.
(3) The lobby is fire separated from adjacent floor areas by floor/wall/ceiling construction having a minimum 1-hour fire resistance rating.
6. Amend section 7.9.1.1 to add subsection:
(6) Emergency lighting shall be provided in all conference rooms, break rooms, laundry rooms, toilet rooms, electrical closets, mechanical rooms,
all areas of assembly or gathering, and in all areas containing fire alarm control panels and/or fire suppression control valves.
Chapter 31, Existing Apartment Buildings, is amended to:
1. Amend section 31.1.1.1 to delete option (1).
2. Delete section 31.2.2.9 and add:
Fire escape stairs complying with 5-2.8 shall be permitted only with approval of the building code board of appeals, and only if it is demonstrated that
a practical hardship exists that would prevent compliance with the egress requirements of this code.
3. Delete section 31.2.6.1 subsection (1) and add:
(1) For buildings using option 3 _ 11.5 m (75 ft)
4. Delete section 31.2.6.2 subsection (1) in its entirety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 135/460
5. Delete section 31.2.9 and add:
Emergency lighting in accordance with section 7.9.1.1 shall be provided in all buildings containing public corridors, exit ways, or other common
areas.
6. Delete section 31.2.11 and add:
In high-rise buildings using option 2 or option 3, smoke proof enclosures shall be provided in accordance with 7.2.3.
7. Delete section 31.3.3.3 and add:
Interior Floor Finish. In buildings utilizing option 2, newly installed interior floor finish in exits and exit access corridors shall not be less than class II in
accordance with 10.2.7.
(Ord. 2006-4044, 8-7-2006)
8. Delete section 31.3.4.1.1 and replace with:
All existing apartment buildings shall be provided with complete automatic fire alarm systems installed in accordance with section 9.6 except as
modified by 31.3.4.2 through 31.3.4.5.2. and the exceptions below.
Exceptions:
1.Existing apartment buildings less than 3 stories in height, and with less than 11 dwelling units, which are equipped with existing non-conforming fire
alarm systems, shall be exempt from this requirement until such time as a substantial repair or upgrade of the existing fire alarm system is made. At
the time of substantial repair or upgrade the non-conforming system shall be brought into compliance with the requirements for an operational fire
alarm system or into full compliance with the requirements of section 9.6.
2.Building less than 3 stories in height, and with less than 11 dwelling units, equipped with existing non-conforming fire alarm systems not meeting the
specifications for an operational fire alarm system may be updated so as to meet the minimum specification without requiring full compliance with the
provisions of section 9.6 of this code.
3.Operational fire alarm systems utilizing alarm horns located in common public areas, where such horns do not provide the required decibel levels
within the dwelling unit, may be equipped with approved sounding devices within the dwelling unit as an equivalent form of notification.
(Ord. 2008-4196, 4-21-2008)
9. Delete section 31.3.4.1.2 in its entirety.
10. Delete section 31.3.4.2.1 and add:
Initiation of the required fire alarm system shall be by manual means in accordance with 9.6.2.
11. Delete section 31.3.4.2.2 in its entirety.
(Ord. 2006-4044, 8-7-2006)
12. Delete section 31.3.4.5 (Smoke Alarms) and replace with:
All dwelling units within existing apartment buildings shall be equipped with one smoke detection and alarm device in each sleeping room, one
device located outside but in the immediate vicinity of the sleeping rooms, and one device on each floor level of the dwelling unit. The required
detector located outside of the sleeping rooms may also serve to function as the required detection device for that floor level with approval of the
authority having jurisdiction.
All smoke detection and alarm devices installed as part of new fire alarm systems shall be hard wired to the alarm system and equipped with battery
back-up functions in accordance with section 9.6 of this code. All devices installed within dwelling units of existing apartment buildings with legal nonconforming
or operational fire alarm systems, may be battery powered devices provided each floor level of the dwelling unit is equipped with a heat
or smoke detection device connected to the fire alarm panel that will initiate fire alarm notification upon activation.
13. Delete section 31.3.5.10.2 in its entirety.
(Ord. 2008-4196, 4-21-2008)
4-13-3: NONCONFORMITIES:
Any building or structure which does not conform to the regulations contained within this chapter at the time it becomes applicable to such building or
structure shall comply in conformance with the following amortization schedule:
(A) Fire Alarm Or Fire Suppression Nonconformity: All existing buildings or structures shall comply with the fire alarm and fire suppression requirements of
this code within three (3) years from the effective date of this chapter.
(B) Means Of Egress Nonconformity: All existing buildings or structures shall comply with the egress requirements of this code within two (2) years from
the effective date of this chapter.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted or misconstrued so as to allow any existing building to be renovated or changed from its existing condition or
use so as to be any less conforming than already existing without compliance to the requirements of this code. Any renovation work directly impacting
the fire alarm system, fire suppression system, or means of egress of any existing building shall be performed in full conformance with the
requirements of this chapter and shall not be exempt from conformance under this section.
When provisions of this section require compliance by a certain date, that date shall be the date for village approval and acceptance of the completed
system. Submittal of working plans and actual system installation shall occur in advance of the stated date for compliance. (Ord. 2006-4044, 8-7-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 136/460
4-13-4: PENALTY:
Any person having been found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated or failed to comply with any provision of this chapter or the life safety
code or prior sections hereby amended shall be fined for each violation or such failure in an amount as specified in the annual fee ordinance. Additional
violations or any such failure to comply shall be construed and deemed to be separate and distinct offenses subjecting the violator to an additional fine for
each day of each violation or noncompliance. (Ord. 2006-4044, 8-7-2006)
Chapter 14
RESIDENTIAL ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING BUILDING CODE
4-14-1: ADOPTION:
There is hereby adopted by the village, for the purpose of regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement,
repair, equipment, removal and demolition of the detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than
three (3) stories in height with separate means of egress, that certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk, being
marked and designated as the international residential code, 2015 edition. (Ord. 2016-4657, 5-16-2016)
4-14-2: AMENDMENTS:
The residential one- and two-family dwelling building code of the village, as hereinbefore adopted, is amended as follows:
Chapter 1 Administration
R101.1 Title: Amend to read:
These provisions shall be known as the residential code for one- and two-family dwellings of the village of Lisle and shall be cited as such and will
be referred to herein as "this code".
R101.2 Scope: Delete exceptions.
Section R103 Department Of Building Safety: Amend to read:
Community and economic development department.
R103.1 Creation Of Enforcement Agency: Amend to read:
The community and economic development department shall be charged with the administration and enforcement of this code. The community
development director, or his designee, shall be the official in charge.
R103.2 Appointment: Delete section in its entirety.
R103.3 Deputies: Delete section in its entirety.
R104.10.1 Flood Hazard Areas: Amend to read:
Code requirements applicable to properties located in special flood management areas are regulated under the stormwater and floodplain
regulations of the village zoning ordinance are not within the scope of this code.
R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit: Amend list of exempt building work to read as follows:
Building:
1. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, countertops and similar finish work.
2. Swings and other playground equipment provided the equipment does not block a drainage route.
3. Landscape retaining walls not more than 2' in height used to create decorative landscape beds. Retaining walls installed for the purpose of
changing the lot grade level or drainage flow shall be regulated under title 5, chapter 16 and title 7, chapter 2 of the village code.
4. Minor pavement work constructed entirely on private property in conformance with the setback requirements of the village zoning ordinance,
not more than 6" above existing grade, provided said improvements do not obstruct stormwater drainage or create a safety hazard. All new or
replacement pavement work occurring in a village owned public right-of-way shall require a permit under section 7-1-4 of the village code.
Village staff shall determine if work is minor following a cursory review of the project.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 137/460
5. Portable private residential swimming pools accessory to a group R-3 occupancy, installed entirely above ground, less than 24" in depth, and
with a surface area less than 250 square feet, and less than 3,250 gallons in volume.
R105.3 Application For Permit: Amend item #6 to read:
6. Be signed by the permit applicant and property owner.
R105.3.1.1 Substantially Improved Or Substantially Damaged Buildings In Areas Prone To Flooding: Amend to read:
Code requirements applicable to properties located in special flood management areas are regulated under the stormwater and floodplain
regulations of the village zoning ordinance are not within the scope of this code.
R105.5 Expiration: Amend to read:
If the work described in any building permit has not begun within one-hundred and eighty (180) days from the date of issuance thereof, or if the
permitted work is suspended or abandoned for more than ninety (90) days, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the building official and
written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected.
If the work described in any building permit has not been completed within two (2) years of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire
and be canceled by the building official and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as
described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a building permit extension has been obtained along with payment of the
required extension permit fee.
At the discretion of the building official, such extension permit may be based on the original application or may require submission of a new
application. The extension permit shall include limitations on time allowed for substantial completion of the work, and provisions for a reasonable
cash security deposit to ensure completion within the time limit set.
R105.7 Placement Of Permit: Amend to read:
The building permit placard or copy thereof shall be displayed on site in a location viewable from the public right-of-way until the completion of the
project.
R106.2 Site Plan: Amend to read:
All building permit applications for new construction, alteration, or demolition of existing structures shall be accompanied by a recent plat of survey
of the property accurately depicting all existing structures and the proposed location of new construction dimensioned to adjacent property lines.
R106.2.1 Add new section as follows:
Topographic Grading Plans: All building permit applications for new construction, or additions to existing structures necessitating the changing of
existing grading, or additions to existing structures having a negative impact on the drainage of surrounding properties, or projects involving the
disturbance of greater than 5000 square feet of ground area, shall be accompanied by a detailed topographic grading plan prepared by a
professional engineer registered in the state of Illinois. The required grading plan shall include all pertinent information as directed by the building
official.
R106.2.2 Add new section as follows:
Foundation (Spot) Surveys: A foundation survey indicating the as-built foundation location and top of foundation elevation is required for all new
construction. The survey must be prepared by a licensed land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois. No structural framing may occur until such
time as the survey has been approved by the building official. Foundation surveys may be required for building additions if the as-built location of
the addition is undeterminable by the building inspector using known reference points on site.
R106.2.3 Add new section as follows:
As-Built Topographic Surveys: A final topographic survey must be submitted for all construction requiring the prior approval of a grading plan. Said
survey shall contain all pertinent information as directed by the building official and must be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the
state of Illinois. The installation of landscape material, or the establishment of ground cover, should not occur until such time as the survey has
been approved by the building official.
R106.3.3 Phased Approval: Delete in its entirety.
R109.1 Types Of Inspections: Amend as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 138/460
The following types of inspections may be required depending upon the type and scope of work permitted. It is the responsibility of the permit
holder to make themselves aware of the required inspections for their particular project and to comply in obtaining inspection approval of each
phase of construction prior to continuation of work. Possible inspection types include:
[] Footing
[] Foundation trench
[] Thickened slab
[] Concrete patio or paver base
[] Fencing
[] Deck pier
[] Foundation wall (prior to placement of concrete)
[] Backfill
[] Underground plumbing and/or electric
[] Water & sewer services
[] Electric service
[] Rough framing, electric, mechanical, and plumbing
[] Insulation
[] Water meter
[] Final building, electric, mechanical, and plumbing
[] Final site inspection
[] Final public works inspection
R110.1.1 Add new section as follows:
Renovations and additions to existing occupied structures. Renovations to existing structures that result in the dwelling unit becoming
uninhabitable during renovation shall require issuance of a new certificate of occupancy prior to re-occupancy. Additions to existing occupied
structures shall not be used for the intended use until such time as the final inspection has been approved and an occupancy permit has been
issued.
R110.2 Change In Use: Amend as follows:
Changes in the character or use of an existing structure shall comply with the requirements of section 5-18-4 of the village of Lisle zoning
ordinance.
R112.1 Board Of Appeals - General: Amend as follows:
Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official or request a variation from the terms of this code before the board of
appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used. The board of appeals shall
grant variations from the strict application of any of the requirements of this code in the case of exceptional conditions, whereby such strict
application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of reasonable use of the land or building
involved. In granting any variation, the board of appeals shall prescribe any conditions that it deems to be necessary or desirable. The board shall
affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the code official by a majority vote. The board of appeals shall be the village of Lisle president and board
of trustees and the chairman of the board of appeals shall be the president, also known as the mayor, of the village of Lisle.
R112.2 Limitations On Authority: Delete in its entirety.
R112.3 Qualifications: Delete in its entirety.
R112.4 Administration: Delete in its entirety.
Chapter 2 Definitions: Add the following:
Sleeping Room: A room physically separated from adjacent room areas by walls and a door, containing a clothes closet, and intended or suitable for
sleeping accommodations.
Chapter 3 Building Planning
Table R301.2(1) Climatic And Geographic Design Criteria: Add the following:
Ground snow load - 25 psf
Wind design:
Wind speed - 115 mph
Topographic effects - no
Special wind region - no
Wind blown debris zone - no
Seismic design category - A
Weathering - severe
Frost line depth - 42"
Termite - moderate to heavy
Decay - slight to moderate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 139/460
Winter design temp. - 0 degrees F
Ice barrier underlayment required - yes
Flood hazards - see village of Lisle floodplain regulations
Air freezing index - 1543
Mean annual temperature - 49.4 degrees F
R301.2.4 Floodplain Construction: Amend as follows:
Code requirements applicable to properties located in special flood management areas are regulated under the stormwater and floodplain
regulations of the village zoning ordinance are not within the scope of this code.
R302.3 Two Family Dwellings: Amend as follows:
Dwelling units in two-family dwellings shall be separated from each other by wall and floor assemblies having not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance
rating where tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263. Fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling and wall assemblies shall extend to and be tight
against the exterior wall, and wall assemblies shall extend from the foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing.
Exceptions:
1. A fire-resistance rating of 1-hour shall be permitted in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in
accordance with NFPA 13.
2. Wall assemblies need not extend through attic spaces where the ceiling is protected by not less than 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) type X gypsum
board, an attic draft stop constructed as specified in section R302.12.1 is provided above and along the wall assembly separating the dwellings
and the structural framing supporting the ceiling is protected by not less than 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board or equivalent.
R309.1 Floor Surface: Amend as follows:
Garage floor surfaces shall be of approved noncombustible and nonabsorbent material. Garage floors adjacent to a dwelling unit shall be poured a
minimum of 4" below the top of foundation wall and shall be sloped to facilitate the movement of liquids out of the garage and toward the vehicle
entry door. A 4" concrete gas curb poured above the garage floor elevation may be provided if the floor is not depressed below the top of
foundation wall.
R309.3 Flood Hazard Areas: Amend as follows:
Code requirements applicable to properties located in special flood management areas are regulated under the stormwater and floodplain
regulations of the village zoning ordinance are not within the scope of this code.
R309.6 Garage Egress: Add new section as follows:
All detached garages shall be equipped with a side hinged man door allowing direct egress to the exterior of the building. The required door shall
be no less than 32" in width and 80" in height.
R311.5.9 Exterior Stairs: Add section as follows:
All elevated exterior deck or patio structures greater than 50 square feet in area shall be equipped with a code compliant stairway or ramp to
grade. Exterior stairways and ramps shall be constructed in compliance with all requirements of sections R311.5 and 311.6 of this code.
R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems: Delete section in its entirety.
R320 Accessibility: Delete section in its entirety.
R323 Flood-Resistant Construction: Amend as follows:
Code requirements applicable to properties located in special flood management areas are regulated under the stormwater and floodplain
regulations of the village zoning ordinance are not within the scope of this code.
R326 Swimming Pools, Spas And Hot Tubs: Amend section to read:
The design and construction of pools, spas and hot tubs shall comply with title 4, chapter 7, of the village code and applicable provisions of the
village electrical code and village plumbing code.
R327 Professional Preparation Of Plans: Add new section as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 140/460
All plans submitted with building permit applications to construct new single-family, two-family, or townhouse residential units shall be prepared by
a licensed architect or structural engineer registered in the state of Illinois and shall bear the stamp of his official seal. Plans for building additions
or renovations of non-conventional design, or designed as permitted under the provisions of sections R301.1.1, R301.1.2, or R301.1.3 of this code,
shall be prepared by a licensed architect or structural engineer registered in the state of Illinois.
Chapter 4 Foundations
R401.1 Application: Amend as follows:
The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the foundation for all buildings. (Delete all reference to wood
foundations.)
R402.1 Wood Foundations: Delete in its entirety.
R402.3 Precast Concrete: Add the following:
Detailed structural plans including field erection specifications must be provided with all permit applications for buildings utilizing precast concrete
components. The required plans must be prepared and certified by a licensed structural engineer registered in the state of Illinois.
R403.1.1 Minimum Size: Amend as follows:
Concrete footings shall be provided and sized so as to support and distribute all imposed loads based upon the load-bearing value of the soil but
not less than 8" thick x 16" wide when supporting an 8" thick wall, and 10" thick x 20" wide when supporting a 10" thick wall.
R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection: Amend as follows:
With exception of single-story freestanding accessory structures not to exceed 600 square feet in area, all foundation walls, piers, and other
permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be protected from frost by constructing the foundation support a minimum of 42" below the
proposed final grade level. Footings shall not bear on frozen soil.
R403.2 Footings For Wood Foundations: Delete in its entirety.
R403.3 Frost Protected Shallow Foundations: Delete in its entirety.
R404.1.5.3 Pier And Curtain Wall Foundations: Delete in its entirety.
R404.2 Wood Foundation Walls: Delete in its entirety.
R404.6 Concrete Pier Foundations: Add section as follows:
Concrete pier foundation systems may be used to support exterior decks, screen rooms and similar accessory type structures only. Piers must be
sized to support and distribute the imposed load but shall be no less than 10" in diameter.
R404.7 Trench Foundations: Add section as follows:
Poured concrete trench foundations may be used to support single story frame additions to existing structures not to exceed 350 square feet in
area. Trench foundations must be designed and constructed to support and distribute the imposed loads and shall have foundation walls not less
than 8" thick "belled" at the base to no less than 16" in width.
R404.8 Slab On Grade Foundations: Add section as follows:
Monolithic slab on grade foundations may be used to support single-story non-habitable accessory buildings not to exceed 600 square feet in area.
Slab foundations shall be designed and constructed to support and distribute the imposed loads and shall be no less than 12" wide x 18" thick with
2-#5 bars around the entire perimeter. The slab shall be poured monolithically with the footing and shall be no less than 4" thick reinforced with 6 x
6 welded wire fabric supported on a minimum 4" compacted stone base.
R405.1 Concrete Or Masonry Foundations: Amend as follows:
Delete exception. Foundation drainage is required with all soil types.
R405.2 Wood Foundations: Delete in its entirety.
R406.3 Dampproofing For Wood Foundations: Delete in its entirety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 141/460
R408.7 Flood Resistance: Amend as follows:
Code requirements applicable to properties located in special flood management areas are regulated under the stormwater and floodplain
regulations of the village zoning ordinance are not within the scope of this code.
R408.8 Crawl Space Floor: Add new section as follows:
A minimum 2 inch thick concrete slab shall be poured in all crawl space areas. The required slab shall be installed over a minimum of 4 inches of
stone over a 6 mil polyethylene film moisture barrier installed as required by this code.
Chapter 5 Floors
R502.7.1 Bridging: Amend as follows:
All floor joists with a clear span greater than 8' shall be supported laterally at mid span by solid blocking or diagonal bridging.
R504 PPT Wood Floors (On Ground): Delete section in its entirety.
R506.1 General: Amend as follows:
Concrete slab on grade floors shall be a minimum 4" thick. The specified compressive strength of concrete shall be as set forth in section R402.2
of this code.
R506.2.1 Fill: Amend as follows:
Fill material shall be free of vegetation and foreign material. All material shall be compacted in lifts to assure uniform support of the slab. Self
compacting materials such as washed stone or pea gravel shall be used when the depth of fill required exceeds 24 inches. The use of any organic
soils as fill material is prohibited.
R506.2.2 Base: Amend as follows:
Delete exception. A stone base course is required under all concrete slabs.
Chapter 6
R606.1.1 Professional Registration Not Required: Delete section in its entirety.
Chapter 7 Wall Covering
R703.1.3 Wall Sheathing: Add new section as follows:
An approved wall sheathing material shall be provided on the exterior of all frame structures.
Exception: Wall sheathing is not required under wood structural panel siding 9/16" thick or greater when installed on non-habitable detached
accessory structures less than 200 square feet in area.
R703.2 Weather-Resistive Barrier: Amend as follows:
An approved weather resistant sheathing paper free from holes and breaks shall be installed under all exterior wall covering materials.
Exception: Weather resistant sheathing paper is not required on non-habitable detached accessory buildings less than 200 square feet in area.
R703.8.2 Exterior Veneer Support: Amend as follows:
Exterior masonry veneers may not be supported by any wood framing member. Structural support over openings and intersecting roof areas shall
be provided by means of steel lintels independent of any wood framing. All lintels shall be properly supported by steel beams, steel columns, or
load bearing masonry to the foundation below.
Delete subsections: R703.8.2.1 and R703.8.2.2 in their entirety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 142/460
Chapter 8 Roof-Ceiling Construction
R801.3 Roof Drainage: Amend as follows:
All dwelling units shall be provided with rain gutters and downspouts that will collect and discharge all roof drainage to the ground surface at least
5' from foundation walls or to an approved drainage system. Discharge from rain gutters and sump pumps into yards of less than 10' in width shall
be prohibited.
R802.10.1.1 Raised Heel Roof Trusses: Add section as follows:
All roof trusses installed above conditioned spaces of dwelling units shall be of a raised heel design so as to allow for the full depth of required
ceiling insulation to be installed over the exterior wall plate.
Chapter 11 Energy Efficiency
Delete chapter in its entirety. Energy efficiency shall be regulated under the current state of Illinois energy code.
Chapter 13 General Mechanical System Requirements
M1301.1.1 Flood Resistant Installation: Amend as follows:
Code requirements applicable to properties located in special flood management areas are regulated under the stormwater and floodplain
regulations of the village zoning ordinance are not within the scope of this code.
Chapter 22 Special Piping And Storage Systems
M2201.06 Flood Resistant Installation: Amend as follows:
Code requirements applicable to properties located in special flood management areas are regulated under the stormwater and floodplain
regulations of the village zoning ordinance are not within the scope of this code.
Chapters 25 - 33 Plumbing
Delete chapters 25 - 33 in their entirety.
All plumbing work shall be performed in conformance with requirements of the currently adopted edition of the Illinois state plumbing code as
amended and adopted by the village of Lisle under title 4, chapter 3 of the village of Lisle municipal code.
Chapters 34 - 43 Electrical
Delete chapters in their entirety.
All electrical work shall be installed in conformance with requirements of the currently adopted edition of the national electrical code as amended and
adopted by the village of Lisle under title 4, chapter 2 of the village of Lisle municipal code.
(Ord. 2016-4657, 5-16-2016)
4-14-3: PENALTY:
Any person having been found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated or failed to comply with any provision of this chapter or the one- and
two-family dwelling unit code or prior sections hereby amended shall be fined for each violation or such failure in an amount as specified in the annual fee
ordinance. Additional violations or any such failure to comply shall be construed and deemed to be separate and distinct offenses subjecting the violator to
an additional fine for each day of each violation or noncompliance. (Ord. 2006-4054, 9-11-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
Chapter 15
FUEL GAS CODE
4-15-1: ADOPTION:
There is hereby adopted by the president and board of trustees of the village for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing fuel gas systems and
gas fired appliances as herein provided, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the 2015 edition of the international fuel gas code. The provisions of the aforesaid code are incorporated
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 143/460
herein by reference and are further clarified in this chapter. The clarified provisions together with the aforesaid codes and other provisions specifically
adopted herein shall be collectively known as the village of Lisle fuel gas code of which three (3) copies of the aforesaid codes have been on file for at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the adoption hereof and are now on file in the office of the village clerk, and have been there kept available for public use,
inspection and examination, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. From the date on which this chapter
shall take effect, the provisions of the aforesaid codes, as clarified by this chapter, shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2016-
4656, 5-16-2016)
4-15-2: AMENDMENTS:
The fuel gas code of the village, as hereinbefore adopted, is amended in the following respects:
101.1 Title. Insert the village of Lisle as name of jurisdiction.
103.1 General. Amend text to read:
The community development department shall oversee the inspection of all work within the scope and purview of this code. The building official, or
his designee, shall serve as the code official.
103.2 Appointment. Delete section in its entirety.
103.3 Deputies. Delete section in its entirety.
106.5.3 Expiration. Amend text to read:
If the work described in any building permit has not begun within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance thereof, or if the permitted work is
suspended or abandoned for more than forty-five (45) days, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the building official and written notice thereof
shall be given to the persons affected.
If the work described in any building permit has not been completed within two (2) years of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and
be canceled by the building official and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as
described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a building permit extension has been obtained along with payment of the required
extension permit fee.
At the discretion of the building official, such extension permit may be based on the original application or may require submission of a new
application. The extension permit shall include limitations on time allowed for substantial completion of the work, and provisions for a reasonable
cash security deposit to ensure completion within the time limit set.
106.6.2 Fee Schedule. Amend section to read:
All permit fees shall be assessed in accordance with the annual fee ordinance as amended from time to time by the village of Lisle.
106.6.3 Fee Refunds. Amend section to read:
No plan review fees will be refunded. For all building projects wherein no work has occurred within the prescribed deadline, the permit shall be
terminated and an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance in relation to the required building permit fees shall be refunded. For all
building projects wherein work has begun and has stopped for any reason, no part of the required building permit fees will be refunded upon
expiration of the building permit.
107.2.4 Approved Inspection Agencies. Amend section to read:
With prior written approval of the building official, inspection reports from approved inspection agencies may be submitted provided such agencies
satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability.
108.4 Violation Penalties. Amend section to read:
Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who performs work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
108.5 Stop Work Orders. Amend section to read:
Whenever the building official finds work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or
dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the
owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall
immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to
resume. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 144/460
deemed a separate offense.
Section 109 Means Of Appeal. Delete section in its entirety and replace with:
109.1 Means Of Appeal Or Variation. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official or request a variation from the terms of
this code before the board of appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted
hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used. The
board of appeals shall grant variations from the strict application of any of the requirements of this code in the case of exceptional conditions,
whereby such strict application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of reasonable use of the land
or building involved. In granting any variation, the board of appeals shall prescribe any conditions that it deems to be necessary or desirable. The
board shall affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the code official by a majority vote. The board of appeals shall be the village of Lisle president
and board of trustees and the chairman of the board of appeals shall be the president, also known as the mayor, of the village of Lisle.
201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes. Amend section to read:
Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the international fuel gas code, international fire code, international mechanical code,
national electrical code or Illinois state plumbing code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
301.6 Plumbing Connections. Amend section to read:
Potable water supply and building drainage system connections to appliances regulated by this code shall be in accordance with the Illinois plumbing
code, as adopted and amended by the village of Lisle.
301.11 Flood Hazard. Delete section in its entirety. All work shall be performed in conformance with the stormwater and floodplain regulations of the
village of Lisle.
403.4.3 Copper And Copper Alloy. Amend section to read:
Copper and copper alloy pipe is not permitted as a fuel gas piping material.
403.5.2 Copper And Copper Alloy Tubing. Amend section to read:
Copper and copper alloy tubing is not permitted as a fuel gas piping material.
(Ord. 2016-4656, 5-16-2016)
Chapter 16
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
4-16-1: ADOPTION OF EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, relocation,
equipment use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures, including permits and penalties, that certain document, one copy of
which is filed in the office of the village clerk, being marked and designated as the 2015 international existing building code, as published by the
International Code Council, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in section 4-16-2 of this chapter,
and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the village. (Ord. 2016-4627, 1-4-2016)
4-16-2: AMENDMENTS:
The existing building code of the village of Lisle, as hereinbefore adopted, is amended in the following respects:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Existing Building Code Of The Village Of Lisle, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
101.8 Add new section:
101.8 Existing Work.
All provisions of this code allowing for existing work to remain shall be applicable only to work that was legally constructed using materials that were
permitted for use at the time of construction. These provisions shall not be construed to allow continuation or approval of existing work that did not comply
with the applicable code at the time of construction.
101.9 Add new section:
101.9 Plumbing Code. All references in this code to the international plumbing code shall be replaced with the reference to the latest Illinois plumbing
code.
105.2 Work Exempt From Permit. Amend to read:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 145/460
Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:
1. Residential play equipment installed accessory to a group R-3 occupancy and intended for the use of children.
2. Landscape retaining walls not more than 2' in height used to create decorative landscape beds. Retaining walls installed for the purpose of changing the
lot grade level or drainage flow shall be regulated under title 5, chapter 16 and title 7, chapter 2 of the village code.
3. Minor pavement work constructed entirely on private property in conformance with the setback requirements of the village zoning ordinance, not more
than 6" above existing grade, provided said improvements do not obstruct stormwater drainage or create a safety hazard. All new or replacement
pavement work occurring in a village owned public right-of-way shall require a permit under section 7-1-4 of the village code. Village staff shall determine if
work is minor following a cursory review of the project.
4. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting and similar cosmetic finish work.
5. Portable private residential swimming pools accessory to a group R-3 occupancy, installed entirely above ground, less than 24" in depth, and with a
surface area less than 250 square feet, and less than 3,250 gallons in volume.
6. Minor electrical repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently
installed receptacles.
7. Replacement of any minor part of existing mechanical equipment that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
8. The stopping of plumbing leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or
vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work
and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in the plumbing code.
105.2.3 Public Service Agencies. Delete section in its entirety.
105.5 Expiration. Amend to read:
If the work described in any building permit has not begun within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance thereof, or if the permitted work is suspended
or abandoned for more than ninety (90) days, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the building official and written notice thereof shall be given to
the persons affected.
If the work described in any building permit has not been completed within two (2) years of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be
canceled by the building official and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the
canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a building permit extension has been obtained along with payment of the required extension permit fee.
At the discretion of the building official, such extension permit may be based on the original application or may require submission of a new application.
The extension permit shall include limitations on time allowed for substantial completion of the work, and provisions for a reasonable cash security deposit
to ensure completion within the time limit set.
105.7 Placement Of Permit. Amend to read:
The building permit placard or copy thereof shall be displayed onsite in a location viewable from the public right-of-way until the completion of the project.
Permits for work located within multi-tenant buildings shall be posted at the entry door to the unit visible from a common area corridor.
106.3.3 Phased Approval. Amend to read:
The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations before the construction documents for the whole building or structure
have been submitted provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) That adequate and detailed building and civil engineering plans for the foundation are submitted to the building department for review by village staff
and consultants.
(b) That any additional documents reasonably required by the building department which are necessary for the review of plans and drawings to determine
compliance with provisions of the village code in the issuance of the permit are submitted for review.
(c) That such building and civil engineering plans are fully approved in writing by the building department.
(d) That the site is properly zoned for the proposed development.
(e) That an irrevocable letter of credit is provided in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of removal of the foundation and restoration of the site in a form
and amount as approved by the village. This letter of credit shall be for the purpose of securing construction or removal of the foundation upon the
property, and restoration of the site to its natural condition if a full building permit is not issued.
(f) That the application is approved by the building code board of appeals.
The holder of such permit for the foundation shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the
entire structure will be granted. Any permit issued hereunder shall expire 90 days after date of issue or upon issuance of a full building permit, whichever is
first to occur. Extensions to the dates of validity of the permit shall be authorized only by the building code board of appeals.
108.6 Refunds. Amend to read:
No plan review fees will be refunded. For all building projects wherein no work has occurred within the prescribed deadline, the building permit shall be
terminated and an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance in relation to the required building permit fees shall be refunded. For all building
projects wherein work has begun and has stopped for any reason, no part of the required building permit fees will be refunded upon expiration of the
building permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 146/460
109.3 Required Inspections. Amend to read:
The following types of inspections may be required depending upon the type and scope of work permitted. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to
make themselves aware of the required inspections for their particular project and to comply in obtaining inspection approval of each phase of construction
prior to continuation of work. Possible inspection types include:
* Pre-construction meeting/inspection
* Civil engineering inspection
* Fencing - site inspection
* Sign foundation & electric inspection
* Footing inspection
* Foundation inspection (prior to pour)
* Backfill inspection
* Underground plumbing inspection
* Underground electric inspection
* Concrete slab, patio, driveway and/or floor deck inspection
* Insulation and fire-stopping inspection
* Water & sewer service inspection
* Electric service inspection
* Rough framing, electric, mechanical, and plumbing inspection
* Above ceiling inspection
* Water meter inspection
* Fire alarm & fire suppression systems inspection
* MEP final inspections
* Final building inspection
112 Board Of Appeals. Delete section in its entirety and replace with:
113.1 Means Of Appeal Or Variation: Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official or request a variation from the terms of
this code before the board of appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted
hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used. The board of
appeals shall grant variations from the strict application of any of the requirements of this code in the case of exceptional conditions, whereby such strict
application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of reasonable use of the land or building involved. In
granting any variation, the board of appeals shall prescribe any conditions that it deems to be necessary or desirable. The board shall affirm, modify, or
reverse the decision of the building official by a majority vote. The board of appeals shall be the village of Lisle president and board of trustees and the
chairman of the board of appeals shall be the president, also known as the mayor, of the village of Lisle.
113.4 Violation Penalties. Amend section to read:
Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
114.3 Unlawful Continuance. Amend to read:
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
410 Accessibility For Existing Buildings. Delete section in its entirety.
702.5 Add exception:
Exception: The replacement of a code compliant egress window with a new window unit shall not result in the window being made non-compliant with the
minimum dimensional requirements of the code for egress openings.
705 Accessibility. Delete section in its entirety.
805.3.1.1 Single-Exit Buildings. Amend item #1 to read:
1. In group A, B, E, F, M, U and S occupancies, a single exit is permitted in the story at the level of exit discharge when the occupant load of the story does
not exceed 20 persons.
806 Accessibility. Delete section in its entirety.
902.1 High-Rise Buildings. Amend section to read:
Any building having occupied floors more than 50 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall comply with the requirements of
sections 902.1.1 and 902.1.2.
906 Accessibility. Delete section in its entirety.
1001.3 Certificate Of Occupancy Required. Amend section to read:
A certificate of occupancy shall be issued where a change of occupancy occurs.
1006 Accessibility. Delete section in its entirety.
1012.1.4 Accessibility. Delete section in its entirety.
1012.8 Accessibility. Delete section in its entirety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 147/460
1105 Accessibility. Delete section in its entirety.
1204.1 Accessibility Requirements. Delete section in its entirety.
1205.15 Accessibility Requirements. Delete section in its entirety.
(Ord. 2016-4627, 1-4-2016)
Chapter 17
FAIR HOUSING
4-17-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the FAIR HOUSING ORDINANCE of the village. (Ord. 2016-4636, 3-21-2016)
4-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
LEASE OR LEASING: Includes and means sublease and subletting, assignment, rent and renting and includes any contract to do any of the foregoing.
LENDING INSTITUTION: Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association or any other person in the business of lending money or
guaranteeing loans, any person in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person in the
business of buying or selling loans or instruments for the payment of money which are secured by title to or a security interest in real estate, but shall not
include any religious institution or organization nor any charitable or educational organization operated, supervised or controlled by a religious institution or
organization.
NATIONAL ORIGIN: Includes national origin and ancestors.
OWNER: Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any beneficial interest in any real property or who holds legal or equitable title to shares
of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any real estate cooperative which owns any real property.
PURCHASE: Includes any contract to purchase.
REAL ESTATE BROKER OR SALESMAN: A person, whether licensed or not, who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells,
purchases, exchanges, rents, or leases real property, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate any of these activities, or who holds himself or herself out
as engaged in these.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: Includes the sale, exchange, rental or lease of real property and also includes the brokering or appraising of residential
real property and the making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance:
(A) For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or
(B) Secured by residential real estate.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements, leaseholds, interests in real estate cooperatives, condominiums, and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein.
SALE: Includes any contract to sell, exchange or to convey, transfer or assign legal or equitable title to or a beneficial interest in real property.
SOLICITATION: Any conduct designed or intended to induce the owner of any real property to sell, rent, exchange, convey, transfer or list for sale or rental
such real property. (Ord. 2016-4636, 3-21-2016)
4-17-3: DISCRIMINATION IN REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS PROHIBITED:
(A) No owner, lessee or sublessee of real property, real estate broker or salesman, lender, financial institution, advertiser or agent of any of the foregoing
shall discriminate against any other person because of the race, color, religion or national origin of such person because of that person's race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or unfavorable discharge from military service
with respect to any real estate transaction.
(B) Any act of discrimination in a real estate transaction shall be considered an unfair housing practice, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Refusal to engage in a real estate transaction with a person or discriminate in making available such a transaction.
2. Altering the terms, conditions or privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith.
3. Refusal to receive or failure to transmit a bona fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction from a person.
4. Refusal to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person.
5. Representing to a person that real property is not available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease when in fact it is so available, or failure to bring a
property listing to his or her attention, or refusal to permit him or her to inspect real property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 148/460
6. Printing, circulating, posting, mailing, publishing or causing to be published a written or oral statement, advertisement or sign, or using a form of
application for a real estate transaction, or making a record in inquiry in connection with a prospective real estate transaction, which expresses any
limitation found upon, or indicating, directly or indirectly an intent to engage in unlawful discrimination.
7. Offering, soliciting, accepting, using or retaining a listing of real property with knowledge that unlawful discrimination or discrimination on the basis of
familial status in a real estate transaction is intended.
8. Soliciting for sale, leasing, listing or purchasing any residential real estate within the village on the grounds of loss of value due to the present or
prospective entry into the vicinity of the property involved of any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry,
age, sex, marital status, familial status, or handicap.
9. Distributing or causing to be distributed written material or statements designed to induce any owner of residential real estate in this village to sell or
lease his or her property because of any present or prospective changes in the race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, marital status,
familial status or handicap of residents in the vicinity of the property involved.
10. Intentionally creating alarm, among residents of any community, by transmitting communications in any manner, including a telephone call whether
or not conversation thereby ensues, with a design to induce any owner of residential real estate in this village to sell or lease his or her property
because of any present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property involved of any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, age, sex, marital status, familial status or handicap.
11. Discriminating or participating in discrimination in connection with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repairs or maintenance of any real property
in the village. For the purpose of this subsection, discrimination in lending shall include the following:
(a) Refusal to make loans; or
(b) Differentiation in the type of loans, including interest rates, charges to buyer or seller, duration and amount of loan; or
(c) Influencing appraisals in connection with loans; or
(d) Delaying processing loan applications. (Ord. 2016-4636, 3-21-2016)
4-17-4: COMPLAINT PROCEDURES:
(A) The village shall act as a local source for assistance and information for persons who have complaints related to unfair housing practices.
(B) The village shall provide assistance and information to any such person, which shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
1. The rights and remedies available to a person who has been discriminated against by virtue of an unfair housing practice;
2. The types of discrimination which are considered to be unfair housing practices;
3. The names, addresses and phone numbers of county, state and federal agencies where such person may file formal complaints; and
4. Such other relevant information or assistance as the village may have available to assist such person.
(C) The community and economic development director shall be responsible for coordinating and directing the village's fair housing procedures. (Ord.
2016-4636, 3-21-2016)
Title 5
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
5-1-1: ADOPTION OF AND AMENDMENTS TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
(A) Adoption Of Comprehensive Plan: The comprehensive plan of public improvement, looking to the present and to the future development of the Village,
which plan is contained in pages 1 to 109 in that certain pamphlet duly marked "Lisle, Illinois Comprehensive Development Plan", said pamphlet being
hereby incorporated by reference, is hereby adopted and made the official comprehensive plan of the Village. The Village Clerk is hereby authorized
and directed to place these provisions and the comprehensive plan herein adopted on file for public inspection.
(B) Land Use Plan (2004): However, said comprehensive development plan is hereby amended to the extent that it is inconsistent with the following: 1)
that document entitled "2004 Village Comprehensive Land Use Plan Village of Lisle", which is a color coded map prepared by Rolf C. Campbell and
Associates, Inc.; and 2) that document entitled "Village of Lisle 2004 Comprehensive Land Use Plan", prepared by Rolf C. Campbell and Associates,
Inc. Said documents are hereby adopted and shall take precedence for all intents and purposes as the official land use map of the official
comprehensive plan of the Village, which map is hereby incorporated by reference as the sole land use map of the Village and is hereby adopted and
made the official land use map of the Village. The previous land use map of the Village comprehensive plan be and is disregarded for all intents and
purposes.
(C) Land Use Plan (1996 Evergreen Drive Subarea Plan): Further, the comprehensive development plan and the Village of Lisle 1995 comprehensive land
use plan are hereby amended as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 149/460
1. The "Evergreen Drive subarea" shall be that land north of Warrenville Road and adjacent to Evergreen Drive except that lot known as the "Gvidas
property", 23 W 640 Warrenville Road (PIN: 08-03-101-107);
2. All lots in the Evergreen Drive subarea shall be a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and shall be developed in accordance with the
Village of Lisle R-1 Single-Family Residence District zoning and subdivision standards;
3. The street access to any subdivided area of the Evergreen Drive subarea shall be from Evergreen Drive, which shall be dedicated as a public rightof-
way.
(D) Land Use Plan (2004 Leask Lane Subarea Plan): Further, the comprehensive development plan and the Village of Lisle 2004 comprehensive land use
plan are hereby amended as follows:
1. That lots shall be a minimum of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
2. That all lots conform to the setbacks of the R-2 Single-Family Zoning District standards.
(E) Ogden Avenue Corridor Plan, 2010: Further, the Village of Lisle comprehensive plan, 2004, is amended to adopt the Ogden Avenue corridor plan,
2010, as the official comprehensive land use plan for the Ogden Avenue corridor.
(F) Downtown Lisle Master Plan, 2018: Further, the Village of Lisle Comprehensive Plan, 2004, is amended to adopt the Downtown Lisle Master Plan,
2018, as the official comprehensive land use plan for the downtown area.
(G) Public Inspection: The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to place the ordinance codified herein and the amended land use map and
comprehensive land use plan on file for public inspection. (Ord. 2019-4803, 1-21-2019)
5-1-2: TITLE; PURPOSE:
This title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF LISLE, ILLINOIS, and said provisions are
hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing comprehensive zoning regulations for the Village and providing for the administration, enforcement and
amendment thereof, in accordance with the provisions of division 13 - zoning, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1 through 5/11-13-9. (Ord. 2006-4070,
11-6-2006)
5-1-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS; ZONING MAP; AUTOMATIC ZONING UPON ANNEXATION:
(A) Establishment Of Districts; Zoning Map: The Village is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the Village official zoning map which,
together with all explanatory matter thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this title. Said official zoning map shall be
identified by the signature of the President, Board of Trustees, attested by the Clerk of the Village and bears the Seal of the Village under the following
words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 5-1-3 of the Lisle Village Code", together with the date of adoption
hereof.
If, in accordance with the provisions of this title, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such
changes will be made on said official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Village Board of Trustees, together with an
entry on the official zoning map as follows: "By Ordinance No. adopted (date) by the Village Board of Trustees, the following change or changes were
made in the Official Zoning Map: (description of change)", which entry shall be signed by the President and attested by the Village Clerk.
Any unauthorized change of the official zoning map of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this title and
punishable under section 5-1-8 of this chapter.
(B) Automatic Zoning Upon Annexation: Any parcel of land hereinafter annexed to the Village shall be classified in the R-1 Single-Family Residence
District, unless a petition has been filed and a public hearing conducted to zone the parcel to a zoning district classification other than R-1 Single-
Family Residence District, in which case the Board of Trustees may zone the parcel in accordance with said petition and hearing. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-
6-2006)
5-1-4: RULES OF INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts, as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
(A) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines or right-of-way lines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such
centerlines;
(B) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;
(C) Boundaries indicated as approximately following Village limits shall be construed as following such Village limits;
(D) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 150/460
(E) Boundaries indicated as following rivers and streams should be construed to follow the approximate centerline of such river or stream, and in the event
of change in such river or stream, should be construed as moving with the actual centerline;
(F) Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of, features indicated in subsections (A) through (E) of this section shall be so construed. Distances
not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
(G) Where the street or property layout existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not
covered by subsections (A) through (F) of this section, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall interpret the district boundaries in accordance with
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-1-5: APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
Except as hereinafter provided:
(A) No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
(B) No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
1. To exceed in height;
2. To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
3. To occupy a greater percentage of lot area;
4. To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces, than therein required, or in any other manner contrary to the
provisions of this title.
(C) No part of a yard, or other open space, or off street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purposes of
complying with this title shall be included as a part of a yard, open space or off street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building,
except as modified hereinafter.
(D) No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this title shall be reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or
lots created after the effective date hereof shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this title.
(E) Within each district the regulations set by this title shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land.
(F) All territories hereafter annexed to the Village shall be zoned at the time such territory is annexed. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-1-6: PROVISIONS DECLARED MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare. Wherever the word requirements of this title are at variance with the requirements of any other
lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
(Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-1-7: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, certain terms or words used herein are hereby defined and the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation of the
provisions of this title. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; the singular number shall include the plural, the plural the singular;
the word "person" shall include a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation; the words "used or occupied" include the
words "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied"; the word "shall" or "will" is mandatory; and the word "may" is permissive. Any other words
used and not defined herein shall be construed as having the commonly accepted meaning as defined in a standard dictionary.
ABOVEGROUND SERVICE FACILITY: An aboveground structure, used by a service entity to provide service to the public, which has a volume above the
ground surface of greater than twenty four (24) cubic feet, a linear size greater than four feet (4') in any one dimension, or a footprint of greater than five
percent (5%) of the maximum lot coverage for the lot.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure subordinate to the principal use of the land or a building on the same lot, serving a purpose
customarily incidental to the principal use or structure and located behind the front wall of the principal structure. An accessory use or structure is not
allowed without the existence of a principal structure or use on the zoning lot.
AGRICULTURE: The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and gardening, but not including the keeping or raising of domestic animals or fowl,
except household pets, and not including agricultural industry or business such as fruit packing plants, fur farms, animal hospitals or similar uses.
ALLEY: A public or private way not more than thirty feet (30') wide affording only secondary means of access to abutting property.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multi-family or multiuse building arranged and intended as a place of residence of a single "family" as
hereinafter defined, providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 151/460
cooking and sanitation.
AQUATIC RECREATION FACILITY: As defined in the code adopted in title 4, chapter 7 of this Code, as amended.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: Any building or group of buildings providing personal assistance or nursing care for those dependent upon the services by
reason of age or physical or mental impairment but not for the treatment of contagious diseases, addicts or mental illnesses.
ATTIC: Unfinished space between the ceiling joists of the story and the roof rafters.
AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES: An open area other than a street used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in
operable condition and where no repair work is done.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: The dismantling or disassembling of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially
dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade.
BLEACHERS: A grandstand where the seats are not provided with backrests.
BLOCK: A tract of land bordered on all sides by streets, or by one or more streets and a railroad right-of-way, stream or river or unsubdivided acreage.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are
provided for five (5) or more persons, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons.
BREEZEWAY: A porch or roofed passageway for connecting two (2) buildings or parts of two (2) buildings. A breezeway must meet the following minimum
requirements:
(A) Is constructed on a forty two inch (42") deep foundation;
(B) Is enclosed by a roof and permanent walls;
(C) Is at least six feet (6') wide;
(D) Is not longer than twenty feet (20') measured between two (2) buildings.
BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The provision of the ability to transmit voice, data, text, sound or video programming. A broadband
telecommunications utility is any entity engaged in operating, maintaining, and/or providing a broadband telecommunications network to subscribers for a
fee, and may be operated via an open and/or closed transmission path. A telecommunications utility may be based on a single technology or a
combination of technologies.
BUILDING: Any structure for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance, as measured from the average finished grade of all four (4) corners of the building to the average height of
the roof.
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to the street right-of-way line at any story level of a building and representing the minimum distance which all or any part of
the building is set back from said right-of-way line.
BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: Professional, governmental, executive, management or administrative offices of private organizations or
government agencies. Typical uses include administrative offices, law offices, architectural firms, insurance companies and government offices. Also
includes travel agencies, tax preparation office and similar consumer service businesses.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead and dedicated as a "cemetery" for such purposes.
CLINIC: A place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm and injured persons and those who are in need of medical or surgical
attention, but who are not provided with board, or room, nor kept overnight on the premises.
CLUB: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying regular dues, and are organized for some common purpose, but not
including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A group home or specialized residential care home serving persons with disabilities that have been determined to be eligible
for services by any independent service coordination agency, and which agency has determined that joint occupancy of a residential property is medically
necessary or beneficial for the person with disabilities. Where the community residence's operator is required to be licensed or certified by a State or
Federal agency or department to operate a community residence, the operator shall: a) provide the Village proof of such licensure or certification upon the
Village's request; and b) maintain at all times a current and valid license or certificate. A community residence does not include a residence that serves
persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense. A contractual obligation by an organization or entity sponsoring or responsible for the
community residence shall be considered ownership, regardless of whether there is a full-time staff person residing in the home.
COURT: An open unoccupied and unobstructed space, other than a yard on the same lot with a building or group of buildings.
DENSITY, GROSS: The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of dwelling units in a development by the gross area of all land (in acres)
within the development. This would include all non-residential land uses and private streets of the development as well as rights-of-way of dedicated
streets; the result being the number of dwelling units per gross acre of land.
DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL: The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of dwelling units in a development by the area of the actual tract of
land (in acres) upon which the dwelling units are proposed to be located and including private streets, common open space and associated recreational
facilities within the area; the result being the number of dwelling units per net residential acre of land.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 152/460
DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities, impairs their ability to live
independently, or a record of having such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment.
DISTRICT: Any section of the Village for which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises and the height and area of buildings are
uniform.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: Any eating or drinking establishment designed for food or drinks to be consumed by persons in vehicles parked on the
premises.
DWELLING: Any residential building that is occupied for living purposes:
Duplex: A building designed for or occupied by two (2) families totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof.
Multiple-Family: A building designed for use by several or many families, including units that are located one over the other.
Single-Family: A detached building having no wall in common with another unit designed for or occupied by one family.
Townhomes: A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three (3) or more attached units.
EXTENDED FAMILY ACCESSORY HOUSING UNIT: A group of rooms which has complete, permanently installed kitchen and bath facilities and which
constitutes a dwelling within a converted dwelling that is separate from the primary unit.
FAMILY: (A) A person living alone,
(B) Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption (including foster children) living together as a housekeeping unit and occupying a
single dwelling unit,
(C) A group of not more than three (3) persons, who need not be related by blood, marriage or adoption (including foster children) living together as a
housekeeping unit by joint agreement and occupying a single dwelling on a nonprofit, cost sharing basis, or
(D) A group of four (4) or more unrelated persons living in a community residence.
FILLING STATION (SERVICE STATION OR GAS STATION): Any building or premises used principally for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail
of automobile fuels or oils.
FIRE RESISTANCE: The time in minutes or hours that materials or assemblies have withstood a fire exposure established in accordance with the test
procedures of Standard Methods of Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials, NFPA 251.
FOLDING AND TELESCOPIC SEATING: A structure that is used for tiered seating of persons and whose overall shape and size may be reduced, without
being dismantled, for purposes of moving or storing.
FRONTAGE: All the property on one side of a street or place between two (2) intersecting streets or places (crossing or terminating) measured along the
line of the street or place, or if the street or place is dead ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street or place and the
dead end of the street or place, but not including the dead end of the street.
FULL-TIME STAFF: Staff which occupy the residence overnight, shall be included when determining the number of persons that can live in a structure
spatially in accordance with the Building Code.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building designed or used for the storage of motor driven vehicles which are owned by the occupants of the building to
which it is accessory.
GRADE: The finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.
GRANDSTAND: A structure providing tiered or stepped seating. Where the term grandstand is preceded by an adjective denoting a material, it shall mean
a grandstand the essential member of which, exclusive of seating, is of the material designated.
HEAVY TIMBER CONSTRUCTION: A type of construction as defined in Standard On Types of Building Construction, NFPA 220.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any ongoing activity conducted on the property with the intent to gain income whether it be the primary source of income or
secondary source of income and incidental to the primary use of the property as residential.
HOSPITAL: An institution providing health services primarily for inpatient medical or surgical care of the sick or injured and including related facilities such
as laboratories, outpatient department, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices which are an integral part of the facility.
HOTEL: A building used as the abiding place of more than twenty (20) persons who are for compensation lodged with or without meals.
INDEPENDENT SERVICE COORDINATION AGENCY: An agency that promotes service accessibility and continuity of care for persons with disabilities
and seeks to maximize an individual's potential for independence, productivity, and community integration by conducting comprehensive assessments and
related services.
JUNKYARD: A place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled; including auto
wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used material yards, but not including pawnshops, antique shops, and places for the sale, purchase, or storage of
used furniture and household equipment, used cars in operable condition or salvaged materials incidental to manufacturing operations.
KENNEL: Any structure or premises on which more than four (4) dogs or cats, or any combination thereof, over four (4) months of age are kept or raised
for compensation, are medically treated, cosmetically handled, groomed, fed, trained or in any way processed for compensation, but not including the retail
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 153/460
sale of animals.
LABELED EQUIPMENT OR MATERIALS: Equipment or materials to which have been attached a label, symbol or other identifying mark of an
organization generally concerned with product evaluation, that maintains periodic inspection of production of labeled equipment or materials and by whose
labeling the manufacturer indicated compliance with appropriate standards or performance in a specified manner.
LISTED EQUIPMENT OR MATERIALS: Equipment or materials which are included in a list published by an organization concerned with product
evaluation, that maintains periodic inspection of production of listed equipment or materials and whose listing states either that the equipment or materials
meet appropriate standards or have been tested and found suitable for use in a specified manner.
LODGING HOUSE: A building where lodging only is provided for compensation for five (5) or more, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons, in
contradistinction to hotels open to transients.
LOT, BUILDING: For zoning purposes, as covered by this title, a lot is a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for
use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public
street and is a single lot of record.
Lot, Corner: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if
straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than one hundred
twenty degrees (120).
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street, other than an alley.
Lot Of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the Office of the County Recorder.
Lot, Reversed Frontage: A lot in which the frontage is at right angles, or approximately right angles, to the general pattern in the area involved. A
reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot or an interior lot.
Lot, Through: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street other than an alley. Through lots with frontage on two (2) streets
may be referred to as "double frontage lots".
LOT COVERAGE: That percentage of a lot occupied by buildings, structures, or any impervious surface.
LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner
lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under "yards" in this
section.
LOT LINES: The lines bounding a lot.
LOT MEASUREMENTS: (A) Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of
the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
(B) Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot measured
across the rear of the required front yard; provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the
street line) shall not be less than eighty percent (80%) of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of a cul-de-sac, where
the eighty percent (80%) requirement shall not apply.
(C) Area of a lot shall be computed from the area contained in horizontal plane defined by the lot lines.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: A safe, clean commercial establishment, which employs professional licensed therapists pursuant to 225 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 57/1 et seq., or utilizes mechanical equipment whose services include massage and body or facial treatments. Private treatment rooms are
provided for each client receiving a personal service. Massage treatments may include body packs and wraps, exfoliation, cellulite and heat treatments,
body toning, waxing, aromatherapy, cleansing facials, medical facials, nonsurgical facelifts, electrical toning, and electrolysis. Hydrotherapy and steam and
sauna facilities, nutrition and weight management, spa cuisine, and exercise facilities and instruction may be provided in addition to the massage and
therapeutic treatment services. Full service hair salons, makeup consultation and application and manicure and pedicure services may be provided as
additional services.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person licensed by the State of Illinois pursuant to 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 57/1 et seq.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an organization that is registered by the Illinois Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis or related supplies to
registered qualifying patients.
MEDICAL OFFICE, CLINIC: A building, structure or portion thereof which is maintained or operated for the diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm
and injured persons and those who are in need of medical or surgical attention, but who are not provided with board, or room, nor kept overnight on the
premises. This includes rehabilitation services provided by physicians, dentists, nurses and other health personnel and medical testing and analysis
services. Typical uses include medical and dental offices, including chiropractic offices, physical therapy and massage establishment offices, psychologist
and psychiatrist offices. Excludes use types more specifically classified, such as hospitals.
MOTEL: A series of sleeping or living units, for the lodging of transient guests, offered to the public for compensation, and with convenient access to off
street parking spaces for the exclusive use of the guests or occupants.
NONCONFORMING USE: A building, structure or premises legally existing and/or used at the time of adoption of this title, or any amendment thereto, and
which does not conform with the use provisions of this title for the district in which the premises is located.
OPEN SPACE: Land and/or water unoccupied by structures, buildings, streets, rights-of-way and automobile parking lots. Open space may contain walls,
patios and structures for recreational use. Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the area used to satisfy stormwater management requirements set forth in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 154/460
other areas of this Code shall be counted as open space required by this title.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON: Land and/or water unoccupied by structures, buildings, streets, rights-of-way and automobile parking lots and designed and
intended for the use or enjoyment of all residents of a planned development or of all residents of the entire area in the advent of public dedication.
Common open space may contain walks, patios, and structures for recreational use. Areas used for private open space, such as private courtyards,
patios, gardens and not available to all residents of a planned unit development shall not be included as common open space.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE: Land and/or water unoccupied by structures, buildings, streets, rights-of-way and automobile parking lots, and designed and
intended for the private use or enjoyment of an individual or limited number of individuals.
PARKING LOT: A parcel of land containing one or more unenclosed parking spaces whose use is principal to the lot as differentiated from an accessory
use, as in a residential lot.
PARKING, OFF STREET PARKING: As used in this title, "parking" and "off street parking" shall be deemed to include parking spaces, access driveways,
aisles and all additional ancillary parking facilities.
PARKING SPACE: A surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one motor vehicle, together with a paved driveway connecting the
parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of an automobile.
PET EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLY STORE: Business involved in the sale of new products or merchandise to consumers for the care of pets, including the
sale of pet food. This definition does not include the retail sale of animals.
PLACE: An open unoccupied space, other than a street or alley, permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A tract of land which is originally developed as a unit under single ownership or unified control, which includes
one or more principal buildings or uses, and is processed under the planned unit development provisions of this title. Also, a parcel of land planned as a
single unit rather than as an aggregate of individual lots, with design flexibility from traditional siting regulations (such as side yards, setbacks, and height
limitations) or land use restrictions (such as prohibitions against mixing land uses within a development). The greater flexibility in locating buildings and in
combining various land uses often makes it possible to achieve certain economies in construction, as well as the preservation of open space and the
inclusion of many amenities.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A drawing or map made to a measurable scale upon which is presented a description and definition of the way
in which the design requirements of the planned unit development are to be met and intended for recording with the County Recorder of Deeds.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: The term includes the following: church, synagogue, rectory, parish house or similar building incidental to the particular use
which is maintained and operated by an organized group of people for religious purposes.
RETAIL SALE OF ANIMALS: To display, sell, deliver, offer for sale or adoption, barter, auction, exchange, or give away animals.
SCHOOL; PRIMARY, SECONDARY, COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY: Any school having regular sessions with regularly employed instructors teaching
subjects which are fundamental and essential for a general academic education, under the supervision of and in accordance with the applicable Statutes
of the State.
SERVICE ENTITY: Any individual or entity, either foreign or domestic, providing any utility or video service for a fee subject to either a franchise, State
issued authorization or regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission.
SIGN: Any name, identification, description, letters, figures, design, display, trademark, symbol or illustration intended to attract attention to a place,
subject, firm, institution, organization, business, corporation, public performance, service, article, item, idea, product, activity, object, machine or
merchandise, painted, printed or constructed and displayed in any manner whatsoever. However, this shall not include any official court public notices nor
the flag, emblem or insignia of a government, school or religious group when displayed for official purposes.
SPA: As defined in the code adopted in title 4, chapter 7 of this Code, as amended.
SPECIAL USE: A specific use of land, buildings or both described herein, subject to special provisions which, because of unique characteristics, have not
been specifically classified as a permitted use (also referred to as a "conditional use").
STABLE, PRIVATE: A stable with a capacity for not more than two (2) horses.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A stable, other than a private stable, with a capacity for three (3) or more horses.
STORY: That portion of a building above grade included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet (3') above the top
floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is finished off for use. A half story containing independent apartment or living
quarters shall be counted as a full story.
STREET: A publicly dedicated thoroughfare serving as the principal means of access to abutting property.
STREET LINE: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders or any
substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground. The term structure shall also include "tents" as that term is defined herein, notwithstanding that said tent may be
erected on a temporary basis only.
SWIMMING POOL: As defined in the code adopted in title 4, chapter 7 of this Code, as amended.
TENT: A portable shelter consisting of canvas, other coarse cloth or flexible material stretched out and extended over support structures or supported by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 155/460
forced air, and attached to stakes or other anchoring devices. A "tent" as used herein, shall be considered a "structure".
TOURIST HOME: A building or part thereof, other than a hotel, boarding house, lodging house or motel, where lodging is provided for compensation,
mainly for transients.
TOWNHOUSE: A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three (3) or more attached units in which each unit extends from foundation to roof
with open space at least on two (2) sides.
UNIFIED CONTROL: The combination of two (2) or more tracts of land wherein each owner has agreed that his tract of land shall be developed as part of
a planned unit development and shall be subject to the controls applicable to the planned unit development.
VETERINARY CLINIC: Any place operated by a veterinarian, licensed by the State of Illinois, that practices veterinary medicine, meaning to diagnose,
prognose, treat, correct, change, alleviate, or prevent animal disease, illness, pain, deformity, defect, injury, or other physical, dental, or mental conditions
by any method or mode as defined by the Illinois Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act1. Veterinary clinics may engage in the retail sale of
animals.
YARD: A required open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure; provided, however, that fences and walls may be
permitted in any yard subject to the fence regulations found in section 5-1-10 of this chapter.
(A) Yard, Front: A yard extending between lot lines which intersect a street line, the depth of which is the horizontal distance between the street right-ofway
line and a line on the lot which is at all points equidistant from and parallel to the street line.
In the case of through lots, unless the prevailing front yard pattern on adjoining lots indicates otherwise, front yards shall be provided on all frontages.
Where one of the front yards that would normally be required on a through lot is not in keeping with the prevailing yard pattern, the Community
Development Director, or authorized designee, may waive the requirement for the normal front yard and substitute therefor a special yard
requirement which shall not exceed the average of the yards provided on adjacent lots.
In the case of corner lots, a front yard of the required depth shall be provided in accordance with the prevailing yard pattern and a second front yard
of half the depth required generally for front yards in the district shall be provided on the other frontage.
In the case of corner lots with more than two (2) frontages, the Community Development Director, or authorized designee, shall determine the front
yard requirements, subject to the following limitations:
1. At least one front yard shall be provided having the full depth required generally in the district.
2. No other front yard on such lot shall have less than half the full depth required generally.
Depth of required front yard shall be measured at right angles to a straight line joining the foremost points of the side lot lines and the foremost point of
the lot. The foremost point of the side lot line, in the case of rounded property corners at street intersections, shall be assumed to be the point at
which the side and front lot lines would have met without such rounding.
(B) Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner side yard lines. In the case of through lots there will be no rear yard. In the
case of corner lots, the rear yard shall extend from the inner side yard line of the side yard adjacent to the interior lot to the rear line of the half depth
front yard.
Depth of required rear yards shall be measured at right angles to a straight line across the lot joining the rearmost points of the side lot lines or in the
case of a dedicated alley it shall be measured from the rearmost points of the side lot lines when extended to the centerline of said alley. The forward
rear yard line of a required rear yard shall be parallel to the straight line so established.
(C) Yard, Side: A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to the rear lot line.
In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend from the rear lines of the front yards required.
Width of required side yards shall be measured at right angles to a straight line joining the ends of front and rear lot lines on the same side of the lot.
The inner side yard line of a required side yard shall be parallel to the straight line so established.
(D) Yard, Required Front: That portion of the front yard from the street line to the front yard setback line, as set forth in the zoning district in which the
subject property is contained.
ZONING LOT: A tract of land consisting of individual parcels of land located within a block, which is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be
used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single ownership. (Ord. 2019-4816, 3-18-2019)
5-1-8: COMPLAINTS, VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES:
(A) Complaints Regarding Violations: Whenever a violation of this title or any ordinance granting a special use or other relief under this title occurs, or is
alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating solely the cause and basis thereof, shall be filed with the
Community Development Director. He shall properly record such complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon as provided in this title.
(B) Violation And Penalty: Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this title or any ordinance granting a special use or other relief under this Code shall be fined pursuant to the Village of Lisle annual fee
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 156/460
ordinance for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day that a violation hereof is permitted to exist. (Ord.
2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-1-9: EXTENDED FAMILY ACCESSORY HOUSING:
"Extended family accessory housing" shall be defined as a group of rooms which has complete, permanently installed kitchen and bath facilities and which
constitutes a dwelling within a converted dwelling that is separate from the primary unit.
An extended family accessory housing unit may be maintained within an existing single-family dwelling unit as a special use in the R-1 or R-2 District as
indicated hereinafter. Accessory housing shall comply with the following conditions:
(A) Only one accessory unit shall be maintained within a converted single-family dwelling unit.
(B) An accessory unit shall not exceed seven hundred (700) square feet.
(C) The accessory unit shall be structurally maintained as part of the single-family dwelling unit and may not be maintained as part of any accessory
structure.
(D) The exterior of the dwelling must retain the appearance of a single-family dwelling unit. The number of exterior entrances on the front of the converted
unit shall be the same number as prior to its conversion.
(E) The accessory unit shall be occupied by persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the occupants of the primary unit. Further, at least one of
the units shall be occupied by a person either fifty five (55) years of age or older or by a person with a proven physical or mental condition, excluding
drug addiction, alcoholism, or similar chemical dependency or substance abuse condition, which renders such joint occupancy of the single-family
dwelling unit necessary, beneficial, or desirable. Any person seeking a special use for extended accessory housing on the basis of alleged physical or
mental condition shall have the burden of proving that such physical or mental condition renders the joint occupancy of the single-family dwelling unit
medically necessary, beneficial, or desirable. A special use permit for any extended family accessory housing shall be of limited duration and shall be in
effect for only such period of time as the occupancy requirements set forth are met.
(F) No roomers or boarders shall be permitted in either units.
(G) Occupancy of an extended family accessory dwelling shall be subject to compliance with an approved floor plan for construction or conversion of the
primary and accessory units, and to elevation drawings, which shall retain the character of a single-family dwelling unit. Floor plans and reconversion
plans shall be submitted at the time of the petition.
(H) By January 31 of each year after the occupancy permit for the accessory unit is issued, all owners of the property shall file a sworn affidavit with the
Village, which shall certify the continued compliance of the use. Failure to maintain such compliance at any time, or failure to file the affidavit shall
result in the automatic expiration of any special use for the extended family accessory housing dwelling.
(I) Any special use for an extended family housing dwelling unit shall automatically expire if the owner occupying one unit thereof transfers his or her
interest to any other person or ceases to occupy such unit, unless the transfer is to a person intending to occupy the unit and is a blood relative of the
occupant of the other unit of the extended family accessory housing dwelling unit and the Village is notified of such transfer, or unless the Village
approves a new special use for such dwelling.
(J) Within one hundred twenty (120) days of any expiration of a special use for an extended family housing dwelling unit granted, the property shall be
converted exclusively to a single-family dwelling pursuant to reconversion plans submitted and approved for a special use, unless such reconversion
time period is extended by the community development director. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-1-10: FENCE REGULATIONS:
(A) All Districts: The following regulations shall apply in all zoning districts:
1. Fences shall always be installed with the "finished side" out, facing the adjacent lot.
2. Where a side, corner side or rear property line abuts a nonresidential zoning district or Interstate 355, Interstate 88, Ogden Avenue, Route 53, or
Warrenville Road, fences may be installed to a height of eight feet (8').
3. No fence may be constructed that may impede the natural flow of stormwater.
4. Fences in front yards shall be no taller than three feet (3') in height and shall be at least fifty percent (50%) open when viewed at right angles and
shall only consist of an ornamental type fence, including a wrought aluminum/iron, picket, split rail or other decorative fence, as approved by the
village.
5. Barbed wire fences shall be prohibited within any zoning district unless approved per special use permit or variation.
6. Invisible fences located in the front yard shall be clearly identified with a sign no larger than one square foot in area and securely located in the
ground.
(B) Residence Districts:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 157/460
1. Front yard: An open fence to a height not to exceed three feet (3'). (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
2. Alternate front yard: An open fence to a height not to exceed five feet (5'). Solid fences above three feet (3') in height must be set back at least ten
feet (10') from the property line located along a street frontage and adjoining an adjacent front yard. (Ord. 2016-4631, 2-15-2016)
3. Side/rear yards: Not to exceed six feet (6') in height except lots subject to subsection (A)3 of this section.
(C) Nonresidential Districts:
1. Front Yard: No fence shall be installed within the required front yard.
2. Side/Rear Yards: Not to exceed eight feet (8') in height. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-1-11: TEARDOWN/INFILL REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements shall apply to single lots within an existing residential neighborhood. The applicant must apply for and receive building permits
for any teardown/infill work. The following requirements shall be included on the required grading/building plans:
(A) Fencing: The applicant shall install a six foot (6') chainlink fence around the perimeter of the construction area, in a location approved by the
community development director, or assigned designee. The fence shall be installed before any of the site work is done.
(B) Disconnection Of Utilities: Electric, water, sanitary sewer and gas services to the building or structure must be properly disconnected.
(C) Debris And Trash Control: Debris and trash shall be controlled and contained within an enclosed trash container at all times. The applicant shall be
responsible for this provision and shall specify the location of the trash enclosure on the building plans.
(D) Sanitation Facilities: The applicant shall provide a portable toilet on the construction site. The location of the portable toilet shall be approved by the
community development director, or assigned designee.
(E) Construction Traffic: Construction site parking shall be only on one side of the street and shall not interfere or obstruct through traffic. The petitioner
shall acknowledge such and the community development director, or assigned designee, may require a parking plan.
(F) Tree Preservation: Any teardown shall require the applicant to meet the requirements of section 5-26-13 of this title for tree preservation, tree
protection, tree replacement and tree removal regulations. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-1-12: REVOCATION OF BOARD APPROVALS:
The following revocation provisions shall apply for development projects involving variations, special use permits, zoning amendments and planned unit
developments (PUDs).
(A) Conditional Approvals: A variation, special use permit, zoning amendment or a PUD may be denied if the applicant has not received final plan and
ordinance approvals within one year of the granting of the conditional approval by the board for the variation, special use permit, zoning amendment or
PUD. If the application is not acted upon finally by the village board within one year of the date of conditional approval, and such time is not extended
by mutual consent of the village board and petitioner, it shall be deemed to have been denied.
(B) Final Approvals: A variation, special use permit, zoning amendment or a PUD may be revoked under the following conditions:
1. The testimony upon which such variance, special use permit or change of zoning was falsely given;
2. There is a discontinuation of these uses for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months;
3. The property has received development approval but a building permit has not been issued within one and one-half (11/2) years of the granting of the
variation, special use permit or PUD approval. However, one extension of six (6) additional months may be granted by the village board of trustees if
cause for such nonactivity is deemed reasonable and the applicant is diligently pursuing construction and development related activities in
accordance with a pending building permit;
4. Extensions may also be considered and granted for phased construction when development approvals specify the phasing schedule in an approved
ordinance or resolution for a project.
(C) Initiation Of Revocation: The village board may initiate a request for a revocation.
(D) Application For Revocation: A request for revocation shall be filed with the zoning administrator and shall be in such form, contain such information and
be accompanied by such exhibits as the planning and zoning commission may reasonably require. A copy of such request shall be delivered via
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record of the subject land at their last ascertainable known address. A copy of such
request so filed for a revocation of a variation, a special use or the revocation of the PUD shall be immediately forwarded by the zoning administrator,
to the PZC.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 158/460
(E) Public Hearing: The PZC shall hold a public hearing on the request for revocation within ninety (90) days after receiving the request from the zoning
administrator. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once, not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30)
days before the hearing in a newspaper published or of general circulation in the village, according to law. Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the
hearing, a copy of the form of such notice shall be mailed by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record addressed to
their last ascertainable known address. The public hearing on any such request shall be held in the village hall and may be adjourned from time to time.
(F) Recommendation Of The Planning And Zoning Commission: The planning and zoning commission, within sixty (60) days after the conclusion of the
hearing on any such request, shall transmit a written report to the village board stating its findings and recommendations with regard to such request. If
granted, the board shall pass an ordinance.
(G) Action By The Village Board Of Trustees: Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the findings and recommendation of the planning and zoning
commission, the village board shall grant or deny the requested revocation or refer the request back to the planning and zoning commission for further
consideration. (Ord. 2011-4376, 4-4-2011)
Chapter 2
NONCONFORMITIES
5-2-1: INTENT:
Within the districts established by this title, or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures and uses of land and structures which
were lawful before these regulations were passed or amended, but which are prohibited under the terms of this title or future amendment thereto. It is the
intent hereof to provide for the gradual elimination of use nonconformities and to permit standards nonconformities to continue, but not to encourage their
survival. It is further the intent hereof that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded nor extended, nor be used as a basis for allowing
additional structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. (Ord. 87-1564, 7-6-1987)
5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
A "nonconformity" is any characteristic of a building, structure, lot or parcel of land, or of the use thereof, which was lawful prior to the date of enactment of
this title or any amendment thereto and that does not conform to the requirements applicable to the zoning district in which it is located.
A use or characteristic of a structure or lot which was illegal at its inception cannot be a nonconformity so as to be protected from elimination for violation
of this title or any amendment thereto.
Nonconformities are divided into two (2) categories, as follows:
(A) Use Nonconformities: A use intended for or presently carried on at premises which use lawfully existed prior to the enactment of a zoning ordinance,
which use is not allowed as a permitted or special use of the zoning district in which the premises are situated. A use nonconformity may apply to either
a principal use or an accessory use.
(B) Standards Nonconformities: All other nonconformities with the requirements of this title, including, but not limited to, nonconformities involving:
1. Yards;
2. Building heights;
3. Lot area or lot area per dwelling unit;
4. Lot width; and
5. Floor area ratio. (Ord. 87-1564, 7-6-1987)
5-2-3: CONTINUANCE OF A NONCONFORMITY:
Any building, structure or use which does not conform to the regulations contained within this title at the time it becomes applicable to such building,
structure or use may be continued subject to the following provisions:
(A) Restoration Of Damaged Structures:
1. If a single-family structure is being used as a single-family residence, regardless of the district in which it is located, and such a structure or portion
thereof is damaged to the extent that the cost of restoration to its previous condition exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the "replacement cost" as defined
herein, any new construction or reconstruction must comply with all use regulations within the zoning district.
2. Regardless of the district in which it is located, if either: a) a single-family residential structure which is not being used as a single-family residence or
b) a structure other than a single-family residential structure or portion thereof contains a standards or use nonconformity and is damaged to the
extent that the cost of restoration to its previous condition exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the "replacement cost" as defined herein, then any new
construction or reconstruction must comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which the structure is located. Further, if such a structure or
portion thereof is damaged, but the cost of restoration to its previous condition is less than fifty percent (50%) of replacement cost, the existing
nonconformity may be reestablished only if restoration commences within one year of damage and is completed within two (2) years of the date the
damage occurred.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 159/460
3. For purposes of this subsection (A), "replacement cost" shall be the fair market value of the structure or portion thereof immediately prior to the time
of such damage, as determined by the building and zoning commissioner.
4. Upon application by a petitioner and after hearing by the zoning board of appeals, the president and board of trustees may permit and allow a
nonconformity to continue or be reestablished if it finds that such continuance orreestablishment is in the best interests of the public welfare.
(B) Repairs, Additions, Enlargements And Alterations To Structures: Such repairs and maintenance work as required to keep a nonconforming building,
structure or use in sound and safe condition may be made provided no additions, enlargements or structural alterations shall be made as follows:
1. Use Nonconformity: No addition, enlargement or structural alteration, as hereinafter defined, shall be made to any structure having a use
nonconformity without the elimination of such nonconformity.
2. Standards Nonconformity: No addition, enlargement, or structural alteration as defined herein shall be made to any structure having a standards
nonconformity without both:
(a) The conformance of any new addition or enlargement portion of the structure to all requirements of the zoning district; and
(b) The elimination in whole or in part, to the extent the building and zoning commissioner determines physically and economically feasible, of
standards nonconformities existing on the property before the addition or enlargement, particularly where such nonconformities can be reduced or
eliminated without relocation of structures, acquisition of additional land, or expenditures disproportionate to the cost of the enlargement.
(C) Moving Of Structures: No structure with any nonconformity shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the same or any other lot unless
in the new location it will conform to all regulations of the applicable zoning district.
(D) Special Uses Not Conforming: Special uses approved by the village shall not be considered to be use nonconformities but shall require an additional
special use permit for any alteration, enlargement, or extension.
(E) Intermittent Uses Nonconforming: The casual, intermittent, or temporary use of land or structures shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a
nonconformity. A temporary use of land is a principal or accessory use that is established for a period of less than six (6) months and is discontinued
within that time period.
(F) Change In Use: No use nonconformity may be changed to another use nonconformity, unless the president and board of trustees shall find, after
hearing before the zoning board of appeals, that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing use
nonconformity. In permitting such change, the president and board of trustees may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with
the provisions of this title.
(G) Discontinuance Of Use: If a use nonconformity is discontinued or becomes inactive for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, any subsequent
use of the property shall conform to the regulations of the applicable zoning district. (Ord. 87-1564, 7-6-1987)
5-2-4: AMORTIZATION:
Use nonconformities shall be altered to eliminate the nonconformity within the amortization periods as follows, unless an extension is granted by the
president and board of trustees, after hearing by the zoning board of appeals:
(A) Use Nonconformity Within Building Or Structure:
1. Located in residential districts shall conform such use within three (3) years from the effective date of this chapter.
2. Located in nonresidential districts shall conform such use within five (5) years from the effective date of this chapter.
3. Multi-family use in nonresidential districts shall conform to the use regulations of the district in which the structure is located within ten (10) years
from the effective date of this chapter.
(B) Use Nonconformity Upon Land With No Structures:
1. Located in residential districts shall conform such use within three (3) years from the effective date of this chapter.
2. Located in other districts shall conform such use within five (5) years from the effective date of this chapter.
(C) Use Nonconformity Upon Land With Only Accessory Structures:
1. Located in residential districts shall conform such use within three (3) years for improvements of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) or less, six (6)
years for improvements over six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), from the effective date of this chapter.
2. Located in other districts shall conform such use within five (5) years for improvements of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) or less, ten (10) years for
improvements over six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), from the effective date of this chapter.
(D) Exceptions: The following types of nonconformities shall not be subject to the amortization provisions herein:
1. Buildings and other structures;
2. Yards;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 160/460
3. Building heights;
4. Lot area or lot area per dwelling unit;
5. Lot width;
6. Floor area ratios; and all other nonconformities not referenced in subsections (A) through (C) of this section. (Ord. 87-1564, 7-6-1987)
5-2-5: ADMINISTRATION:
(A) A building permit lawfully issued prior to the enactment of this title or any amendment thereto shall be considered to establish the lawfulness of any
structure if said structure was constructed in accordance with plans approved in conjunction with the issuance of said permit. (Ord. 87-1564, 7-6-1987)
(B) The applicable amortization period of any nonconformity shall begin upon the date of the enactment of this title for uses nonconforming on or before
that date. The applicable amortization period of any use which becomes nonconforming after that date shall begin upon the date the use becomes
nonconforming. (Ord. 96-2728, 2-5-1996)
Chapter 3
R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
5-3-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the R-1 District to encourage the establishment and preservation of residential neighborhoods characterized by single-family dwelling
units. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-3-2: PERMITTED USES:
Community residence subject to the following:
(A) The residence shall not be located within six hundred sixty (660) linear feet from an existing or approved community residence;
(B) The operator applies for and receives a certificate of zoning compliance in accordance with section 5-18-4 of this title; and
(C) Compliance with other applicable codes, regulations and policies of this Code.
Detached single-family residences.
Outdoor Christmas tree displays and sales shall be permitted during the period from the third Thursday in November through December 26 of each year,
provided: a) the zoning lot contains not less than five (5) acres of total land area and b) the zoning lot has direct roadway access from an arterial roadway
defined herein as Route 53, Ogden Avenue, Maple Avenue, Yackley Avenue or Warrenville Road. A temporary use permit must be obtained from the
Community Development Director, or assigned designee. One (1) temporary sign not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area is permitted to advertise the
temporary display and sale of Christmas trees. Posting of a cash bond is required to ensure removal of all debris and to return the property to its prior
condition.
Public land and buildings, including municipal buildings and public space.
Temporary festival parking for a fee during events designated as "special events" by resolution or motion of the Village Board. Unless the Village Board by
resolution or motion specifically allows parking on grass or other surface, all such parking shall be on parking lots and driveways meeting the standards of
subsection 5-13-1-5(C) of this title. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006; amd. Ord. 2017-4724, 5-1-2017)
5-3-3: SPECIAL USES:
Cemeteries, on a minimum land area of two (2) acres.
Community residences located within six hundred sixty (660) linear feet of an existing community residence, as measured from lot line to lot line, or for
which the State of Illinois does not require a license or certification.
Extended family accessory housing.
Libraries.
Planned unit developments.
Recreational and social facilities, including, but not limited to, aquatic centers, community centers, golf courses and golf driving ranges.
Religious institutions.
Schools, public and private. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006; amd. Ord. 2017-4724, 5-1-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 161/460
5-3-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings or structures in sum gross floor area completely subordinate in gross floor area, height and use to a principal permitted use and must
be located behind the front wall of the principal structure. In addition, the accessory building must conform to all applicable building and fire codes.
Daycare home, which receives no more than twelve (12) children and provided the residence or operator has obtained a license or certification by the
State of Illinois Department of Children and Family Services and in conformance with the home occupation code (chapter 22 of this title).
Home occupations, as defined in section 5-1-7 of this title and regulated in chapter 22 of this title.
Living quarters of persons employed in the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
Signs shall be permitted and regulated, as provided in the sign code (title 4, chapter 4, "Sign Code", of this Code).
Trails and paths for foot and bicycle. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-3-5: BULK REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Principal Buildings: The following requirements shall be observed for principal buildings:
1. Maximum Height: Thirty five feet (35'), the vertical distance, as measured from the average finished grade of all four (4) corners of the building to the
average height of the roof.
2. Minimum Lot Area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
3. Minimum Lot Frontage: The minimum lot frontage at the building line shall be one hundred feet (100').
4. Minimum Yard Requirements: As measured from the property line to the building foundation:
Front Yard
Corner
Side Yard
Interior
Side Yard
Rear Yard
40 feet 20 feet 10 feet 20 feet
5. Maximum Lot Coverage: Thirty four percent (34%), including, but not limited to, all impervious surfaces and structures covered by principal buildings,
accessory buildings, driveways, sidewalks, patios, porches, stoops and swimming pools. PUDs with lots less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet
shall include only principal buildings, accessory buildings and parking spaces in the maximum lot coverage calculation.
(B) Accessory Buildings: The following requirements shall be observed for accessory buildings:
1. Maximum Height: Fifteen feet (15'), the vertical distance, as measured from the average finished grade of all four (4) corners of the building to the
average height of the roof.
2. Minimum Yard Requirements:
Front Yard
Corner
Side Yard
Interior
Side Yard
Rear Yard
Not permitted in front of the principal building 20 feet 5 feet 10 feet
3. Minimum Building Separation: Accessory structure shall be located a minimum of ten feet (10') away from the principal structure. The minimum
separation shall be reduced to five feet (5') if the building is constructed with building materials that provide a one (1) hour fire separation.
(C) Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as specified in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-
2006)
Chapter 4
R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
5-4-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the R-2 District to encourage the establishment and preservation of residential neighborhoods characterized by single-family dwelling
units. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-4-2: PERMITTED USES:
Community residence subject to the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 162/460
(A) The residence shall not be located within six hundred sixty (660) linear feet of an existing or approved community residence, as measured from lot
line to lot line;
(B) The operator applies for and receives a certificate of zoning compliance in accordance with section 5-18-4 of this title; and
(C) Compliance with other applicable codes, regulations and policies of this Code.
Detached single-family residences.
Public land and buildings, including municipal buildings and public spaces. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006; amd. Ord. 2017-4724, 5-1-2017)
5-4-3: SPECIAL USES:
Community residences located within six hundred sixty (660) linear feet of an existing community residence, as measured from lot line to lot line, or for
which the State of Illinois does not require a license or certification.
Extended family accessory housing.
Libraries.
Planned unit developments.
Recreational and social facilities, including, but not limited to, aquatic centers, community center, golf courses and golf driving ranges.
Religious institutions.
Schools, public and private. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006; amd. Ord. 2017-4724, 5-1-2017)
5-4-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings or structures in sum gross floor area completely subordinate in gross floor area, height and use to a principal permitted use and must
be located behind the front wall of the principal structure. In addition, the accessory building must conform to all applicable building and fire codes.
Daycare home, which receives no more than twelve (12) children and provided the residence or operator has obtained a license or certification by the
State of Illinois Department of Children and Family Services and in conformance with the home occupation code (chapter 22 of this title).
Home occupations, as defined in section 5-1-7 of this title and regulated in chapter 22 of this title.
Living quarters of persons employed in the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
Signs shall be permitted and regulated, as provided in the sign code (title 4, chapter 4, "Sign Code", of this Code).
Trails and paths for foot and bicycle. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-4-5: BULK REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Principal Buildings: The following requirements shall be observed for principal buildings:
1. Maximum Height: Thirty five feet (35'), the vertical distance, as measured from the average finished grade of all four (4) corners of the building to the
average height of the roof.
2. Minimum Lot Area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
3. Minimum Lot Frontage: The minimum lot frontage at the building line shall be seventy five feet (75').
4. Minimum Yard Requirements: As measured from the property line to the building foundation: (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
Front Yard
Corner
Side Yard
Interior
Side Yard
Rear Yard
35 feet 15 feet 10 feet
7 feet1
20 feet
Note:
1.The minimum required interior side yards shall be 7 feet for any lot or zoning lots of record having a lot frontage of 60 feet or less provided a
minimum 14 foot building separation is provided between principal buildings.
(Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006; amd. Ord. 2008-4218, 8-4-2008)
5. Maximum Lot Coverage: Thirty four percent (34%), including, but not limited to, all impervious surfaces, covered by principal buildings, accessory
buildings, driveways, sidewalks, patios, porches, stoops and swimming pools. PUDs with lots less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 163/460
include only principal buildings, accessory building and parking spaces in the maximum lot coverage calculation.
(B) Accessory Buildings: The following requirements shall be observed for accessory buildings:
1. Maximum Height: Fifteen feet (15'), the vertical distance, as measured from the average finished grade of all four (4) corners of the building to the
average height of the roof.
2. Minimum Yard Requirements:
Front Yard
Corner
Side Yard
Interior
Side Yard
Rear Yard
Not permitted in front of the principal building 20 feet 5 feet 10 feet
3. Minimum Building Separation: Accessory structure shall be located a minimum of ten feet (10') away from the principal structure. The minimum
separation shall be reduced to five feet (5') if the building is constructed with building materials that provide a one (1) hour fire separation.
(C) Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as specified in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-
2006)
Chapter 5
R-3 ONE TO FOUR RESIDENCE DISTRICT
5-5-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the R-3 District to encourage the establishment and preservation of a range of residential neighborhoods characterized by a mixture of
single-family homes, duplexes, row houses and townhouses. Multi-family buildings shall be of the type known as duplex, row house, or townhouse with
individual dwelling units horizontally attached only. Single-family, duplex and row house and townhome dwelling units shall be limited to not more than four
(4) units in a row per zoning lot. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-5-2: PERMITTED USES:
Community residence subject to the following:
(A) The residence shall not be located within six hundred sixty (660) linear feet of an existing or approved community residence, as measured from lot
line to lot line;
(B) The operator applies for and receives a certificate of zoning compliance in accordance with section 5-18-4 of this title; and
(C) Compliance with other applicable codes, regulations and policies of this Code.
Detached single-family residences.
Duplex residences.
Public land and buildings, including municipal buildings and public spaces.
Row houses/townhomes, not to exceed more than four (4) units per building and zoning lot. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006; amd. Ord. 2017-4724, 5-1-2017)
5-5-3: SPECIAL USES:
Accessory buildings or structures in sum gross floor area completely subordinate in gross floor area, height and use to a principal permitted use and must
be located behind the front wall of the principal structure. In addition, the accessory building must conform to all applicable building and fire codes.
Community residences located within six hundred sixty (660) linear feet of an existing community residence, as measured from lot line to lot line, or for
which the State of Illinois does not require a license or certification.
Libraries.
Planned unit developments.
Recreational and social facilities, including, but not limited to, aquatic centers, community center, golf courses and golf driving ranges.
Religious institutions.
Schools, public and private. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006; amd. Ord. 2017-4724, 5-1-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 164/460
5-5-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Daycare home, which receives no more than twelve (12) children and provided the residence or operator has obtained a license or certification by the
State of Illinois Department of Children and Family Services and in conformance with the home occupation code (chapter 22 of this title).
Home occupations, as defined in section 5-1-7 of this title and regulated in chapter 22 of this title.
Signs shall be permitted and regulated, as provided in the sign code (title 4, chapter 4, "Sign Code", of this Code).
Trails and paths for foot and bicycle. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-5-5: BULK REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Principal Buildings: The following requirements shall be observed for principal buildings:
1. Maximum Height: Thirty five feet (35'), the vertical distance, as measured from the average finished grade of all four (4) corners of the building to the
average height of the roof.
2. Minimum Lot Area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for duplexes, row houses and townhomes.
3. Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
4. Minimum Lot Frontage: The minimum lot frontage at the building line shall be seventy five feet (75'). One hundred feet (100') for duplexes, row
houses and townhome units.
5. Minimum Yard Requirements: As measured from the property line to the building foundation:
Front Yard
Corner
Side Yard
Interior
Side Yard
Rear Yard
30 feet 15 feet 10 feet 20 feet
(Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
6. Maximum Lot Coverage: Forty percent (40%), including, but not limited to, all impervious surfaces covered by principal buildings, accessory
buildings, driveways, sidewalks, patios, porches, stoops and swimming pools. For townhome developments of one (1) acre or less and buildings with
no more than four (4) attached units, the maximum lot coverage shall be forty percent (40%) for all impervious surfaces covered by principal
buildings and accessory buildings only. (Ord. 2008-4226, 9-22-2008)
(B) Accessory Buildings: The following requirements shall be observed for accessory buildings:
1. Maximum Height: Fifteen feet (15'), the vertical distance measured from the average finished grade of all four (4) corners of a building to the average
height of the roof.
2. Minimum Yard Requirements:
Front Yard
Corner
Side Yard
Interior
Side Yard
Rear Yard
Not permitted in front of the principal building 20 feet 5 feet 10 feet
3. Minimum Building Separation: Accessory structure shall be located a minimum of ten feet (10') away from the principal structure. The minimum
separation shall be reduced to five feet (5') if the building is constructed with building materials that provide a one (1) hour fire separation.
(C) Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as specified in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-
2006)
Chapter 6
R-4 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
5-6-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the R-4 District to encourage the establishment and preservation of a range of medium to high density residential neighborhoods
characterized by a mixture of multi-family building styles that may exceed four (4) units per building. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-6-2: PERMITTED USES:
Community residence subject to the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 165/460
(A) The residence shall not be located within six hundred sixty (660) linear feet of an existing or approved community residence, as measured from lot
line to lot line;
(B) The operator applies for and receives a certificate of zoning compliance in accordance with section 5-18-4 of this title; and
(C) Compliance with other applicable codes, regulations and policies of this Code.
Multi-family dwellings.
Public land and buildings, including municipal building and public spaces. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006; amd. Ord. 2017-4724, 5-1-2017)
5-6-3: SPECIAL USES:
Accessory buildings or structures in sum gross floor area completely subordinate in gross floor area, height and use to a principal permitted use and must
be located behind the front wall of the principal structure. In addition, the accessory building must conform to all applicable building and fire codes.
Assisted living facilities.
Community residences located within six hundred sixty (660) linear feet of an existing community residence, as measured from lot line to lot line, or for
which the State of Illinois does not require a license or certification.
Libraries.
Planned unit developments.
Recreational and social facilities, including, but not limited to, aquatic centers, community center, golf courses and golf driving ranges.
Religious institutions.
Schools, public and private. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006; amd. Ord. 2017-4724, 5-1-2017)
5-6-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Daycare home, which receives no more than twelve (12) children and provided the residence or operator has obtained a license or certification by the
State of Illinois Department of Children and Family Services and in conformance with the home occupation code (chapter 22 of this title).
Home occupations, as defined in section 5-1-7 of this title and regulated in chapter 22 of this title.
Signs shall be permitted and regulated, as provided in the sign code (title 4, chapter 4, "Sign Code", of this Code).
Trails and paths for foot and bicycle. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
5-6-5: BULK REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Principal Buildings: The following requirements shall be observed for principal buildings:
1. Maximum Height: Fifty feet (50'), the vertical distance, as measured from the average finished grade of all four (4) corners of the building to the
average height of the roof.
2. Minimum Lot Area: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
3. Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: Two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet.
4. Minimum Lot Frontage: The minimum lot frontage at the building line shall be one hundred feet (100').
5. Minimum Yard Requirements: As measured from the property line to the building foundation:
Building
Height
Front Yard Corner
Side Yard
Interior
Side Yard
Rear Yard
20 feet 20 feet 10 feet 10 feet 20 feet
30 feet 25 feet 12.5 feet 20 feet 25 feet
40 feet 30 feet 15 feet 30 feet 30 feet
50 feet 35 feet 17.5 feet 40 feet 35 feet
(Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 166/460
6. Maximum Lot Coverage: Fifty percent (50%), including, but not limited to, all impervious surfaces covered by principal buildings, accessory buildings,
driveways, sidewalks, patios, porches, stoops and swimming pools. For townhome developments of one (1) acre or less and buildings with no more
than four (4) attached units, the maximum lot coverage shall be fifty percent (50%) for all impervious surfaces covered by principal buildings and
accessory buildings only. (Ord. 2008-4226, 9-22-2008)
(B) Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as specified in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 2006-4070, 11-6-
2006)
Chapter 6A
C/U COLLEGE/UNIVERSITY DISTRICT
5-6A-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the college/university district to promote higher education within its boundaries. The college/university district is intended to establish
the area in which a college or university may continue to operate in harmony with the surrounding residential and business areas. It is also understood that
segregation of such facilities in a separate district is appropriate given the unique characteristics of college and university areas, the variety of uses
needed to serve the college and university community, and the intensity of land uses in such a community. (Ord. 2004-3804, 1-5-2004)
5-6A-2: USES PERMITTED, SPECIAL AND ACCESSORY:
(A) Principal Permitted Uses: No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is
arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the following uses, except as provided in chapter 2 of this title relating to the nonconforming use of
land and/or structures:
Childcare centers.
Colleges or universities with campuses of one hundred (100) or more acres, and with master land use plans approved by the village board.
General commercial centers in accordance with the requirements of the B-2 community business district.
Public and private utility facilities.
Telecommunications towers up to sixty feet (60') in height, set back a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from adjacent residentially zoned
properties or residential developments measured at the property line.
Temporary structures and operations subject to applicable requirements of the Lisle zoning code.
(B) Special Uses: The following uses shall be permitted only ifspecifically authorized by the president and board of trustees, upon recommendation by the
board of zoning appeals in accordance with the provisions of chapter 19 of this title:
Boarding, lodging and rooming houses.
Colleges or universities without master land use plans approved by the village board.
Telecommunications towers greater than sixty feet (60') in height, or set back less than one hundred feet (100') from adjacent residentially zoned
properties or residential developments measured at the property line.
(C) Accessory Uses And Buildings: Accessory use, building or structure customarily incident to a principal permitted use or conditionally permitted use,
located on the same lot therewith, including:
1. Any use, building or structure serving or customarily associated with a college or university, including, but not limited to, the following:
(a) Classrooms; laboratory and research facilities; administration facilities; athletic centers and facilities; gymnasiums, arenas and stadiums;
multipurpose buildings; training centers; conference and seminar centers; auditoriums; student centers; cafeterias; dormitories; maintenance
facilities; and parking lots and decks.
(b) Housing for currently enrolled college and/or university students and their dependents and for current college and/or university employees and
their dependents.
(c) Health clubs, general retail and services, bookstores and dining services and other functions servicing college students.
(d) Religious and cultural uses such as churches and similar places of worship, student centers sponsored by religious organizations within the
college/university, libraries, museums, art galleries, performing arts center and similar public cultural uses.
2. Other uses and structures that are the same general character of the above permitted uses, as determined by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 2004-
3804, 1-5-2004)
5-6A-3: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the following requirements shall be observed:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 167/460
(A) Maximum Height: There are no height restrictions for college/university uses unless otherwise established.
(B) Minimum Lot Area: There are no area requirements for college/university uses unless otherwise established.
(C) Minimum Lot Frontage: There are no lot frontage requirements for college/university uses unless otherwise established.
(D) Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: There are no minimum lot area requirements for college/university uses unless otherwise established.
(E) Yard Coverage: Yard requirements for the college/university district shall be as established in a master land use plan or special use permit.
(F) Off Street Parking And Loading: The off street parking and loading requirements specified in chapter 13 of this title shall not be applicable to uses
within the college/university district. The number and the location of off street parking and loading spaces to be provided shall be as indicated on the
master land use plan or in the special use permit.
(G) Lot Coverage And Minimum Floor Area: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, there shall be no lot coverage or minimum floor area
requirements within the college/university district, unless such requirements are otherwise established in a master land use plan or special use permit.
(H) Master Land Use Plan: The location of the buildings and structures and establishment of uses shall be in general conformance with a master land use
plan. The master land use plan shall designate existing and proposed buildings, structures and land uses. A college or university may: 1) enlarge said
buildings, structures and land uses, 2) utilize any building, structure and land use designated on the master land use plan for any permitted or
permitted accessory use as enumerated above, both at the discretion of the college or university, provided that said enlargement or use is in keeping
with the requirements of this district.
(I) Community Events: The college or university may sponsor a special event of community wide interest or may permit a person or organization to utilize
facilities for such an event with or without renumeration.
(J) Lots Or Tracts Of Land: In the college/university district, any tract of land or lot may contain one or more principal buildings, structures or uses and any
building, structure, or use may be located on one or more lots or tracts of land. (Ord. 2004-3804, 1-5-2004)
5-6A-4: REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO THE BENEDICTINE UNIVERSITY MASTER PLAN AREA:
(A) Intent: This district is created in recognition of the fact that Benedictine University and the surrounding residential,business and institutional uses
constitute a single neighborhood which must develop and grow in a harmonious and compatible manner. It also recognizes that the continual
development and stability of Benedictine University is integral to the viability of the neighborhood and the entire Lisle community. Therefore, the district
is intended to provide flexibility to Benedictine University to develop and expand as it deems necessary to meet the changing requirements of higher
education, with a minimum amount of impact on surrounding areas. The Benedictine University master land use plan dated March 1998, was approved
by the village board on January 5, 2004.
(B) Maximum Height: The maximum height for all buildings and structures in the Benedictine University master land use plan area shall be seven (7)
stories unless a special use is obtained for a building or structure in excess of seven (7) stories.
(C) Yard Requirements: There shall be provided and maintained a building and parking lot setback, not inclusive of any driveways, of one hundred feet
(100') along the perimeter of the Benedictine University master land use plan area, as shown on the plan, except that said setback shall not apply to
existing buildings or parking lots shown in the Benedictine University master land use plan.
(D) Signage: All signage shall be installed in conformance with the village's sign code with the following exceptions and special requirements:
1. Two (2) identification signs shall be permitted along College Road, Maple Avenue and the westerly perimeter roadway. Each sign shall not exceed
three hundred (300) square feet of sign face area, nor exceed twelve feet (12') in height.
2. All signs located over one hundred feet (100') from the perimeter of the Benedictine University master land use plan area, as shown on the plan,
shall not be required to comply with the village's sign code, provided, all such signs shall comply with Benedictine University's sign policy in effect as
of December 10, 2003, and as the same may be amended from time to time.
3. All signage shall relate to the function, activities and events of Benedictine University. Notwithstanding this provision, commercial signage shall be
permitted within a sports stadium.
4. All signage existing as of the date of adoption hereof may remain and may be replaced or reconstructed to the same dimensions and in the same
location as the prior sign even if said sign does not conform to the village's codes. Said signage may be replaced or reconstructed of materials
different from the existing signage provided that said materials are permitted under the village's codes. (Ord. 2004-3804, 1-5-2004)
Chapter 7
O OFFICE DISTRICT
5-7-1: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 168/460
It is the purpose of the O Office District to restore economic value to developed sections of the Village, generally located along major thoroughfares or in
close proximity to the Central Business District, where existing structures situated on large parcels are no longer practical for single-family residency and
can be removed and replaced by modern office buildings, or would otherwise reasonably lend themselves to office sites without unreasonably affecting
surrounding property, while still maintaining a noncommercial environment. (Ord. 2018-4789, 10-1-2018)
5-7-2: USES PERMITTED:
(A) Principal Permitted Uses: No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is
arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the following uses, except as provided in chapter 2 of this title relating to the nonconforming use of
land and/or structures. Any of the following permitted, special or accessory uses, when situated on a parcel of five (5) acres or more, or part of one
development of five (5) acres or more, shall be permitted only as a planned unit development and in accordance with chapter 14 of this title:
Business and professional offices.
Temporary festival parking for a fee during events designated as "special events" by resolution or motion of the Village Board. Unless the Village Board
by resolution or motion specifically allows parking on grass or other surface, all such festival parking shall be on parking lots and driveways meeting the
standards of subsection 5-13-1-5(C) of this title.
(B) Special Uses: The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the President and Board of Trustees upon recommendation by the
Board of Zoning Appeals, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 19 of this title:
Colleges for academic instruction.
Daycare facilities for the care of preschool and school age children.
Hospitals and sanitariums for human care, provided that buildings which are used for the treatment of contagious diseases, the care of epileptics, drug
addicts, the feeble minded or insane, shall be at least one hundred fifty feet (150') distant from any lot in any residence district.
Mortuary or funeral homes.
Residences of architects, artists, dentists, lawyers, engineers, physicians or similar professional persons when the office or the studio of the
professional person is located in the same building as the residential use.
(C) Accessory Uses And Buildings: Accessory uses, buildings or structures customarily incidental or accessory to a principal permitted or specially
permitted use, located on the same lot therewith.
No "sign", as defined herein shall be permitted except as is provided in the Sign Code of the Village (title 4, chapter 4 of this Code). (Ord. 2018-4789,
10-1-2018)
5-7-3: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Maximum Building Height: The maximum building height shall be no greater than thirty five feet (35').
(B) Minimum Lot Area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
(C) Minimum Lot Frontage: The minimum lot frontage at the building line shall be seventy five feet (75').
(D) Yards And Lot Coverage: "Front", "rear" and "side yards" are required as defined in section 5-1-7 of this title and as specified below and the maximum
lot area that may be covered by principal buildings, accessory buildings, parking spaces, or garages, exclusive of areas used for walkways and other
landscape elements, shall not exceed the percentage of total area specified below:
Maximum
Building
Height
Front
Yard
Rear
Yard
Side Yards
Least Width
Side Yards
Sum Of
Least Widths
Maximum
Lot Coverage
20' 20' 10' 10' 20' 50%
30' 25' 20' 20' 50' 50%
35' 27.5' 25' 25' 60' 50%
(E) Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as specified in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 79-854, 5-10-
1979)
Chapter 8
B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 169/460
5-8-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the B-1 neighborhood business district to permit and to encourage the establishment of small convenience goods and personal service
centers located in close proximity to residences which are so arranged and designed as to be a functional and harmonious part of a residential
neighborhood. The location of these districts and the nature of commercial activity primarily limits the service area to the surrounding neighborhood, thus
avoiding undue traffic congestion and providing commercial services within a reasonable walking distance. (Ord. 350)
5-8-2: USES PERMITTED, SPECIAL AND ACCESSORY:
(A) Principal Permitted Uses: No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is
arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the following uses, except as provided in chapter 2 of this title relating to the nonconforming use of
land and/or structures. Any of the following permitted, special or accessory uses, when situated on a parcel of five (5) acres or more, or part of one
development of five (5) acres or more, shall be permitted only as a planned unit development and in accordance with chapter 14 of this title.
Business and professional offices.
Restaurant outdoor seating areas; provided:
1. The location of any outdoor seating areas comply with all setback requirements in the applicable zoning district and shall not obstruct pedestrian
or vehicular traffic. A minimum of four feet (4') of sidewalk clearance shall be maintained at all times for pedestrian travel;
2. Any outdoor seating area be under the direct supervision and control of the principal restaurant, and such seating area be enclosed by a fence
or decorative chain which shall be constructed in a manner to clearly delineate the boundaries of the area and to protect the health and safety of
restaurant patrons and the general public;
3. The hours of operation of any outdoor seating area be within the normal operating hours of the principal restaurant;
4. Plans shall be provided indicating the location of the outdoor seating area, and such location be approved by the building and zoning
department. The outdoor seating area shall be maintained in compliance with the approved plans; and
5. The principal restaurant and outdoor seating area shall be in compliance with all requirements of this code and all other applicable rules and
regulations of any governing body regarding the restaurant and outdoor seating area.
Retail business or service establishments supplying commodities or performing services primarily for residents of the surrounding neighborhood on a
day to day basis including grocery stores, pharmacies, delicatessen stores, barbershops, beauty parlors, clothes cleaning and laundry pick up
stations, and other similar stores and shops for the conduct of a retail business or personal service, when determined by the president and board of
trustees that said use will conform substantially to the purpose of this section, as set out herein.
Soda fountains, ice cream parlors, tearooms, restaurants and cafes, but not including entertainment, drive-in and carryout restaurants. (Ord. 350;
amd. Ord. 88-1703, 8-1-1988; Ord. 2002-3394, 4-15-2002; Ord. 2010-4320, 5-17-2010)
(B) Special Uses: The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the president and board of trustees upon recommendation by the
board of zoning appeals in accordance with the provisions of chapter 19 of this title:
Drive-in banks, building and loan companies and similar financial institutions, provided that the premises shall be enclosed by a solid wall or fence at
least six feet (6') high where it adjoins in the rear or on the sides of any residence district, public park, school or church.
Mortuaries or funeral homes.
Self-service laundries, dry cleaners and similar uses.
Studios, art, television, radio, music and dance studios and/or conservatories. (Ord. 350)
(C) Accessory Uses And Buildings:
Any accessory use, building or structure customarily incidental to a principal permitted use or special permitted use, located on the same lot therewith.
Business identification signs, professional, institutional, announcement, bulletin board, real estate and nameplate signs, subject to the provisions of the
village sign code in title 4, chapter 4 of this code.
No "sign", as defined herein, shall be permitted except as is provided in the sign code of the village in title 4, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 83-1126, 7-5-
1983)
5-8-3: REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements shall be observed:
(A) Business In Enclosed Buildings:
1. All businesses, services or processing shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except as specifically authorized by the
corporate authorities upon the recommendation of the board of zoning appeals after a public hearing has been held. (Ord. 90-2093, 10-1-1990)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 170/460
2. Temporary outdoor displays of goods or materials are allowed upon receipt of a permit from the community development director. Not more than two
(2) outdoor display events shall be approved for any business entity during each calendar year. Outdoor displays may remain outdoors for a period
not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days. A permit for any event allowed by this subsection (A)2 shall be issued only if the display of goods or
materials is accessory to the principal use of the land, and is authorized by the principal user and the owner of the land.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, outdoor Christmas tree displays and sales shall be permitted during the period from the third Thursday in November
through December 25 of each year, provided a permit is obtained from the community development director. (Ord. 97-2842, 2-3-1997)
(B) Size Restricted: Each business establishment is restricted to a maximum of twenty five thousand (25,000) cubic feet of gross area. This volume shall
be measured by multiplying the gross floor area by the average ceiling height.
(C) Production For Sale At Retail: All products produced on the premises, whether primary or incidental, shall be sold at retail on the premises where
produced.
(D) Objectionable Uses: No processes and equipment shall be employed or goods sold which are objectionable by reason of odor, dust, smoke, cinders,
gas, fumes, noise, vibration, radiation, refuse matter or water carried wastes.
(E) New Merchandise: Goods for sale shall consist primarily of new merchandise.
(F) Maximum Building Height: No principal structure shall exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') in height.
(G) Minimum Lot Area: For residential uses, minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
(H) Minimum Lot Frontage: For residential uses, the minimum lot frontage shall be seventy five feet (75').
(I) Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: For residential uses, same as specified for R-2 single-family residence district.
(J) Yards And Lot Coverage: Front, rear and side yards are required as defined in section 5-1-7 of this title and as specified below; and the maximum lot
area that may be covered by principal buildings, accessory buildings and parking spaces or garages, exclusive of areas used for walkways, access
drives, landscape elements, shall not exceed the percentage of total lot area as specified below:
Maximum
Building
Height
Front
Yard
Rear
Yard
Side Yards
Least Width
Side Yards
Sum Of
Least Widths
Maximum Lot
Coverage
15'/1
story
25' 25' None except where adjoining a residential district, in which case there shall be a yard of not
less than 10'. If an unrequired side yard is provided, it shall be not less than 5' wide
If residential, 34%; if not
residential, not applicable
(K) Minimum Floor Area: For residential uses, same as specified for R-2 single-family residence district.
(L) Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as specified in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 350)
Chapter 9
B-2 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
5-9-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the B-2 Community Business District to permit and to encourage the establishment of commercial shopping centers which offer a wide
variety of consumer goods and services. It is intended that the Community Business District serve a larger population and larger area than the B-1 District
and, when located along major highways and thoroughfares, accommodate primarily automotive oriented establishments. (Ord. 2019-4816, 3-18-2019)
5-9-2: USES PERMITTED, SPECIAL AND ACCESSORY:
(A) Principal Permitted Uses: No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is
arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the following uses, except as provided in chapter 2 of this title relating to the nonconforming use of
land and/or structures. Any of the following permitted, special or accessory uses, when situated on a parcel of five (5) acres or more, or part of one
development of five (5) acres or more, shall be permitted only as a planned unit development and in accordance with chapter 14 of this title.
1. General. All principal permitted uses as regulated in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District, except as hereinafter modified.
2. Retail stores. Specialty shops such as jewelry stores, shoe stores, dry goods, notion stores, florist shops, or pet equipment and supply stores.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 171/460
3. Personal services and business services.
Eating and drinking places, restaurants and cocktail lounges, subject to all applicable regulations and such permits and licenses as may be required
by law.
General business services.
Personal service establishment.
Post Offices and telegraph offices.
4. Processing. Bakery, catering establishment, laundry or dyeing and cleaning works, employing not more than five (5) persons.
(B) Special Uses: The following uses shall be permitted if specifically authorized by the President and Board of Trustees upon recommendation by the
Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the provisions of chapter 19 of this title:
1. General. Any special permitted use and as regulated in the B-1 District.
2. Commercial recreation. Any type of commercial recreation, including baseball fields, swimming pools, skating rinks, and similar open air facilities,
provided such establishments shall be located not less than one hundred feet (100') from any Residential District.
3. Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics. Kennels for display, boarding or treatment of pets and other domestic animals; provided that any structure or
area used for such purposes, including pens, and exercise yards, shall be located at least one hundred feet (100') from any Residential District and
that such pens or exercise runs shall be enclosed on four (4) sides by a sight obscuring, unpierced fence or wall at least five feet (5') in height.
4. Retail sale of animals.
5. Automotive and power equipment services.
Any automobile, truck, trailer, recreational vehicle, motorcycle, mower, tractor, power trimmer or chain saw, including, but not limited to, selling,
servicing, displaying, repairing, cleaning, renovating, and washing, provided that there shall be a minimum distance of fifty feet (50') between the use
and any Residential District, and that the premises shall be enclosed by a solid wall, fence or earthen berm, at least six feet (6') in height where it
adjoins in the rear of or on the side of any Residential District.
Gasoline service stations, but not including repair and/or painting or the storage and/or rental of cars, trucks or trailers provided that:
(a) There shall be a minimum distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') between the parcel of land proposed for the automotive use and any
Residentially Zoned District. In the case of a parcel of land across a street or alley right-of-way from a Residentially Zoned District, the street or
alley right-of-way shall not be included as part of the required distance.
(b) Landscaping and screening shall be installed, maintained and subject to Village inspection and approval. Said landscaping shall be a fence, berm
or hedge at least six feet (6') in height and shall have an opacity of at least eighty percent (80%) when adjacent to a Residentially Zoned District.
(c) Lighting as specified in chapter 27, "Outdoor Lighting", of this title.
(d) Any building or structure be constructed with solid masonry bearing walls with face brick which shall be subject to Village inspection and approval.
(e) The parcel on which such use is proposed is not within the floodplain as defined in chapter 16 of this title.
(f) The Village Corporate Authorities specifically find that such use will not adversely impact, or cause unnecessary hardship to adjacent property
owners. Further, the Corporate Authorities shall find that such use shall not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the community.
6. Utility stations. Public utility stations and services.
7. Motel and hotels.
8. Minor fabricating and repair. Plumbing shop, painting and decorating shop, tinsmithing shop, automobile service stations, including auto repairing
and tire repair shop.
9. Commercial parking lots.
10. Firearms and ammunition. Sale of firearms or ammunition for firearms; provided, however, that no special use for firearms or ammunition sales
shall be approved for any property located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a public, private or parochial school.
11. Other similar uses.
(C) Accessory Uses And Buildings: Accessory uses, buildings or structures customarily incidental or accessory to a principal permitted or specially
permitted use, located on the same lot therewith including:
1. Sign. No "sign", as defined herein, shall be permitted except as is provided in the Sign Code in title 4, chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 2019-4816, 3-18-
2019)
5-9-3: REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements shall be observed:
(A) Businesses In Enclosed Buildings:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 172/460
1. All businesses, services or processing shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except for the sale of automotive fuel,
lubricants and fluids at service stations, and such outdoor display or storage of vehicles, materials and equipment as hereinbefore specifically
authorized or as may be authorized by the Corporate Authorities upon the recommendation of the Board of Zoning Appeals after a hearing has been
held.
2. Temporary outdoor displays of goods or materials are allowed upon receipt of a permit from the Community Development Director. Not more than
two (2) outdoor display events shall be approved for any business entity during each calendar year. Outdoor displays may remain outdoors for a
period not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days. A permit for any event allowed by this subsection (A)2 shall be issued only if the display of goods
or materials is accessory to the principal use of the land, and is authorized by the principal user and the owner of the land.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, outdoor Christmas tree displays and sales shall be permitted during the period from the third Thursday in November
through December 25 of each year, provided a permit is obtained from the Community Development Director.
(B) Production For Sale At Retail: All products produced on the premises, whether primary or incidental, shall be sold at retail on the premises where
produced.
(C) Objectionable Uses: No process or equipment shall be employed or goods sold which are objectionable by reason of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas,
fumes, noise, vibration, radiation, refuse matter or water carried wastes.
(D) New Merchandise: Goods for sale shall consist primarily of new merchandise, excepting antique shops and used motor vehicles.
(E) Maximum Building Height: No principal structure shall exceed three (3) stories or forty five feet (45') in height.
(F) Minimum Lot Area: For residential uses, minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
(G) Minimum Lot Frontage: For residential uses, the minimum lot frontage shall be seventy five feet (75').
(H) Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: For residential uses, same as specified for R-2 Residence District.
(I) Yards And Lot Coverage: Front, rear and side yards are required as defined in section 5-1-7 of this title and as specified below, and the maximum lot
area that may be covered by principal buildings, accessory buildings and parking spaces or garages, exclusive of areas used for walkways, access
drives and landscape elements shall not exceed the percentage of total lot area as specified below:
Maximum
Building
Height
Front
Yard
Rear
Yard
Side Yards
Least Width
Side Yards
Sum Of
Least Widths
Maximum Lot
Coverage
Up to and
including 45'
25' 25' None except when adjoining a Residential District in which case there shall be a side yard
of not less than 10'. If an unrequired yard is provided, it shall not be less than 5'
If residential, 34%; if not
residential, not applicable
(J) Minimum Floor Area: For residential uses, same as specified for R-2 Residence District.
(K) Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as specified in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 2019-4816, 3-18-
2019)
Chapter 10
B-3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
5-10-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the B-3 District to accommodate pedestrian oriented development in the downtown area consisting primarily of retail service and
specialty shops and a mixture of pedestrian oriented uses, including retail, service, office, residential and public uses. The B-3 District is divided into two
(2) subdistricts to provide a primary retail shopping environment at the street level along the major retail corridor within the downtown and to provide a
Perimeter District to accommodate a variety of mixed uses on the periphery of the downtown area and also provide a transition from the downtown
business area and adjacent single-family residential areas.
(A) Subdistricts: The B-3 Central Business District shall be divided into two (2) subdistricts: 1) the B-3A Central Retail Core District and 2) the B-3B
Downtown Perimeter District. The purpose of the B-3A Central Retail Core District is to accommodate retail, entertainment and restaurant uses at the
ground level. The purpose of the B-3B Perimeter District is to accommodate a variety of uses, including residential, office, retail, service and public
uses.
(B) Boundaries: The boundaries of the B-3 Central Business District and B-3 Subdistricts shall be delineated on the official Village of Lisle zoning map
adopted annually in March by the Mayor and Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2019-4816, 3-18-2019)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 173/460
5-10-2: REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements shall be observed:
(A) Business In Enclosed Buildings:
1. All businesses, services, processing or storage of materials shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except for the sale of
automotive fuel, lubricants and fluids at service stations, and such outdoor display or storage of vehicles, materials and equipment as hereinbefore
specifically authorized or as may be authorized by the Corporate Authorities upon recommendation of the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public
hearing has been held.
2. Temporary outdoor displays of goods or materials are allowed upon receipt of a permit from the Community Development Director. Not more than
two (2) outdoor display events shall be approved for any business entity during each calendar year. Outdoor displays may remain outdoors for a
period not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days. A permit for any event allowed by this subsection (A)2 shall be issued only if the display of goods
or materials is accessory to the principal use of the land, and is authorized by the principal user and the owner of the land.
(B) Christmas Tree Displays And Sales: Notwithstanding the foregoing, outdoor Christmas tree displays and sales shall be permitted during the period
from the third Thursday in November through December 25 of each year, provided a permit is obtained from the Community Development Director.
(C) Festival Parking: Temporary festival parking for a fee during events designated as "special events" by resolution or motion of the Village Board. Unless
the Village Board by resolution or motion specifically allows parking on grass or other surface, all such festival parking shall be on parking lots and
driveways meeting the standards of subsection 5-13-1-5(C) of this title.
(D) Exterior Lighting: Exterior lighting fixtures shall be designed or shaded to avoid casting direct light or glare toward surrounding properties or streets and
to direct illumination downward.
(E) Manufacture Of Goods: The manufacture of goods shall be permitted only when ancillary to the principal use of the property. All goods produced shall
be sold at retail on the premises.
(F) Site Plan And Review: Site plan and architectural review for all new structures and parking lots is required to ensure that all Village standards are
satisfied, including, but not limited to, land use, site access, parking circulation, landscaping, stormwater management, open space, signage and
exterior finish materials. (Ord. 2019-4816, 3-18-2019)
5-10-3: SUBDISTRICTS:
(A) Central Retail Core Subdistrict:
1. Permitted Uses:
Antique shop.
Art gallery.
Arts and crafts store.
Bakery, retail.
Bath, bed and kitchen shops.
Bicycle sale, rentals and repairs.
Book, magazine and newspaper stores.
Business and professional offices, when located on a floor other than the ground floor.
Camera stores.
Candy stores.
China and glassware stores.
Civic uses.
Clothing and apparel stores.
Coin and stamp stores.
Convenience store.
Delicatessens.
Department stores.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 174/460
Drugstore and pharmacy, retail.
Florist shops.
Food stores.
Furniture stores.
Gift and card stores.
Hardware stores.
Hobby and craft stores.
Ice cream parlors.
Interior decorating stores.
Jewelry stores.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Liquor stores.
Meat markets.
Musical instrument sales and service.
Office supply stores.
Optical goods, sales and service.
Paint, glass and wallpaper stores.
Parcel services.
Pet equipment and supply stores.
Photographic stores.
Restaurants.
Shoe stores.
Sporting goods stores.
Tailor shops.
Telecommunications store, sales and service.
Tobacco shops.
Toy stores.
Upholstery store.
2. Special Uses:
Amusement establishments. Bowling alleys, pool halls, dance halls, swimming pools and skating rinks.
Banks without drive-through facilities.
Beauty and barber shop.
Business and professional offices, when located on the ground floor.
Club and lodge, private, fraternal or religious.
Community center.
Daycare centers.
Drive-through facilities.
Dry cleaning.
Dwelling units, above ground floor level only.
Greenhouse, retail and wholesale of plants.
Hotels.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 175/460
Indoor recreational center.
Medical offices, clinics.
Music and dance school.
Outdoor sales and storage.
Parking garages and stand alone parking lots.
Planned unit developments.
Printing, copying and blueprint shops.
Private and public schools.
Tanning salon.
Wellness facility. Ground level not to exceed two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet/aboveground, the ground floor only.
3. Bulk Requirements:
(a) Maximum Building Height: No principal structure shall exceed four (4) stories or fifty feet (50') in height, whichever is lower.
(b) Minimum Lot Area: No requirements.
(c) Minimum Lot Frontage: No requirements.
(d) Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: There is no specified minimum lot area per dwelling unit since other controls in this district such as above
first floor location, yards, floor area ratio, minimum floor areas, parking and others will combine to limit this variable.
(e) Yard Requirements: No requirements. Corner yard requirements may be required by the Village in order to maintain proper vision clearance at
street intersections.
(f) Minimum Floor Area: No requirements.
(g) Floor Area Ratio: No requirements.
4. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as specified in chapter 13 of this title with the exception of
the following:
Multiple-family dwellings:
2 bedroom units 1.5 parking spaces
1 bedroom and efficiency units 1 parking space
5. Signage: Signage shall be constructed and maintained as specified in title 4, chapter 4, "Sign Code", of this Code.
(B) Downtown Perimeter Subdistrict:
1. Permitted Uses:
All permitted uses identified in the B-3 Central Business District.
Banks.
Beauty and barber shops.
Business and professional offices.
Dry cleaning.
Medical offices, clinics.
Music and dance studios.
Printing, copying and blueprint shops.
Tanning salon.
Wellness facility.
2. Special Uses:
All special uses identified in the B-3 Central Business District.
Automobile car wash.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 176/460
Automobile sales and service.
Dwelling units, single-family, two-family and multi-family.
Veterinary clinics.
3. Bulk Requirements:
(a) Commercial maximum building height: No principal structure shall exceed four (4) stories or fifty feet (50') in height, whichever is lower. No
building adjacent to Single-Family Residential zoning shall exceed a building height of two (2) stories unless otherwise permitted by special use
permit.
(b) Residential maximum building height: No principal structure shall exceed forty feet (40') in height. No building adjacent to Single-Family
Residential zoning shall exceed a building height of two (2) stories unless otherwise permitted by special use permit.
(c) Commercial minimum lot area: No requirements.
(d) Residential minimum lot area: Minimum ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
(e) Commercial minimum lot frontage: No requirements.
(f) Residential minimum lot frontage: Seventy five feet (75').
(g) Commercial and residential minimum lot area per dwelling unit: There is no specified minimum lot area per dwelling unit since other controls in
this district such as above first floor location, yards, floor area ratio, minimum floor areas, parking and others will combine to limit this variable.
(h) Commercial yard requirements:
(1) Front and corner side yards: No requirements. Corner yard requirements may be required by the Village in order to maintain proper vision
clearance at street intersections.
(2) Side and rear yards: A minimum twenty feet (20') shall be provided if the yard is located adjacent to a Residential Zoning District. The required
yard must be landscaped in accordance with the landscaping requirements of chapter 26 of this title.
(i) Residential yard requirements:
(1) Front and corner side yards: Ten feet (10').
(2) Side yard: Ten feet (10').
(3) Rear yard: None. If abutting a Residential Zoned District, twenty feet (20').
(j) Minimum floor area: No requirements.
(k) Floor area ratio: No requirements.
4. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as specified in chapter 13 of this title with the exception of
the following:
Multiple-family dwellings:
2 bedroom units 1.5 parking spaces
1 bedroom and efficiency units 1 parking space
5. Signage: Signage shall be constructed and maintained as specified in title 4, chapter 4, "Sign Code", of this Code. (Ord. 2019-4816, 3-18-2019)
5-10-4: NONCONFORMING USES:
Nonconforming uses may remain indefinitely until a time that one or more of the following occurs:
(A) A structure is damaged beyond fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value.
(B) Change in use.
(C) A use is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months. (Ord. 2019-4816, 3-18-2019)
Chapter 11
O-R OFFICE-RESEARCH DISTRICT
5-11-1: PURPOSE:
The Office-Research District is intended to provide land for attractively landscaped sites, often along major trafficways, permitting "show place" buildings
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 177/460
having large setbacks. The entire area is intended to create a "park like" atmosphere conducive to the quality development of international headquarters,
large office buildings, research and educational activities, and some specialized nonobjectionable industrial activities. The low intensity and limiting
restrictions provide for permitted uses compatible with adjacent residential and commercial developments. (Ord. 2018-4789, 10-1-2018)
5-11-2: USES PERMITTED, SPECIAL AND ACCESSORY:
(A) Principal Permitted Uses: No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is
arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the following uses, except as provided in chapter 2 of this title relating to the nonconforming use of
land and/or structures. Any of the following permitted, special or accessory uses, when situated on a parcel of five (5) acres or more, or part of one
development of five (5) acres or more, shall be permitted only as a planned unit development and in accordance with chapter 14 of this title:
1. Commercial uses:
Restaurants with or without accessory cocktail lounge, but excluding fast food carryout and drive-in service.
Temporary festival parking for a fee during events designated as "special events" by resolution or motion of the Village Board. Unless the Village
Board by resolution or motion specifically allows parking on grass or other surface, all such festival parking shall be on parking lots and driveways
meeting the standards of subsection 5-13-1-5(C) of this title.
2. Office and/or business service establishments such as, but not limited to:
Bank and/or financial institutions.
Business offices.
Computer and/or data processing centers.
Home office operations.
Insurance company headquarters.
International headquarters.
Medical offices, clinics.
Merchandise and product display space, but not direct sales.
Merchandise mart, used primarily for display and the wholesale marketing of products; limited retail sales are allowed.
Personnel training center, including dormitory facilities.
Professional offices of engineering and/or architectural firms.
Regional sales offices including incidental distribution and servicing of products.
Theaters, but not including outdoor theaters.
3. Research and development uses such as, but not limited to:
Design firms.
Electronic and communications industries.
Experimental product development.
Laboratories.
Pharmaceutical industries.
Research firms including incidental pilot plant operations.
4. Light industrial type uses, limited to the following uses only:
Light industrial operations of electronic and communications industries.
Light industrial operations of experimental product development firms.
Light industrial operations of pharmaceutical industries.
Light industrial operations of research firms.
"Light industrial" shall be defined as the production processes, including testing, carried on under circumstances such that the activities shall not be
injurious or offensive to adjacent property owners by reason of emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, fly ash, fumes, vapors, gases,
particulate matter, or other forms of air pollution, odors, toxic or noxious materials, glare, heat, liquid or solid wastes, fire or explosion hazards, or
other hazards. All of the referenced activities involved in production shall be carried on, and all storage areas contained, within completely enclosed
facilities that are of materials similar to materials used in the principal building on the site.
5. Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities such as, but not limited to:
Essential services. Gas regulator stations, telephone exchange, electric substation, well site and water storage facility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 178/460
Fire station.
Hospital.
Museum, art gallery.
Office building.
Post Office.
(B) Prohibited Uses: No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged,
intended or designed for any of the following uses:
1. Residential:
One-family dwellings.
Two- to four-family dwellings.
2. Institutional:
Childcare centers.
Homes for the aged and similar institutions for human care.
3. Commercial:
Commercial uses, except as listed in subsections (A)1, (A)2, and (C)2 of this section.
Industrial uses, except as listed in subsection (A)4 of this section.
4. Other uses having operations that are deemed by the Board of Trustees to be incompatible with the intended environmental character of the O-R
Office-Research District.
(C) Special Uses: The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the President and Board of Trustees upon recommendation by the
Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the provisions of chapter 19 of this title:
1. Residential:
Dwellings for families of caretakers, watchmen and operators, and such sleeping and boarding accommodations as are customarily incidental and
necessary to a permitted use, which buildings must be located on the same premises as such permitted use; further, additions to existing buildings
may be authorized where the number of families or the number of lodging accommodations is not increased.
Multi-family dwellings.
2. Commercial:
Health, swim and racquet clubs and incidental facilities, separate and apart from those permitted in this subsection.
Hotel and/or motel.
Private, membership only health clubs in multi-building office complexes under single ownership or control on sites not less than ten (10) acres,
when such facility is designed primarily for use by tenants of the office complex. Such structure shall not front on any perimeter road and access
thereto shall be provided only from interior roadways.
Restaurant outdoor seating areas; provided:
(a) That the location of any outdoor seating areas comply with all setback requirements in the applicable zoning district and shall not obstruct any
pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
(b) That no direct access to any outdoor seating area be available except through the principal use restaurant;
(c) That any outdoor seating area be under the direct supervision and control of the principal use restaurant, and that such seating area be
enclosed by a fence or decorative chain which shall be constructed in a manner to clearly delineate the boundaries of the area and to protect the
health and safety of restaurant patrons and the general public;
(d) That the hours of operation of any outdoor seating area be the same as those of the principal restaurant; and
(e) That any restaurant outdoor seating area be subject to all regulations, and such permits and licenses as may be required by law.
Restaurants with accessory cocktail lounges, in multi-building office complexes under single ownership or control, located on sites not less than ten
(10) acres in size, and provided such facility is incidental to and designed primarily for the use by tenants of the office complex. The restaurant may
be freestanding or located within an office building; however, if freestanding, such structure shall not front on any perimeter road and access thereto
shall be provided only from interior roadways.
3. Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities:
Church.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 179/460
Heliport, public and private, located on lots not less than one acre in area and having a touchdown space which is enclosed by a fence and which is
not less than one hundred feet (100') in diameter. The landing area shall, as a minimum, have two (2) approach-departure paths, with centerlines
radiating from the center of the area forming an angle greater than ninety degrees (90), which are not less than seventy five feet (75') in width and
which are unobstructed above an imaginary plane extending from the edge of the landing area at an incline of one foot (1') vertically to each six feet
(6') horizontally.
4. Institutional:
Schools, workshops, training centers for developmentally disabled persons.
Vocational, trade, technical schools, colleges, or universities.
5. Other similar uses: Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as "principal permitted uses" under subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 2018-4789,
10-1-2018)
(D) Accessory Uses And Buildings: Accessory uses, buildings or structures customarily incidental or accessory to a principal permitted or specially
permitted use, located on the same lot therewith, including:
1. Sign. No "sign", as defined herein, shall be permitted except as is provided in the Sign Code in title 4, chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 83-1126, 7-5-
1983)
5-11-3: REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements shall be observed:
(A) Maximum Building Height: No structure or portion thereof (except a mechanical penthouse structure) shall exceed a height of eighty feet (80').
(B) Minimum Lot Area: A separate ground area of not less than four (4) acres shall be designated, provided it is continuously maintained for each structure
of land containing a permitted use. Variations in lot size for the development of special uses as specified in subsection 5-11-2(C) of this chapter may be
granted by the president and board of trustees after public hearing before the zoning board of appeals. (Ord. 85-1336, 10-7-1985)
(C) Minimum Lot Frontage: A minimum lot frontage of three hundred feet (300') shall be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.
(D) Yards:
1. Front Yard: All structures shall be set back from the front lot line at least the minimum distance specified in the following table, except when a greater
distance is required by subsection (D)4 of this section:
Building Height Front Yard Setback
Up to 50 feet 100 feet
60 feet 120 feet
70 feet 140 feet
80 feet 160 feet
2. Side Yard: All structures shall be set back from the side lot line at least the minimum distance specified in the following table, except when a greater
distance is required by subsection (D)4 of this section:
Building Height Side Yard Setback
Up to 50 feet 50 feet
60 feet 60 feet
70 feet 70 feet
80 feet 80 feet
3. Rear Yard: All structures shall be set back from the rear lot line at least the minimum distance specified in the following table, except when a greater
distance is required by subsection (D)4 of this section:
Building Height Rear Yard Setback
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 180/460
Up to 50 feet 50 feet
60 feet 60 feet
70 feet 70 feet
80 feet 80 feet
4. Yards Adjacent To Residential Districts: All structures and parking lots shall be at a distance of not less than two hundred feet (200') from a
residential zoning district and all vehicular drives shall be set at a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100') from a residential zoning district;
provided, however, that the yards may be reduced to one hundred feet (100') for structures and parking lots and fifty feet (50') for vehicular drives if
adequate screening, landscaping, earth berming, or walls, or a combination thereof, and controlled lighting is provided in accord with plans submitted
and approved by the mayor and board of trustees. The screening plan shall be submitted to, reviewed by and a report rendered to the mayor and
board of trustees by a competent, recognized landscape architect.
In the case of a parcel of land across a street or alley from a residential district, the street or alley right of way shall not be included as a part of the
required yard.
If other provisions of this chapter require greater yards than this subsection, the greater yard shall be required.
(E) Maximum Lot Coverage: No building with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of thirty percent (30%) of the area of the lot. (Ord. 502, 2-19-
1974)
(F) Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.5. Additionally, not to exceed 0.8 where over ninety percent (90%) of the required parking is provided underground or
in an enclosed parking structure. Parking structures will be included in calculating the square footage of the floor area ratio as follows:
1. Underground parking, that is parking in a story or level that is more than one-half (1/2) below the adjacent grade measured at all points around the
structure, shall not be counted as floor area in computing the floor area ratio.
2. Aboveground parking, that is any parking in a structure that is not considered underground, shall be counted when computing the square footage
figure for calculating the floor area ratio.
3. Aboveground rooftop structured parking shall be counted at the rate of fifty percent (50%) of the rooftop area for purposes of calculating the floor
area in the floor area ratio. (Ord. 89-1994, 10-2-1989)
(G) Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as specified in chapter 13 of this title. In addition to said
requirements, off street parking, with the exception of guest parking not to exceed space for eight (8) vehicles and pick up areas, shall not be located
within the front yard area required by the provisions of subsection (D)4 of this section.
In addition, all parking and drives shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from all side and rear property lines. (Ord. 502, 2-19-1974)
(H) Open Space: All unpaved areas shall be landscaped subject to the approval of the mayor and board of trustees. A complete landscape plan for the
building area and entire site must be approved by the mayor and board of trustees or their assigned representatives in the village staff. Open spaces
shall not be less than forty percent (40%) of the site area. Land occupied by buildings, vehicular drives and open automobile parking lots shall not be
included in the calculation of the required open space. (Ord. 89-1994, 10-2-1989)
(I) Performance Standards: All uses shall be developed in compliance with the applicable performance standards required in chapter 15 of this title. (Ord.
502, 2-19-1974)
1. Enclosure Of Operations:
(a) All business, services, processing, storage and all truck and miscellaneous loading operations shall be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings. Provided, miscellaneous loading operations for office, office type, hotel and motel uses may utilize "open air" loading spaces located in
the rear and side yards only. Said "open air" loading spaces shall be designed and constructed according to the applicable provisions of ordinance
350 (this zoning title), as from time to time amended. Garage doors and loading space doors shall be fully screened and located on the side yard
or rear yard exposure of the building only. (Ord. 90-2093, 10-1-1990)
(b) Temporary outdoor displays of goods or materials are allowed upon receipt of a permit from the community development director. Not more than
two (2) outdoor display events shall be approved for any business entity during each calendar year. Outdoor displays may remain outdoors for a
period not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days. A permit for any event allowed by this subsection (I)1(b) shall be issued only if the display of
goods or materials is accessory to the principal use of the land, and is authorized by the principal user and the owner of the land.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, outdoor Christmas tree displays and sales shall be permitted during the period from the third Thursday in
November through December 25 of each year, provided a permit is obtained from the community development director. (Ord. 97-2842, 2-3-1997)
(c) Temporary indoor display and retail sale of goods or materials shall be allowed upon receipt of written approval from the community development
director. Not more than four (4) indoor display or retail sale events shall be approved for any business entity during each calendar year. No indoor
display or retail sale event shall exceed seven (7) consecutive days in length. The approval of four (4) indoor events shall not limit a business
entity from obtaining permits for temporary outdoor displays of goods or materials as provided in subsection (I)1(b) of this section. No approval of a
temporary indoor display or retail sale event shall be given unless the business entity has submitted to the community development director a copy
of the multiple site vendor filing which has been filed with the Illinois department of revenue. Notated thereon or attached thereto shall be the
business entity's Illinois business tax number. (Ord. 93-2369, 3-15-1993)
2. Utility Facilities: All utility cables, conduit, sewer and water lines shall be located belowground. Fire hydrants and similar relatively small
appurtenances may be located aboveground. More sizeable appurtenances and facilities, which are located aboveground, such as transformers,
shall be adequately screened or be given building treatment compatible with the quality of this zoning classification and subject to the approval of the
board of trustees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 181/460
3. Lighting: In addition to the performance standards of subsection 5-15-6(H) of this title dealing with glare, no other lighting shall be constructed in
such a way as to be objectionable to adjacent property owners. Lighting of buildings, interior street lighting, and landscape lighting shall be directed
away from adjacent highways, streets and properties. Screening shall be provided to conceal from adjacent properties the direct light created by
vehicle headlights.
No neon, moving, revolving or flashing signs shall be permitted and all permissible signs shall be illuminated by interior lighting, indirect lighting or
direct lighting concealed from view from adjoining highways and streets, or as part of the general floodlighting of the building. (Ord. 502, 2-19-1974)
Chapter 12
I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
5-12-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the I-1 industrial district to create industrial areas that will be acceptable within the village and will not adversely affect adjacent
business or residential neighborhoods by permitting industrial establishments which are either: a) ones whose operations are relatively free from
objectionable influences, or b) ones whose objectionable features will be obviated by design and/or appropriate devices. In the interest of general health
and welfare, residential and certain institutional uses are not permitted within this district. (Ord. 350; amd. 1979 Code)
5-12-2: USES PERMITTED, SPECIAL AND ACCESSORY:
(A) Principal Permitted Uses: No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is
arranged, intended or designed for other than one of the following uses, except as provided in chapter 2 of this title relating to the nonconforming use of
land and/or structures. Any of the following permitted, special or accessory uses, when situated on a parcel of five (5) acres or more, or part of one
development of five (5) acres or more, shall be permitted only as a planned unit development and in accordance with chapter 14 of this title:
Any manufacturing use or process including assembling, fabricating, altering, converting, finishing, processing, treating and packaging, except any use
or process hereinafter specifically excluded, and providing that such use will not be hazardous, offensive or objectionable by reason of odor, dust,
cinders, gas, fumes, noise vibrations, radiation, refuse matter or water carried waste.
Professional offices or business offices not exceeding two (2) stories or thirty feet (30') in height.
Storage, handling, assembly and distribution of goods and materials for retail, wholesale or on site use, except any combustible materials and/or
flammable liquids.
Temporary festival parking for a fee during events designated as "special events" by resolution or motion of the village board. Unless the village board
by resolution or motion specifically allows parking on grass or other surface, all such festival parking shall be on parking lots and driveways meeting the
standards of subsection 5-13-1-5(C) of this title. (Ord. 350; amd. 1979 Code; Ord. 85-1326, 9-3-1985; Ord. 88-1703, 8-1-1988; Ord. 2002-3399, 5-20-
2002)
(B) Prohibited Uses: No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged,
intended or designed for any of the following uses; provided, however, that any of the uses herein described that legally exist in the I-1 district at the
time of adoption of these provisions, or any amendment thereto, shall be classified as a "nonconforming use", as defined in section 5-1-7 of this title,
and subject to the provisions of chapter 2 of this title. No lot on which is located such legally existing uses shall be used for the construction or erection
of a building for another use, so as to create a mixed use of said lot.
Dwellings, dwelling units and residences of any kind, including hotels, motels, rooming houses and tourist homes.
Industrial uses are as follows:
Acid manufacture.
Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture.
Crematories.
Distillation of bones.
Explosives manufacture or storage.
Fat rendering.
Fertilizer manufacture.
Garbage, offal or dead animal reduction or dumping.
Gas manufacture.
Glue manufacture.
Junkyards, including automobile wrecking and industrial metal and waste salvage.
Petroleum refining.
Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 182/460
Stockyards or slaughter of animals.
Any other use which, in the opinion of the president and board of trustees, is of similar character to those hereinbefore described.
Schools, orphanages, childcare centers, homes for the aged and similar institutions for human care, except where they are incidental to a principal
permitted use. (Ord. 350; amd. 1979 Code)
(C) Special Uses: The following uses may be permitted only if specifically authorized, as may be authorized by the president and board of trustees upon
recommendation of the board of zoning appeals:
1. Dwellings for families of caretakers, watchmen and operators, and such sleeping and boarding accommodations as are customarily incidental and
necessary to a permitted use, which buildings must be located on the same premises as such permitted use, further, additions to existing buildings
may be authorized where the number of families or the number of lodging accommodations is not increased.
2. Recreational, exercise, and instructional facilities.
(a) Gymnastics training centers.
(b) Indoor baseball hitting and instructional facilities.
3. Storage of any combustible materials will be located at least two hundred feet (200') from any residential district and provided that any flammable
liquids will be stored in underground tanks, not to exceed twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per storage unit and at least two hundred feet (200')
from any residential district.
4. Freight terminal facility.
5. Restaurants with accessory cocktail lounges, in a building under single ownership or control.
6. Commuter parking lots.
7. Medical cannabis dispensing organizations. (Ord. 2014-4535, 6-2-2014)
(D) Accessory Uses And Buildings: Accessory uses, buildings or structures customarily incidental or accessory to a principal permitted or specially
permitted use, located on the same lot therewith, including:
Accessory food service. Accessory food service facilities shall be permitted for those special uses specified in subsections (C)2(a) and (C)2(b) of this
section.
Sign. No "sign", as defined herein, shall be permitted except as is provided in the sign code of the village. (Ord. 2003-3798, 11-17-2003)
5-12-3: REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements shall be observed:
(A) Maximum Building Height: No building or structure shall exceed a height equal to two and one-half (21/2) times the distance from the centerline of the
street to the building line.
(B) Minimum Lot Area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
(C) Minimum Lot Frontage: One hundred feet (100').
(D) Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: None required.
(E) Yards: Front, rear and side yards are required as defined in section 5-1-7 of this title, and, unless otherwise required, as specified below:
Maximum
Building Height Front Yard Rear Yard Side Yard Width
1 and 21/2 story
or 40 feet
25 feet 10 feet 12 feet each side yard,
and 25 feet each side
yard adjoining any
residential district
3 stories or
50 feet
30 feet 15 feet 17 feet and/or 30 feet
4 stories or
60 feet
35 feet 20 feet 22 feet and/or 35 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 183/460
5 stories or
70 feet
40 feet 25 feet 27 feet and/or 40 feet
(F) Minimum Floor Area: None required.
(G) Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as specified in chapter 13 of this title.
(H) Maximum Lot Coverage: No building, with its accessory buildings, shall occupy in excess of sixty five percent (65%) of the area of the lot.
(I) Greenbelts: A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required front yard and side yards must be of a planted, greenbelt nature. This landscaped area is
subject to the approval of the village manager prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 350; amd. 1979 Code)
Chapter 13
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
5-13-1: OFF STREET PARKING SPACES:
5-13-1-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
It is the purpose of these off street parking regulations to reduce congestion on the streets due to excessive use for parking of motor vehicles and to
provide for adequate construction of said parking facilities, including suitable and attractive landscaping and screening.
The provisions of this section shall apply and govern in all zoning districts. (Ord. 501, 2-19-1974)
5-13-1-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKING SPACES:
(A) Responsibility: The duty to provide and maintain off street parking space shall be the joint and several responsibility of the operator and/or owner of the
use and/or land for which off street parking space is required to be provided and maintained.
(B) Existing Parking: For land, structures or uses actually used, occupied or operated on the effective date of this chapter, there shall be provided such off
street parking space as was required for such land, structures or uses by any previous ordinance regulations. If such land, structures or uses are
enlarged, expanded or changed, there shall beprovided, for that increment of expansion only, at least the amount of off street parking space that would
be required hereunder if the increment were a separate land, structure or use established or placed into operation after the effective date hereof.
(C) New Uses: For all uses established or placed into operation after the effective date hereof, there shall be constructed, provided, preserved and
maintained the amount of off street parking space hereinafter set forth.
(D) Change In Use: A change in the use of a parcel of land, building and/or premises shall require at least the minimum number of parking spaces to be
provided for the new use, in accordance with the requirements of section 5-13-1-7 of this chapter. A "change of use" permit shall be obtained from the
village before the new use is allowed to occupy the premises.
(E) Requirements: All off street parking space, whether provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or in accordance with the provisions of
any former ordinance regulations, shall be maintained as hereinafter required.
(F) Location: Parking for all types of uses may be provided either in garages or parking areas conforming with the provisions of this chapter.
(G) Charge: Parking may be with or without charge, subject to the provisions of the zoning district in which said parking area lies. No parking may be with
charge unless provided for in the applicable zoning district. (Ord. 501, 2-19-1974)
(H) Parking In Yards:
1. Front Yards:
(a) R-1, R-2, R-3 Zoning Districts: Parking shall be permitted within the front yard or required front yard in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts only
when located upon a properly constructed driveway for which a driveway permit has been issued by the village.
Parking access driveways shall be permitted in the front yard or required front yard of any R-3 zoning district property if said parking access
driveways are set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the side lot line, provided furthermore, common access driveways may be located up to the
side property line in the R-3 zoning district where two (2) properties share a common access driveway; provided, however, common access
driveways shall be permitted only in those instances where the property owners sharing the common access driveway shall enter into and record
in the county recorder's office an unlimited permanent ingress and egress easement.
A common access driveway shall be permitted in the R-3zoning district only when the other side yard of the property being serviced by the
common access driveway shall be totally landscaped, with the exception of sidewalks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 184/460
(b) R-4, O Zoning Districts: No parking shall be permitted in the required front yard of an R-4 or O zoning district property.
Parking access driveways shall be permitted in the front yard or required front yard of any R-4 or O zoning district property if said parking
access driveways are set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the side lot line; provided, furthermore, common access driveways may be located
up to the side property line in the R-4 and O zoning district where two (2) properties share a common access driveway; provided, however,
common access driveways shall be permitted only in the instances where the property owners sharing the common access driveway shall enter
into and record in the county recorder's office an unlimited permanent ingress and egress easement.
A common access driveway shall be permitted in the R-4 and O zoning districts only when the other side yard of the property being serviced by
the common access driveway shall be totally landscaped, with the exception of sidewalks.
(c) B-1, B-2, B-3 Zoning Districts: Parking shall be permitted within the front yard or required front yard of any B-1, B-2 or B-3 zoning district property
only when located upon a parking lot constructed in accordance with all village ordinances. When parking shall be permitted in the front yard or
required front yard of any B-1, B-2 or B-3 zoning district property, a landscaped greenbelt, a minimum of five feet (5') wide, area shall be provided
along the lot line or lot lines abutting the streets.
(d) O-R Zoning District: Parking shall not be permitted in the front yard or required front yard of any O-R zoning district property except as expressly
provided for in subsection 5-11-3(G) of this title of the O-R district regulations.
(e) I-1 Zoning District: Parking shall not be permitted in the required front yard of any I-1 zoning district property except for visitor parking which may
be permitted in the front yard or required front yard on a maximum ratio of one parking space for visitors for every twenty five (25) regular required
parking spaces. The visitor parking spaces being provided for herewith shall be restricted for the exclusive use of visitors.
In the case of "through lots", as defined in section 5-1-7 of this title, parking may be permitted in the one required front yard as determined by
the zoningcommissioner based upon prevailing yard patterns.
In no instance shall parking be permitted in more than one required front yard on through lots.
In the case of "corner lots" in the I-1 zoning district, parking may be allowed in the "alternate front yard" (the front yard other than the primary
front yard as determined by the zoning commissioner based upon prevailing yard patterns) as if the alternate front yard were a side yard in the I-1
zoning district.
Parking access driveways shall be permitted in the required front yard of the I-1 zoning district if said parking access driveways are set back a
minimum of five feet (5') from the side lot line; provided furthermore, common access driveways may be located up to the side property line in the
I-1 zoning district where two (2) properties share a common access driveway; provided, however, common access driveways shall be permitted
only in those instances where the property owners sharing the common access driveway shall enter into and record in the county recorder's office
an unlimited permanent ingress and egress easement.
A common access driveway shall be permitted in the I-1 zoning district only when the other side yard of the property being serviced by the
common access driveway shall be totally landscaped, with the exception of sidewalks.
2. Side Yards:
(a) Parking may be permitted in a required side yard of any R-1 or R-2 zoning district property if located on a properly constructed driveway for which
a driveway permit has been issued.
(b) Parking may be located on a required side yard of any R-3, R-4, O, O-R or I-1 zoning district property but not within five feet (5') of a side lot line
or within the external forty percent (40%) of the required side yard, whichever is greater.
Common parking access driveways shall be permitted in the R-3, R-4, O, and I-1 zoning districts only when the other side yard of the property
being serviced by the common access driveway shall be totally landscaped, with the exception of sidewalks.
3. Rear Yards: Parking may be permitted in the required rear yard of any R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or O zoning district, but not within five feet (5') of the rear
lot line or within the external twenty five percent (25%) of the required rear yard, whichever is greater. Parking may be permitted in the required rear
yard of any B-1, B-2, O-R or I-1 zoning district, but not within five feet (5') of a rear lot line or within theexternal twenty percent (20%) of a required
rear yard, whichever is greater. (Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005)
4. Parking Adjacent To Residential Districts: Notwithstanding the provisions aforesaid in any district on any lot devoted to other than single-family use, if
any front lot line, side lot line or rear lot line separates the lot from or is across the street or alley from a lot in a residential district, the off street
parking shall not be located closer to said lot line than the minimum front yard depth, side yard depth, side yard width or rear yard depth, as the case
may be, prescribed by the district in which the off street parking area is located; provided, however, that in no case shall the distance be less than ten
feet (10') from the front line.
All open automobile parking areas containing more than four (4) parking spaces shall be adequately screened on each side adjoining or fronting
on any property located in any residence district by a wall, fence or densely planted compact hedge, not less than three feet (3') nor more than six
feet (6') in height. In addition to the provisions of this subsection, screening provisions as noted in subsection 5-13-1-5(D) of this chapter shall be
adhered to. (Ord. 79-873, 7-3-1979)
5-13-1-3: LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES:
Off street parking space shall be located on the same lot as the use for which provided, except as set forth in this section.
Special Location Plan: Pursuant to the procedure hereinafter set forth, either part or all of the required off street parking space may be located off the lot of
the use for which the space is provided. Also, two (2) or more uses may share in the same off street parking space and each of such uses may be
considered as having provided such shared space individually. The following limitations shall apply to the "special location plan":
(A) Separation From Use: Off street parking shall be located as hereinafter specified; where a distance is specified, such distance shall be the walking
distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the building that such facility is required to serve.
1. In all residential districts, parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or lots with the building they are required to serve.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 185/460
2. In all commercial districts, parking facilities shall be located within three hundred feet (300') of the building they are required to serve.
3. In all office-research districts, parking facilities shallbe located within four hundred fifty feet (450') of the building they are required to serve.
4. In all industrial districts, parking facilities shall be located within six hundred feet (600') of the building they are required to serve.
(B) Sharing Of Space: No use shall be considered as individually having provided off street parking space which is shared with one or more other uses
unless the schedules of operation of all such uses are such that none of the uses sharing the space requires the off street parking space at the same
time as any other use sharing the space.
(C) Application: All applications for approval of a "special location plan" hereunder shall be filed with the zoning board of appeals by the owners of the
entire land area to be included within the special plan, and the owner or owners of all structures then existing on said land area and all encumbrances
of said land area and structures; shall contain sufficient evidence to establish to the satisfaction of the zoning board of appeals that the applicants are
the owners and encumbrancers of the designated land and structures; shall contain such information and representations required by this chapter or
deemed necessary; and shall include plans showing the following details:
1. The location of the uses or structures for which off street parking space is required.
2. The location at which the off street parking space is to be located.
3. The design of the parking facility.
(D) Procedure:
1. All applications shall be reviewed and approved by the zoning board of appeals. Any approval may establish necessary conditions and limitations.
2. Upon approval of a "special location plan", a copy of such plan shall be registered and recorded among the records of the county recorder of deeds.
3. All special plans registered and recorded hereunder shall be binding upon the applicants for such special plans, their successors and assigns, shall
limit and control the issuance and validity of all zoning permits and zoning certificates and shall restrict and limit the use and operation of all land and
structures included within such special plans to all conditions and limitations specified in such plans and the approvals thereof.
4. All special plans registered and recorded hereunder may be amended pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the samelimitations and
requirements by which such plans were approved, registered and recorded.
5. Upon application to the zoning board of appeals by the owner or owners of the entire land area included within any special plan registered and
recorded hereunder, the owner or owners of any structures then existing thereon and all encumbrances of said land and structures, any such plan
may be withdrawn, either partially or completely, from registration and released from recording if all uses, land and structures remaining under such
plan can be made to comply with all conditions and limitations of the plan and all uses, land and structures withdrawn from such plan can be made to
comply with all regulations established by this chapter and unrelated to any special plan. (Ord. 713, 10-18-1977)
5-13-1-4: SEPARATE OR COMBINED PARKING SPACES:
Separate off street parking space shall be provided for each use or the parking space required of two (2) or more uses located on the same lot may be
combined and used jointly; provided, however:
(A) Where off street parking space is combined and used jointly by two (2) or more uses having different standards for determining the amount of off street
parking spaces required, the parking space shall be adequate in area to provide the sum total of off street parking space requirements of all such uses.
(B) Where off street parking space is combined and used jointly by two (2) or more uses having the same standard for determining the amount of off street
parking space required, all such uses, for the purposes of this section, shall be considered a single unit and the gross floor area of all such uses in all
structures on the same lot or the number of employees of all such uses in all structures on the same lot as fixed by the applicable standard, shall be
taken as a single total for the purpose of determining the amount of off street parking space required. (Ord. 713, 10-18-1977)
5-13-1-5: DESIGN, DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF PARKING AREAS:
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area, including a commercial parking lot and also an automobile, boat or trailer sales lot,
shall be designed, developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: (Ord. 713, 10-18-1977)
(A) Use Limit: In the residential districts, unless in a garage or fully enclosed structure, parking areas shall only be used by vehicles up to ten thousand
(10,000) pounds' gross vehicle weight. Vehicles classified as second divisionvehicles under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes of more than ten thousand
(10,000) pounds' gross vehicle weight, farm machinery, construction equipment, heavy machinery and the like shall not be parked or housed in the
residential district, unless being used exclusively for building construction or agricultural uses in the immediate residential area. (Ord. 80-968, 12-16-
1980)
(B) Commercial Use: Shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials, supplies or the parking of
commercial vehicles, except when parking is a permitted principal or special use. (Ord. 501, 2-19-1974)
(C) Design And Construction: Except for parking lots and driveways in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning district not used for temporary festival parking, all
parking lots and driveways shall be provided with curb and gutter and shall be designed in accordance with the current standard detail sheets for
streets, parking lots, drives and alleys of the village as from time to time amended, and the state of Illinois department of transportation "Design Manual
For The Structural Design Of Bituminous And Concrete Pavements". All work shall be constructed in accordance with the current "Standard
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 186/460
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", adopted July 2, 1973, by the state of Illinois department of transportation.
Storm drainage shall be designed in accordance with the village ordinances and standard detail sheets and shall be constructed according to the
plans and specifications approved by the village engineer.
For all one- and two-family residences, all new parking areas and driveways shall be constructed of a minimum of four inches (4") of CA-6 crushed
stone base and two inches (2") of class I bituminous asphalt pavement or equivalent concrete construction. Provided, however, that brick or other
paver type materials may be installed if constructed with a minimum of eight inches (8") of CA-6 crushed stone base topped with one and one-half
inches (11/2") of sand base and minimum two and three-eighths inches (23/8") (6 cm) of pavers tested and approved to eight thousand five hundred
(8,500) psi compressive strength. No paver materials will be allowed on rights of way, parkways, or over utility easements unless authorized by a
license agreement, signed by the village manager or his designee, indemnifying and holding the village harmless for any and all liability including
expenses, costs and fees, arising out of or associated with maintenance, repair or condition of the pavers or base material. (Ord. 96-2729, 2-5-1996)
(D) Screening: Off street parking areas for more than four (4) vehicles that adjoin or are across the street from property zoned for any residential use, shall
have an evergreenplanting berm, fence, masonry wall and/or such other screening that is at least eighty percent (80%) opaque or as may be
determined by the village board of trustees. Berming shall be considered as the preferred treatment when possible.
If parking areas are set in a distance of not less than two hundred feet (200') and access drives are set in not less than one hundred feet (100') from
a residential zoning district, screening shall not be required. (Ord. 501, 2-19-1974)
(E) Access: In the R-1 and R-2 zoning districts, access driveways shall be permitted not less than nine feet (9') in width nor more than twenty four feet (24')
in width, measured at the property line for any lot located within said districts.
Access in all other zoning districts other than R-1 and R-2 shall be provided with entrances and exits so located and designed as to minimize traffic
congestion. The location and design of entrances and exits shall be subject to the review and approval of the village engineer. (Ord. 713, 10-18-1977)
(F) Lighting: (Rep. by Ord. 2006-4025, 6-19-2006)
(G) Shelter: May have one attendant shelter building situated in or along the parking area or along the access drive. This one attendant shelter building
shall not be subject to structure setback requirements, but shall be subject to setback requirements pertaining to the location of the parking lot and/or
driveway setback. (Ord. 501, 2-19-1974)
(H) Size: Each off street parking space shall be designed in accordance with and have an area of not less than that required by the following table:
Stall Stall Aisle Bay
Parking Type Width Length1,2 Width Width3,4
30 degree angle 9.0' 17' 12' 46'
45 degree angle 9.0' 18' 14' 50'
60 degree angle 9.0' 18' 18' 54'
75 degree angle 9.0' 19' 21' 59'
90 degree angle 9.0' 19' 24' 62'
Parallel 8.0' 24' See
note 5
See
note 5
Notes:
1. Measured perpendicular to centerline of an access road from face of curb.
2. The stall length shall be increased to 20 feet for 30 degrees, 45 degrees, 60 degrees, 75 degrees and 90 degrees angle parking where an
overhang of at least 1.5 feet cannot be provided.
3. Measured perpendicular face to face of curb.
4. The bay width shall be increased to 53 feet for 45 degrees parking, 60 feet for 60 degrees parking, 62 feet for 75 degrees parking and 65 feet for
90 degrees parking, where an overhang of at least 1.5 feet cannot be provided at each end of the parking bay.
5. Street pavement serves as aisle width and as remainder of bay width; parallel parking is not permitted along access driveways.
Each parking space shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7') and shall be of usable shape and condition.
Parking spaces in retail commercial parking lots shall have the stall width increased by six inches (6") over that shown in the above table.
Where the overhang provided for in this section overhangs a sidewalk, the sidewalk shall be expanded in width by at least the amount for which
overhang credit has been taken. (Ord. 82-1053, 7-6-1982)
(I) Handicapped Parking: Each handicapped parking space shall have a stall width of not less than sixteen feet (16'). Parking spaces not in conformance
with this requirement and in use prior to July 1, 1988, may be maintained for their useful lives. (Ord. 87-1621, 11-2-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 187/460
5-13-1-6: UNITS OF MEASUREMENT FOR PARKING SPACES:
For purposes of this section, the following units of measurement shall apply:
(A) Floor Area: In the case of offices, merchandising or service types of uses, "floor area" shall mean the gross floor area used or intended to be used by
tenants and/or owners or for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used
for display or sale of merchandise. It shall not include areas used principally for nonpublic purposes, such as storage, incidental repair, processing or
packaging of merchandise, for show windows, for offices incidental to the management or maintenance of stores or buildings, for toilet or rest rooms,
for mechanical equipment, or for dressing rooms, fitting or alteration rooms.
(B) Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit shall mean one room, or a suite of two (2) or more rooms, designed for or used by one family for living and sleeping
purposes and having only one kitchen or kitchenette.
(C) Seat Or Bench: A seat shall be the space intended for oneindividual; in places where patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other seating
facilities, each twenty inches (20") of such seating facilities shall be counted as one seat.
(D) Employees: Employees shall mean the average number of permanent staff members working on the premises at any one time as certified by an
affidavit signed by the owner and/or operator of the use or structure at the time application is made for a building permit and/or certificate of zoning
compliance.
(E) Fractions: When units of measurement result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction shall require one parking space. (Ord. 501, 2-19-
1974)
5-13-1-7: PARKING SPACES REQUIRED:
At least the following numbers of usable off street parking spaces shall be provided; also, adequate provision for ingress, egress, turn around and
maneuvering shall be provided. (Ord. 501, 2-19-1974)
(A) Residential uses:
One- and two-family
dwellings
2 parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Further, there may be no more than 5 vehicles parked on open,
unenclosed parking areas and driveways between 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M.
Multiple-family dwellings
2 parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
Hotels, motels, inns and
auto courts
1 parking space shall be provided for each guest or sleeping room or suite, plus 1 additional space for the owner or
manager.
Lodging, rooming and
boarding houses
1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 lodging rooms, plus 1 additional space for the owner or manager.
Fraternities, sororities
and dormitories
1 parking space shall be provided for each 5 active members, plus 1 additional space for the manager thereof.
(Ord. 501, 2-19-1974; amd. Ord. 88-1704, 8-1-1988)
(B) Commercial uses:
Automobile laundry Stacking spaces shall be provided to accommodate waiting automobiles equal in number to 5 times the
maximum capacity of the automobile laundry for each wash rack, plus 1 parking space for each 2
employees. Maximum capacity, in this instance, shall mean the greatest number of automobiles
undergoing some phase of laundering at the same time.
Automobile service stations 2 parking spaces shall be provided for each island of pumps and each service stall plus 1 parking space
for each 2 employees.
Banks 1 parking space shall be provided for each 200 square feet of floor area. Drive-in establishments shall
provide 6 stacking spaces per teller or customer service window.
Barbershop 2 parking spaces shall be provided for each barber chair plus 1 parking space for each employee.
Beauty parlor 1 parking space shall be provided for each 150 square feet of floor area.
Bowling alleys 3 parking spaces shall be provided for each alley, plus such additional spaces as may be required herein
for affiliated users, bars, restaurants and the like.
Furniture and appliance stores,
household equipment or furniture repair
shops
1 parking space shall be provided for each 600 square feet of floor area in excess of 1,000 square feet.
Motor vehicle sales and machinery sales
1 parking space shall be provided for each 800 square feet of floor area.
Restaurants (carryout) 1 parking space shall be provided for each 20 square feet of floor area.
Restaurants (drive-in) and/or 1 parking space shall be provided for each 20 square feet of floor area, but not less than 10 spaces.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 188/460
refreshment stand (where food and/or
beverage is consumed in a vehicle)
Restaurants or establishments
dispensing food and/or beverage for
consumption on the premises (not
including drive-in establishments)
1 parking space shall be provided for each 100 square feet of floor area, or 1 parking space for each 3
seats, 1 parking space for each 3 employees, whichever is greater.
Retail stores 1 parking space shall be provided for each 150 square feet of floor area, except that within the B-3
central business district zoning classification, 1 parking space shall be provided for each 450 square feet
of floor area. 1 additional parking space must be provided for every 2 employees in the central business
district.
Theaters (indoor) 1 parking space shall be provided for each 4 seats up to 400 seats, plus 1 for each 6 seats over 400
seats.
Undertaking establishments, funeral
parlors
6 parking spaces shall be provided for each chapel or parlor, or 1 for each 50 square feet of floor area
used for services, whichever is greater, plus 1 parking space for each funeral vehicle kept on the
premises.
Commercial uses within the B-3 central
business district zoning classification
shall be given credit
A credit of 4 parking spaces for each on street parking space which is directly contiguous to and which
lies wholly within the frontage of the lot lines of the business establishment. 1 additional parking space
must be provided for every 2 employees.
(Ord. 501, 2-19-1974; amd. Ord. 635, 5-18-1976)
(C) Office uses:
Business or professional
offices
1 parking space shall be provided for each 300 square feet of floor area.
Medical or dental clinics 2 parking spaces shall be provided for each office, examining room or treatment room, plus 1 parking space for each
employee.
(Ord. 501, 2-19-1974)
(D) Industrial uses:
Manufacturing uses or any establishments engaged
in production, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing or repair of materials, goods or products
1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 employees, plus 1 parking space for each
vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise. If the number of employees cannot be
determined, 1 parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area must be provided.
Truck terminals 1 parking space shall be provided for each employee and 1.5 parking spaces for each truck.
Warehouses and storage buildings 1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 employees, plus 1.5 parking spaces for each
vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise. If the number of employees cannot be
determined, 1 parking space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area must be provided.
Wholesale establishments (but not including
warehouses and storage buildings other than
accessory)
1 parking space shall be provided for each 600 square feet of floor area in excess of 4,000
square feet.
(Ord. 82-1053, 7-6-1982)
(E) Schools, institutions and places of assembly:
Auditoriums,
gymnasiums,
convention halls and
all places of
assembly
1 parking space shall be provided for each 5 seats or parking spaces equal to 1/5 the capacity of the facility in persons.
Churches 1 parking space shall be provided for each 4 seats in the main auditorium.
Colleges,
universities, trade
schools
1 parking space shall be provided for each 5 students (based on the maximum number of students that the facility is
designed to handle at any one time), plus 1 parking space for each 2 employees.
Elementary and
junior high schools
2 parking spaces shall be provided for each classroom. However, if a place of assembly is provided in the school and the
parking spaces provided for the place of assembly are equal to or in excess of the requirement for the classrooms, the
classroom requirement need not be provided.
High schools 1 parking space shall be provided for each 8 students (based on the maximum number of students that the facility is
designed to handle at any one time), plus 1 for each 2 employees. However, if a place of assembly is provided in the school
and the parking spaces provided for the place of assembly are equal to or in excess of the requirement for the classrooms,
the classroom requirement need not be provided.
Hospitals 1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 beds, plus 1 parking space for each staff doctor or visiting doctor, plus 1 parking
space for each 2 employees.
Libraries 1 parking space shall be provided for each 1,000 square feet of floor area.
Nursery schools 1 parking space shall be provided for each employee or 2 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of floor area, whichever
is greater.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 189/460
Nursing homes,
convalescent homes
and similar type
establishments
1 parking space shall be provided for each 3 beds, plus 1 parking space for each 2 employees.
Private clubs and
lodges
Parking spaces equal to 1/5 the capacity of the facility in persons shall be provided.
(F) Other uses: For uses not listed heretofore in this schedule of parking requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required for
the most similar listed uses, or as determined by the zoning board of appeals, after a public hearing upon approval of the corporate authorities. (Ord.
501, 2-19-1974)
5-13-2: OFF STREET LOADING SPACES:
5-13-2-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
It is the purpose of the off street loading regulations to reduce congestion on the streets due to excessive loading and unloading of vehicles on the streets.
The provisions of this section 5-13-2 shall apply and govern in all zoning districts. (Ord. 501, 2-19-1974)
5-13-2-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LOADING SPACES:
(A) Off street loading space shall be required and maintained in connection with any building or part thereof, hereafter erected or altered which is to be
occupied by uses requiring the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise.
(B) Loading spaces for all types of uses may be provided either in garages or parking areas conforming with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 501, 2-19-
1974)
5-13-2-3: LOCATION OF LOADING SPACES:
Off street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the structure for which provided. (Ord. 501, 2-19-1974)
5-13-2-4: LOADING SPACES REQUIRED:
The duty to provide the off street loading space herein required shall be the joint and several responsibility of the operator and owner of the structure or
structures for which off street loading space is required to be provided. No structure shall be designed, erected, altered, used or occupied unless the off
street loading space herein required is provided in at least the amount herein set forth; provided, however, that off street loading space need not be
provided for structures actually used, occupied and operated on the effective date hereof until such structures are enlarged or expanded, or the uses
within such structures are enlarged or expanded, or changed, so as to require a greater amount of off street loading space than the amount of off street
loading space not required to be furnished by reason of the foregoing exclusion, in which event the structures hereby excluded shall not be used, occupied
or operated unless there is provided for the increment only of such structures, and maintained as herein required, at least the amount of off street loading
space that would be required hereunder if the increment were a separate structure. (Ord. 501, 2-19-1974)
5-13-2-5: DESIGN, DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF LOADING SPACES:
Every parcel of land hereafter used for off street loading space shall be designed, developed and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements:
(A) Shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies. (Ord. 501, 2-19-1974)
(B) Shall be graded for proper drainage and provided with an all weather surfacing maintained at all times in such a manner so as to prevent the release of
dust and to be free of dust, trash and debris.
All loading areas located outside of the buildings shall be provided with curb and gutter and shall be designed in accordance with the current
standard detail sheets for streets, parking lots, drives and alleys of the village, as from time to time amended, and the state of Illinois department of
transportation "Design Manual For The Structural Design Of Bituminous And Concrete Pavements". All work shall be constructed in accordance with
the current "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", adopted July 2, 1973, by the state of Illinois department of transportation.
(Ord. 79-858, 5-15-1979)
(C) Off street loading spaces that adjoin or are across the street from property zoned for any residential use shall havea dense evergreen planting, fence,
masonry wall or such other screening as may be determined by the corporate authorities after a public hearing and recommendation by the zoning
board of appeals. The zoning board of appeals shall also determine the height, location and density of screening used to provide adequate protection
to adjoining property.
(D) Shall be provided with entrances and exits not less than twelve feet (12') in width and so located as to minimize traffic congestion.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 190/460
(E) No portion of a vehicle shall project into a street or alley while being loaded or unloaded nor shall any vehicle project into any required yard while being
loaded or unloaded. (Ord. 501, 2-19-1974; amd. 1979 Code)
(F) Each off street loading space shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width, sixty five feet (65') in length and fourteen feet (14') in height, exclusive of
access drives. When more than three (3) spaces are required, the spaces other than the first three (3) may be ten feet (10') in width, twenty five feet
(25') in length and twelve feet (12') in height. (Ord. 79-845, 4-3-1979)
(G) Off street loading spaces may not occupy any part of any required rear yard or required side yard or any part of any required front yard or a front yard.
(1979 Code)
5-13-2-6: AMOUNT OF LOADING SPACE REQUIRED:
At least the following amount of off street loading space shall be provided, plus an area or means adequate for maneuvering, ingress and egress:
Gross Floor Area
Required
Number
Minimum Size
Width/Length
Minimum Vertical
Clearance
Up to 10,000 1 10 feet x 35 feet 10 feet
10,000 to 20,000 1 12 feet x 65 feet 14 feet
20,000 to 40,000 2 12 feet x 65 feet 14 feet
40,000 to 100,000 3 12 feet x 65 feet 14 feet
100,000 to 200,000 4 12 feet x 65 feet 14 feet
For each additional
100,000
1 12 feet x 65 feet 14 feet
Provided, however, when more than three (3) spaces are required, the spaces more than the first three (3) may be as little as ten feet in width, twenty five
feet in length, and twelve feet in height (10' x 25' x 12'). Provided, further, that where a building is designed to serve or serves more than one user as
where the building has been divided into several segments for use, no building or user shall provide any amountof space less than as provided for those
having a gross floor area of up to ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord. 79-845, 4-3-1979)
5-13-3: PERMITS REQUIRED:
Prior to commencement of construction of any parking or loading facility regulated by this chapter, a permit must be issued by the business office manager.
Permit fees as established by the annual fee ordinance for each parking space and for each loading space shall be paid prior to issuance of said permit.
(Ord. 501, 2-19-1974; amd. 1979 Code; Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
5-13-4: MODIFICATIONS:
The corporate authorities may grant, subject to the recommendation of the zoning board of appeals, after a public hearing has been held on the matter,
modification, reduction or waiver of the foregoing requirements if it should find that in the particular case appealed, the peculiar nature of the residential,
business, trade, industrial or other use, or the exceptional shape or size of the property or other exceptional situation or condition would justify such action.
(Ord. 79-845, 4-3-1979; amd. 1979 Code)
Chapter 14
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
5-14-1: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
Planned unit developments are of such substantially different character from other special uses that specific procedures, standards and exceptions are
hereby established to govern recommendations of the plan commission and the actions of the village board pertaining to planned unit developments.
These special planned unit development provisions include:
(A) Purpose (section 5-14-2 of this chapter).
(B) Standards (section 5-14-3 of this chapter).
(C) Application procedure (section 5-14-4 of this chapter).
1. Preapplication stage:
(a) Procedure.
(b) Specific content.
2. Conceptual plan option:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 191/460
(a) Purpose.
(b) Procedure.
(c) Specific content.
3. Preliminary plat stage:
(a) Procedure.
(b) Specific content.
4. Final plat stage:
(a) Procedure.
(b) Specific content.
(D) Findings (section 5-14-5 of this chapter).
(E) Conditions and guarantees (section 5-14-6 of this chapter). (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
5-14-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the planned unit development regulations is to encourage and allow more creative and imaginative design for land developments than is
possible under the more conventional zoning regulations. The planned unit development also provides for more efficient use of the land and thus results in
more economical land development. Preservation of natural site qualities, better urban amenities, more open space and a higher quality project are the
normal results of the planned unit development process.
The following objectives may be obtained through the use of the planned unit development procedure:
(A) To permit a maximum choice in the types of environment available to the public by allowing a development that would not be possible under the strict
application of this and other village ordinances pertaining to land development.
(B) To promote a creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities that results in better design and development, with the inclusion of
aesthetic amenities.
(C) To combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms and building relationships with a possible mixing of different urban uses in an innovative
design.
(D) To encourage a pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic and geological features, and environmentally appropriate features.
(E) To provide for the prevention and/or control of soil erosion, surface flooding and the preservation of subsurface water.
(F) To create a method for the permanent preservation of common open space for the continued use and enjoyment of the residents of the development.
(G) To provide for more usable and suitably located recreation facilities, schools and other public and private facilities.
(H) To promote the more efficient use of the land resulting inmore economically feasible networks of utilities, streets and other facilities.
(I) To encourage a land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare.
(J) To create a method for the permanent preservation of architectural and/or historic landmarks.
The planned unit development is intended to provide for developments incorporating a single type or a variety of related uses which are planned and
developed as a unit. The planned unit development should provide amenities not otherwise required by law and often establishes facilities and open
space greater than the minimums required by law.
Such development may consist of conventionally subdivided lots to be sold, unsubdivided single ownership, separate condominium ownership of
structures, or other ownership methods, and shall provide for development by means of a planned unit development plat which establishes the location
and extent of the features of the planned unit development in keeping with the purpose of this plan. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
5-14-3: STANDARDS:
A planned unit development may be authorized as a special use in any of the zoning districts of this title, provided that it fulfills the intentions of the
following standards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 192/460
(A) Comprehensive Plan: A planned unit development must conform with the intent and spirit of the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan of the
village1.
(B) Size: The site of the planned unit development must be under single ownership and/or unified control and be not less than two (2) acres in area. If the
site is in excess of thirty six (36) acres, the "conceptual plan" procedure may be followed.
(C) Compatibility: The uses permitted in a planned unit development must be of a type and so located as to exercise no undue detrimental influence upon
surrounding properties.
(D) Need: The planned unit development must be of a character and contain such uses that are clearly needed in the service area of the proposed project.
(E) Space Between Buildings: The minimum horizontal distance required between buildings shall be determined by the villageboard, taking into
consideration the plan commission's recommendations. Each site plan shall be reviewed and said horizontal distance requirement shall be based upon
that review and the merits of the planned unit development proposed.
(F) Yards: The required yards in the planned unit development shall be as follows:
1. Along the periphery of the planned unit development, they shall be at least equal in width or depth to that of the adjacent zoning district. In lieu of this
yard requirement, the village board shall have the flexibility to establish any yard requirement deemed appropriate and in the public interest.
2. Buildings of more than twenty four feet (24') in height shall provide a setback from any property line of not less than equal to the height of such
building.
(G) Parking Requirements: Adequate parking shall be provided, and shall be in conformance with the parking provisions of chapter 13 of this title.
(H) Traffic: Adequate provisions shall be made to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
(I) Design Standards: The provisions of the subdivision regulations2 of the village setting forth design and engineering standards shall be adhered to for all
areas, subdivided or unsubdivided, unless specifically waived by the plan commission and the village board.
1. All streets, whether public or private, shall be constructed to conform to construction standards specified by the village.
2. All streets, whether public or private, shall be constructed to a width enabling village maintenance and fire protection vehicles adequate ingress and
egress. The village board may require public dedication of any street within or adjacent to a planned unit development. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
(J) Departure From Standards: The planned unit development may depart from strict conformance with the required density, dimension, area, height, bulk,
use and specific content regulations of this title, and shall be designated and identified as "departure from standards", by the petitioner in his original
application. Said departures from standards shall be submitted to the plan commission as part of, and in conjunction with, the application for the
planned unit development. A departure from standards shall not berecommended by the plan commission unless said commission specifically finds
that the requested departure from standards shall be the direct cause of the accrual of positive benefits to the residents of the development as well as
to the general community. (Ord. 85-1336, 10-7-1985)
5-14-4: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
A planned unit development shall be granted as a special use in accord with the procedures and standards of this chapter. Prior to consideration of the
planned unit development by the president and board of trustees, all hearings and recommendations as are required in this chapter shall be executed
exclusively by the planning commission. Application shall be made on forms provided by the village and shall be accompanied by the required plats and
documents including, but not limited to, proposed signage plans. Each step shall be reviewed and certified by the plan commission as being in accordance
with the planned unit development requirements. (Ord. 2000-3252, 11-20-2000)
5-14-4-1: PREAPPLICATION STAGE (OPTIONAL):
(A) Procedure; Preapplication Conference: Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a planned unit development, the developer may request of the
plan commission an informal meeting to discuss the development of their land in conjunction with the village plan. Said meeting shall be a part of a
regularly scheduled meeting, shall be open to the public and shall be included on the agenda in advance of the meeting. The preapplication conference
is not mandatory and does not require formal application, fee or filing of a planned unit development plat.
(B) Specific Content; Preapplication Stage: If the preapplication conference is elected, the following information is required, unless waived by the plan
commission:
1. General Site Information: Data regarding site conditions, land characteristics, available community facilities and utilities, existing covenants and other
related information.
2. Sketch Plan: A drawing in simple sketch form showing the proposed location and extent of the land uses, streets, lots and other features.
3. Legal Description: A complete property survey and legal description of the site proposed for development. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
5-14-4-2: CONCEPTUAL PLAN STAGE (OPTIONAL):
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 193/460
In order to assure a common understanding of the generalrelationship of the planned unit development to the overall comprehensive land use plans of the
village, the applicant may at his discretion utilize the procedures and requirements of the conceptual plan option.
(A) Purpose: The purpose of the conceptual plan submission is to obtain approval of the village for the development of a parcel of land in accord with the
plans, programs and schedule submitted as a part of the planned unit development application. It is intended that the proposal submitted will be in
conceptual form and that, following the anticipated approval, the developer will proceed with preparing detailed plans for all or a portion of the site for
submission as a preliminary plat (section 5-14-4-3 of this chapter). This procedure allows for approval of an overall concept without the necessity of
prejudging long range markets and preparing precise plans for unknown quantities and allows the developer to complete long range commitments
knowing he has a viable and acceptable project. This procedure pertains principally to large size projects and therefore has been provided for in the
planned unit development procedure as an additional optional step for projects in excess of thirty six (36) acres.
The "conceptual plan" procedure is not mandatory and the developer may select to proceed directly to the "preliminary plat" and/or "final plat" stage.
(B) Procedure:
1. Submission of the following:
(a) Written application for review of a planned unit development in concept only.
(b) The application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be established by the village president and board of trustees.
(c) Sufficient supporting data, plans or other information necessary to indicate the extent and nature of the proposal and that the project is ready for
public hearing. Twelve (12) copies of all required information shall be submitted.
2. Copies of the conceptual plan and supporting data shall be submitted to the plan commission for certification as to conformity with the
aforementioned regulations and for comments, recommendations and suggestions regarding the overall design, if any.
3. Copies of the conceptual plan and supporting data shall be submitted to the village planning consultant for review, comments and recommendations.
4. The plan commission shall hold a public hearing on the application for a planned unit development giving public notice of the time and place, in
accordance with statutory requirements. It shall be the responsibility of the sponsorsof the proposed planned unit development to furnish the village
with a list of people who, in accordance with statutory requirements, are to be notified about subject development. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
5. Following the public hearing and review of the conceptual plan and supporting data for conformity to these regulations, the plan commission shall
recommend approval, modification or disapproval and the reasons therefor, or indicate why a report and recommendation cannot be rendered to the
village board. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974; amd. Ord. 87-1526, 4-6-1987)
The report of the plan commission shall set forth in a communication to the village board, findings of fact, in accordance with section 5-14-5 of this
chapter, on which they base their recommendations and describing how the proposal meets the standards required in section 5-14-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
6. The village board, after receipt of the conceptual plan from the plan commission, shall approve, modify or disapprove the plan. In the case of
approval, or approval with modification, the village board shall pass an ordinance approving the plan granting the special use, and shall arrange
zoning map modifications as necessary. The village board may require such special conditions as they may deem necessary to ensure conformance
with the intent of the planning objectives of the village and the stated purposes of the planned unit development. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974; amd. Ord.
87-1526, 4-6-1987)
7. The granting of the conceptual plan portion of the planned unit development by the village board shall constitute a zoning acceptance of the specific
content of the conceptual plan and shall indicate the general acceptance of the village board to approve a "preliminary plat" that carries out, refines
and implements the concepts expressed in the conceptual plan. The "preliminary plat" and "final plat" shall be submitted in accordance with the
requirements of sections 5-14-4-3 and 5-14-4-4 of this chapter. Submission of a preliminary plat for a part of or all of the planned unit development
shall be made within a period of not to exceed two (2) years from the date of approval of the conceptual plan.
The preliminary plat shall be approved as a planned unit development plat if it conforms substantially with the principles and concepts presented in
the conceptual plan. No building permit shall be issued for any structure until the final plat has been filed, approved and recorded.
(C) Specific Content; Conceptual Plan Option: The following information shall be required unless specifically waived by the plan commission:
1. A general area map showing the boundaries of the proposedplanned unit development, any regional factors relating to the development such as
highways or other regional transportation facilities including air rights, regional utilities and municipal boundaries, and ownership and existing uses of
adjacent properties.
2. A natural features map indicating: topographical features, hydrologic data including any floodplain elevations, natural vegetation, and soils and/or
geologic conditions of the site and adjacent land.
3. A conceptual land use plan in a general form and approximately to scale including:
(a) Name of development, name and address of owner, name and address of site planner, north point and scale, date of preparation and acreage of
site.
(b) The general outlines of the interior roadway system and all existing rights of way and easements, whether public or private.
(c) Availability of services with respect to transportation, water supply, sewage disposal and other utility type services.
(d) General indication of availability of other community facilities, such as schools, fire and police protection and cultural facilities.
(e) The interior open space system.
(f) The location of the various proposed land uses and their areas in acres.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 194/460
(g) Population estimates, description and quantity of land uses, and description of residential uses by number of bedrooms.
(h) General indication of the nature of the various elements of the conceptual plan including ranges of design criteria, densities and overall
development standards.
4. A written statement containing detailed explanation of the required graphic elements of the conceptual plan option, estimated phasing of construction
and any general anticipated variations from the conventional development standards of the village's zoning and subdivision regulations.
5. At the request of the plan commission, any additional information can be requested of the developer to clarify various aspects of the proposed
planned unit development. This additional data might include, but is not limited to, traffic, tax and/or market analyses of the development, pertinent
environmental information and conceptual renderings of structures within the development. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
5-14-4-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT STAGE:
A preliminary plat of the planned unit development shall be submitted to the plan commission for public hearing, report and recommendations to the village
president and board of trustees. Meetings with other taxing bodies affected by the development will be necessary to fulfill the requirements of the
preliminary plat review.
(A) Procedure:
1. Submission of the following:
(a) Written application for approval of a planned unit development shall be made on forms and in the manner prescribed by the village.
(b) The application shall be accompanied by such fee which shall be established by the village president and board of trustees.
(c) The preliminary plat and supporting data shall be in accord with the stipulations of subsection (B) of this section.
2. The plan commission shall hold a public hearing on the application for a planned unit development, giving public notice of the time and place in
accordance with statutory requirements. If a public hearing is held during the conceptual plan stage, the public hearing required during the
preliminary plat stage may be waived by the village board, upon recommendation of the plan commission.
It shall be the responsibility of the sponsors of the proposed planned unit development to furnish the village with a list of people who, in
accordance with statutory requirements, are to be notified about subject development.
3. Twelve (12) copies of the preliminary planned unit development plat and supporting data shall be submitted to the plan commission for certification of
conformity with these regulations and for comments, recommendations and suggestions regarding the overall design, if any. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
4. It shall be the duty of the plan commission, after the regular plan commission meeting and review of the preliminary planned unit development plat
and supporting data, to recommend approval, modification or disapproval, and the reasons therefor, or indicate why a report cannot be rendered to
the village board. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974; amd. Ord. 87-1526, 4-6-1987)
The report of the plan commission shall set forth in a communication to the village board, findings of fact in accordance with section 5-14-5 of this
chapter, on whichthey base their recommendations, and describing how the proposal meets the standards required in section 5-14-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
5. The village board, after receipt of the preliminary planned unit development plat from the plan commission, shall approve, modify or disapprove the
preliminary plat. In the case of approval, or approval with modification, the village board shall pass an ordinance granting the special use and indicate
their approval upon the plat, and arrange zoning map modifications as necessary; or, in the case of a planned unit development having been granted
a special use in the conceptual plan option stage, the village board shall reconfirm the approval by resolution. The village board may require special
conditions to ensure conformance with the intent of all comprehensive plan elements and the stated purposes of the planned unit development
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974; amd. Ord. 87-1526, 4-6-1987)
6. Approval of a preliminary planned unit development plan shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of
approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of the
village board and subsequent recording upon the fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and conditions of the preliminary approval, if
any. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974; amd. Ord. 87-1577, 7-20-1987)
The preliminary and final plats may be filed and approved simultaneously or the final plat may be filed and approved without a preliminary plat if all
of the land is to be developed at one time, and if all requirements herein are met.
No building permit shall be issued for any structure until the approval of the final plat. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
7. Changes to an approved preliminary plat of planned unit development may be made as follows:
(a) The proposed change to the preliminary planned unit development shall be submitted to the plan commission for a recommendation whether the
proposed change constitutes a major or minor change, in accordance with the criteria set forth below:
Major changes are changes which alter the concept or intent of the planned unit development, including increases in density, increases in floor
area ratio (FAR), reductions in exterior setbacks, increases in the height of buildings, reductions of proposed open space, any increase in the
bedroom count, changes in road standards or significant changes in the final governing agreements, provisions or covenants, any change
involvingsubstitution of materials of a lower or lesser quantity or quality than that previously approved or other such changes.
Minor changes are changes in the preliminary plat of planned unit development which do not change the concept or intent of the development or
other changes not defined as a major change.
(b) The plan commission shall recommend to the village board that the proposed change be considered either a major or minor change, in
accordance with the criteria set forth above. If the plan commission is unable to make a recommendation, it should indicate same to the village
board.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 195/460
(c) The village board, after receipt of the plan commission's report, shall determine whether the proposed change constitutes a major or a minor
change. If the change is determined to be major, a petitioner must submit a new preliminary plat and supporting data and follow the preliminary
plat procedure. If the change is determined to be minor, the petitioner need not go through the preliminary plat approval steps, and the village
board may approve said minor change.
(d) All changes to a preliminary plat shall be recorded with the office of DuPage County recorder as amendments to said plat or reflected in the
recording of a new "corrected" preliminary plat. (Ord. 87-1577, 7-20-1987)
(B) Specific Content; Preliminary Plat Stage: The following information shall be required unless specifically waived by the plan commission:
1. Drawing: A drawing of the planned unit development shall be prepared to a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and
shall show such designations as proposed streets, all buildings and their uses, common open space, recreation facilities, parking areas, service
areas and other facilities to indicate the character of the proposed development. The submission may be composed of one or more sheets and
drawings and shall include:
(a) Boundary lines: Bearings and distances of the area to be subdivided. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
(b) Easements: General location, width and purpose and identification of all village easements for water mains, sanitary sewer, storm water, and/or
overland storm drainage, as well as all utility easements for gas, electric, telephone and cable television. (Ord. 85-1345, 10-21-1985)
(c) Streets on and adjacent to the tract: Street name, right of way width, existing or proposed centerline elevations, pavement type, walks, curbs,
gutters, culverts, etc. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
(d) Utilities on and adjacent to the tract: Location, size, and invert elevation of sanitary storm sewers, the location and size of water mains; location of
gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone lines, and streetlights; direction and distance to and size of nearest usable water mains and sewers
adjacent to the tract showing invert elevations of sewers. (Ord. 85-1345, 10-21-1985)
(e) Ground elevations on the tract: Contours at an interval of not greater than two feet (2') or at one foot (1') intervals if deemed necessary by the
plan commission.
(f) Subsurface conditions on the tract: Location and results of tests made to generally ascertain subsurface soil, rock and ground water conditions.
(g) Other conditions on the tract: Watercourses, floodplains, marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot (1') or more in
diameter, houses, barns, accessory buildings and other significant features.
(h) Other conditions on adjacent land: Approximate direction and gradient of ground slope which can be interpreted from USGS maps, including any
embankments or retaining walls; character and location of major buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby nonresidential land
uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent unplatted land; for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name, and show approximate
percent buildup, typical lot size and dwelling type.
(i) Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
(j) Proposed public improvements: Highways or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on, near or affecting
the tract.
(k) Open space: All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose indicated.
(l) General location, purpose and height, in feet and stories, of each building other than single-family residences on individually platted lots.
(m) Map data: Name of development, name of site planner, north point and scale, date of preparation and acreage of site. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
(n) A signature block for endorsement by the chairman of the village plan commission, as follows:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS:
COUNTY OF DU PAGE )
Approval (is) (is not) recommended this day of , A.D., 20 , by the Plan Commission of the Village of Lisle, County of Du Page and
State of Illinois.
By
Chairman of Plan Commission
(o) A signature block for endorsement by the president of the village and attestation by the clerk, stating that approval of the preliminary plat of
planned unit development has been granted, as follows:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS:
COUNTY OF DU PAGE )
Approval this day of , A.D., 20 by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lisle, County of Du Page, State of Illinois.
President
Clerk
(Ord. 87-1577, 7-20-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 196/460
2. Character: Explanation of the character of the planned unit development and the manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the
flexibility of these regulations and referencing the general benefits that will accrue to the public as a result of the development.
3. Ownership: Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land within the project, including present tract designation according to official
records in the offices of the county recorder.
4. Names: The names and addresses of the persons to whom the notice of the hearing to be held by the plan commission should be sent (the
subdivider, the designer of the development and the owners of the land immediately adjoining the land to be platted).
5. Schedule: Development schedule indicating:
(a) Estimated stages in which the project will be built with emphasis on area, density (gross and residential), land use, and public facilities such as
open space to be developed with each state. Overall design of each stage shall be shown on the plat and through supporting graphic material.
(b) Estimated dates for beginning and completion of each stage.
(c) If different land use types are to be included within the planned unit development, the schedule must include the mix of uses to be built in each
stage.
6. Covenants: Proposed agreements, provisions or covenants which will govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned unit
development and any of its common open space.
7. Densities: Provide preliminary statistics on the proposed gross and residential density, including the number of dwelling units by type and bedroom,
and the number of buildings by type. This information should be submitted in conformity with the planned unit development's staging (i.e., densities
of various stages), as well as for the overall project.
8. Nonresidential Use: Provide information on the type and amount of ancillary and nonresidential uses in a residential development, including the
amount of common open space.
9. Service Facilities: Provide information on all service facilities and off street parking facilities.
10. Architectural Plans: Preliminary architectural plans and/or concepts for all primary buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an
understanding of the style of the development, the general design of the building and the number, size and type of dwelling units. (Ord. 540, 11-19-
1974)
11. Landscape Plans: Preliminary landscape plans shall be submitted, including the following:
(a) Earth sculpturing, berming and aesthetic features in sufficient detail so as to aid in the understanding of the style of the development;
(b) Proposed location, name and size of any required tree plantings. Said tree plantings must meet the following criteria:
(1) The trees must be one of the following varieties:
Common Name Botanical Name
Marshall seedless ash Fraxinus pennsylvanica lanceolata Marshall seedless
White ash Fraxinus americana
Norway maple Acer platanoides
Sugar maple Acer saccharum
Red maple Acer rubrum
Honeylocust Cleditsia tricanthos inermis
Littleleaf linden Tilia cordata
American basswood Tilia americana
Bradford pear Pyrus calleryana Bradford
(2) Plants shall conform to the current "American Standard For Nursery Stock" as approved by the American Standards Association Incorporated.
(3) The minimum size of the trees provided shall be as specified by the village planner.
(4) Trees may be balled and burlapped.
(5) Trees of park grade stock are unacceptable.
(6) Trees may be planted no closer than fifty feet (50') apart.
(7) Clay subsoils shall be amended or replaced with topsoil for backfilling tree holes.
(8) All street trees shall be adequately watered upon installation.
(9) All street trees shall be guaranteed for one full year from planting date and be promptly replaced with plants of the same variety and size at no
cost to the village.
(10) Evidence must be provided that trees come from state inspected commercially licensed nurseries. (Ord. 85-1270, 2-18-1985)
12. Facilities Plans: Preliminary plans or information, which will indicate that the proposed development can be adequately serviced for the following:
(a) Roads including classification, width of right of way, width of pavement and typical construction details.
(b) Sanitary sewers.
(c) Storm drainage.
(d) Water supply system.
(e) Lighting program.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 197/460
13. School Impact Study: Provide information on the student load and financial impact on the local school districts, including estimated scheduling of
potential students.
14. Tax Impact Study: Provide information on the estimated assessment and distribution of taxes to be generated by the proposed project and the cost
to the various taxing bodies to provide necessary services to the project.
15. Traffic Analysis: Provide information on the adequacy of the local transportation and thoroughfare system to handle anticipated traffic volumes
generated by the planned unit development. This analysis shall include the anticipated impact for both on site and community (off site) transportation
systems.
16. Environmental Impact Study: Provide information on the relationship between the proposed land uses and the natural environment of the area,
including, but not limited to, the soils, geology, hydrology, and atmosphere. The natural resource opinions of the United States soil and water
conservation district may be utilized as part of these studies.
17. Market Study: Provide an economic feasibility study of the proposed development, including information on land utilization and marketing potential.
18. Objectives: Provide a statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the planned unit development. This statement should include a
description of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions and site plan of the developer.
19. Other: Provide any other information that the plan commission may reasonably require for their evaluation of the proposed planned unit
development. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
5-14-4-4: FINAL PLAT STAGE:
The purpose of the final plat is to designate with particularity the land subdivided into conventional lots as well as the division of other lands, not so
subdivided, into common open space and building sites. The preliminary plat shall generally locate buildings, whereas the final plat shall show the exact
location of each building.
The final planned unit development plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and, if desired by the developer, it may be
submitted in stages with each stage reflecting the approved preliminary plat. The required procedure for approval of a final plat shall be:
(A) Procedure:
1. Plans Submitted: A final planned unit development plat and other supporting data required for approval shall be submitted to the plan commission in
accordance with the provisions for final plats submission (see subsection (B) of this section). Supporting data shall show in detail the design, precise
location and use of all buildings and overall land development as well as such additional information as the plan commission may require. (Ord. 540,
11-19-1974)
2. Certification: The final plat and supporting data shall be submitted to the plan commission for certification that the final plat is in conformity with the
approved preliminary plat, including any major and/or minor changes to said preliminary plat as have been approved pursuant to the procedure set
forth in section 5-14-5 of this chapter. Further, the plan commission shall recommend to the village board either approval or disapproval and the
reasons therefor. (Ord. 87-1577, 7-20-1987)
3. Approval, Disapproval; Filing: The village board, after receipt of the final plat, shall approve or disapprove the final plat and shall pass an ordinance
authorizing the planned unit development as a special use and allowing the issuance of all necessary permits, if approved. Permits are to be issued
only after the final planned unit development plat and supporting data have been recorded with the county recorder of deeds, and shall be issued in
full conformance with this chapter. Proof of the filing of the final plat shall be provided to the village.
4. Recording The Final Plat: The ordinance authorizing construction of the planned unit development shall be effective only upon recording of the final
planned unit development plat and supporting data with the county recorder of deeds.
The recording of the final plat shall inform all who deal with the planned unit development of the restrictions placed upon the land and act as a
zoning control device.
5. Changes In The Planned Unit Development: The planned unit development project shall be developed only according to the approved and recorded
final plat and all supporting data. The recorded final plat and supporting data, together with all recorded amendments, shall be binding on the
applicants, their successors, grantees, and assigns, and shall limit and control the use of premises and location of structures in the planned unit
development project as set forth therein. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
Changes to an approved final plat of planned unit development may be made as follows: (Ord. 87-1577, 7-20-1987)
(a) Major Changes: Changes which alter the concept or intent of the planned unit development, including increases in density, increases in floor area
ratio (FAR), reductions in exterior setbacks, increases in the height of buildings, reductions of proposed open space, any increase in the bedroom
count, any twenty five percent (25%) or greater increase in sign height, square footage or face area, or any increase in number of signs, or twenty
five percent (25%) or greater decrease in setback to signage, or any change in sign illumination, changes in road standards or significant changes
in the final governing agreements, provisions or covenants,any change involving substitution of materials of a lower or lesser quantity or quality
than that previously approved or other changes, may be approved only by submission of a new final planned unit development plat and supporting
data and following the preliminary plat procedure. If major changes are proposed, a new public hearing is required during resubmission of the final
plat. The village board shall decide what constitutes a major change for each planned unit development. (Ord. 2000-3252, 11-20-2000)
(b) Minor Changes: The village board may approve minor changes to the final plat of planned unit development which do not change the concept or
intent of the development without going through the preliminary approval steps. A minor change shall be any change not defined as a major
change.
All changes to the final plat shall be recorded with the county recorder of deeds as amendments to said plat or reflected in the recording of a
new "corrected" final plat. (Ord. 87-1577, 7-20-1987)
6. Submission Requirements: The final plats must be submitted for approval in accordance with the agreed scheduling. The first final plat must be
submitted not later than three (3) years from the approval of the preliminary plat, and construction as authorized by the issuance of a building permit
must begin within two (2) years of the date of the filing of the final plat dealing with such construction; in the event that same is not done, the planned
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 198/460
unit development special use shall be null and void and the plan commission shall initiate such zoning changes as it deems necessary to service the
public interest. The property may revert back to its original zoning classification. If construction falls more than three (3) years behind the schedule
filed with the final plat, the plan commission may either extend the schedule period or shall initiate action to revoke the planned unit development
special use. Extensions in the building schedule for two (2) year periods may be recommended by the plan commission and granted by the village
board. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
7. Procedure Where Proposed Final Plat Is Not In Conformity With Approved Preliminary Plat:
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, if, prior to submittal of a proposed final plat, a petitioner has reason to believe that the final plat he is
about to submit for certification and recommendation of approval differs or departs from the approved and recorded preliminary plat and all
amendments thereto, the petitioner may, at his option, request a full public hearing to seek approval of said difference or departure as a major
change to the approved and recorded preliminary plat, and to further seek approval of the final plat.
(b) If petitioner declines to request a public hearing as setforth in subsection (A)7(a) of this section, he shall submit said final plat to the plan
commission for certification and approval pursuant to subsection (A)2 of this section. If the plan commission determines that the final plat is not in
conformity as set forth above, the petitioner may, at this point, do either of the following:
(1) Request a full public hearing to seek approval of the subject nonconformity as a major change to the approved and recorded preliminary plat,
and all amendments thereto, and further to seek approval of the final plat; or
(2) Request a determination by the board of trustees as to whether the nonconformity constitutes a major or minor change to the approved
preliminary plat.
a. If the change is found to be a minor change to the preliminary plat, the board of trustees may approve said change and remand the
matter to the plan commission for certification that the final plat is in conformity with the approved preliminary plat, as amended, and to
recommend to the village board either approval or disapproval of the final plat and the reasons therefor;
b. If the change is found to be a major change, the board of trustees shall remand the matter to the plan commission for a full public
hearing to discuss approval of a major change to the preliminary plat and approval of the final plat based thereon.
(3) All costs, expenses and fees for any hearings, transcripts and reproduction of documents, plat and plan reviews by village consultants, reviews
or preparation of documents by the village attorney, or other activity taking place pursuant to this chapter or necessitated by a major or minor
change as defined herein, shall be at petitioner's sole expense, in accordance with section 1-14-1 of this code. (Ord. 87-1577, 7-20-1987)
(B) Specific Content; Final Plat Stage:
1. Final Plat: A final planned unit development plat, suitable for recording with the county recorder of deeds, shall be prepared.
The final planned unit development plat shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate development within the planned unit development.
(b) If subdivided lands are included, a subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and meeting the requirements of a normal subdivision
plat.
(c) An accurate legal description of each separate unsubdivided use area, including common open space. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
(d) Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be constructed, other than single-family detached residences on individually platted lots. (Ord.
544, 12-3-1974)
(e) Certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of lands and recording the documents.
(f) Tabulations on separate unsubdivided use area, including land area, number of buildings, number of dwelling units, and dwelling units per acre.
(Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
(g) Designation of the exact location of all trees to be planted, showing common and botanical names and diameter of trunk for each tree. (Ord. 85-
1270, 2-18-1985)
(h) Designation of the exact location, width and purpose, and identification of all village easements for water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
and/or overland storm drainage routes, as well as for all utility easements for gas, electric, telephone and cable television.
(i) Topographical and profile studies, having on their face the certification of a registered professional engineer, and the owner of the land or his duly
authorized attorney, stating as follows:
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
) SS
COUNTY OF DU PAGE)
To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of such development or any part
thereof, or, that if such surface water drainage will be changed, adequate provision has been made for collection and diversion of such surface
waters into public areas, or drains, which the developer has a right to use, and that such surface waters will not be deposited on the property of
adjoining land owners in such concentrations as may cause damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of the development.
Dated this day of , 20 .
Engineer Owner or Attorney
(Ord. 85-1345, 10-21-1985)
(j) A signature block for endorsement by the chairman of the village plan commission, as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 199/460
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
) SS
COUNTY OF DU PAGE)
It is hereby certified that this final plat of planned unit development is in conformity with the approved preliminary plat. Further, approval (is) (is
not) recommended this day of , A.D., 20 , by the Plan Commission of the Village of Lisle, County of Du Page and State of Illinois.
By
Chairman of Plan Commission
(k) A signature block for endorsement by the president of the village and attestation by the clerk stating that approval of the final plat of planned unit
development has been granted, as follows:
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
) SS
COUNTY OF DU PAGE)
Approved this day of , A.D., 20 , by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lisle, County of Du Page and State of Illinois.
President
Clerk
(Ord. 87-1577, 7-20-1987)
(l) Designation of the exact location and dimensions of signage to be constructed on the platted property. Signage plans shall also be provided to the
village for each sign to be erected. (Ord. 2000-3252, 11-20-2000)
2. Common Open Space Documents: All common open space shall be conveyed to the owners, including condominium owners, of the buildings within
the planned unit development, said conveyance to contain covenants running with the land making such owners jointly and severally liable and
responsible for the care, upkeep and maintenance of all such common open space. Said covenant shall further provide that the village, its
successors and assigns, shall have the right to bring an action at law or in equity to assess fines for the noncompliance with applicable municipal
codes or to compel said owners to provide such maintenance as may be required.
3. Public Facilities: All public facilities and improvements made necessary as a result of the planned unit development shall be either constructed in
advance of the approval of thefinal plat, or in lieu of such, escrow deposits, performance bonds or commitments from banks or other financial
institutions, in such form acceptable to the village, shall be posted by the sponsors of the planned unit development to guarantee construction of the
required improvements.
4. Construction Schedule: A final construction schedule shall be submitted for that portion of the planned unit development for which approval is being
requested.
5. Guarantee Deposit: A deposit shall be made to the village in cash, performance bond, maintenance bond, irrevocable bankable letter of credit, or
commitments from banks or other financial institutions, in such form acceptable to the village, equal to ten percent (10%) of the estimated cost of
public facility installations. This deposit shall be a guarantee of satisfactory performance of the facilities constructed within the planned unit
development and shall be held by the village for a period of twelve (12) months after completion. After such twelve (12) months, the deposit shall be
refunded if no defects have developed, or if any defects have developed, then the balance of such deposit shall be refunded after reimbursement for
amounts expended in correcting defective facilities.
6. Delinquent Taxes: A certificate shall be furnished from the county collector stating that he finds no delinquent taxes on subject property and that all
assessments constituting a lien on the whole or any part of the property of the planned unit development have been paid.
7. Covenants: Final agreements, provisions or covenants which will govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned unit
development shall be recorded at the same time as the final planned unit development plat. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
8. Letter Of Credit: A letter of credit shall be posted with the village in compliance with section 5-18-6 of this title. (Ord. 2000-3200, 2-21-2000)
5-14-5: FINDINGS:
The plan commission shall provide findings of fact setting forth the reasons for the recommendation, and said findings shall set forth with particularity in
what respects the proposal would or would not be in the public interest, including, but not limited to, the following findings of fact:
(A) In what respect the proposed plan is consistent with the stated purpose of the planned unit development regulations.
(B) The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements and standards of the planned unit development regulations.
(C) The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning and subdivision regulations or other village ordinances otherwise applicable to the
subject property, including, but not limited to, the density, dimension, area, bulk and use, and the reasons why such departures are deemed to be in the
public interest.
(D) The method by which the proposed plan makes adequate provision for public services, provides adequate control over vehicular traffic, provides for
and protects designated common open space, and furthers the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 200/460
(E) The relationship and compatibility of the proposed plan to the adjacent properties and neighborhood.
(F) The desirability of the proposed plan regarding physical development, tax base and economic well being of the entire community.
(G) The conformity with the intent and spirit of the comprehensive plan and community planning objectives of the village. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
5-14-6: CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES:
Prior to the granting of any planned unit development, the plan commission may recommend, and the village board may stipulate, such conditions and
restrictions upon the establishment, location, design, layout, height, density, construction, maintenance, aesthetics, operation and other elements of the
planned unit development as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest, improvement of the development, protection of the adjacent area,
and to secure compliance with the standards specified in section 5-14-3 of this chapter. In all cases in which planned unit developments are granted, the
village board may require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection with the approval
of the planned unit development are being, and will be, complied with. (Ord. 540, 11-19-1974)
5-14-7: CONVEYANCE OF EASEMENTS AND UTILITIES:
All sanitary sewer lines and water mains within the planned unit developments in the village, which sanitary sewer lines are required by the environmental
protection agency or any other division or branch of the Illinois state government to be owned, operated or maintained by the village, and which water
mains are specified by the village engineer, shall be conveyed by the owner or developer of such development to the village free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances by good and proper bills of sale and such other documents such as waivers of lien as are deemed necessary by the villageattorney.
All said lines and mains shall be constructed and installed to the satisfaction of the village engineer, and said engineer shall be present at all times during
construction and installation of said lines and mains3.
The owner or developer shall furnish the village with three (3) full sets of as built plans, and shall grant the village a permanent easement of no less than
ten feet (10') (and more as determined necessary by the village engineer) on each side of the sanitary sewer lines and water mains for the purpose of
operation, maintenance, replacement, repair and cleaning of the lines and mains.
The owner or developer shall reimburse the village for all engineering fees, TV inspections, infiltration and/or pressure tests and inspection expenses
incurred by the village relating to the said lines and mains, and said owner or developer shall also reimburse the village for all costs of maintenance,
replacement and repair (except cleaning) of said lines and mains and all costs of returning the area to its original condition including, but not limited to,
landscaping and paving, and shall enter into a binding written agreement with the village so to do.
The provisions of this section shall be fully complied with by the developers and owners of planned unit developments in the village prior to acceptance by
the village of such lines and mains and prior to issuance of any certificates of occupancy by the village; and the village shall not acquire any responsibility
for said lines and mains until they are accepted by a duly passed resolution of the village president and board of trustees. (Ord. 410, 2-15-1972)
5-14-8: DEDICATION OF PARK LANDS AND SCHOOL SITES OR FOR PAYMENTS OF FEES IN LIEU THEREOF:
A planned unit development must comply with all provisions of section 6-3-2 of this code. (Ord. 674, 1-18-1977)
Chapter 15
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
5-15-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable
fire, explosive or other hazards, including dust, odor or other form of air pollution; heat, cold, dampness, electrical or other substance, condition or element
in such a manner or in such amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area or adjoining premises; provided that any use permitted or not expressly
prohibited by this title may be undertaken and maintained if it conforms to the regulations of this chapter limiting dangerous and objectionable elements at
the point of the determination of their existence. (Ord. 350)
5-15-2: PROCEDURE:
All principal permitted uses and conditional uses specified in the B-3 and I-1 zoning districts shall comply with the performance standards procedure in
applying for a zoning clearance permit. In addition, the building commissioner may, at his discretion, require any other industrial use not specifically listed
to comply with the performance standards procedure if such use is likely to violate the standards of this title. (Ord. 350)
5-15-3: STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL USES:
Compliance with performance standards procedure shall be required only of the uses expressly listed, every use which is now or may hereafter be
authorized by this title shall fully comply with the standards and requirements of this title. (Ord. 350)
5-15-4: NONCONFORMING USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 201/460
Certain uses established before the effective date hereof and nonconforming as to performance standards shall be given a reasonable time in which to
conform therewith, as provided in section 5-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 350)
5-15-5: LOCATIONS FOR ENFORCEMENT DETERMINATIONS:
The determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made at the location of the use creating the same and at any
points where the existence of such elements may be more apparent (herein referred to as "at any point"); provided, however, that the measurements
necessary for enforcement of performance standards set forth in this chapter shall be taken at different points in different districts in relation to the
establishment or use creating the element being measured (herein referred to as "point of measurement") as follows:
(A) In any R district and B-1 and B-2 districts: Twenty five feet (25') from the establishment or use, or at the lot line of the use if closer to the establishment
or use.
(B) In any other district: At the boundary or boundaries of the district, or at any point within any R district. (Ord. 350)
5-15-6: REGULATIONS:
The following provisions, standards and specifications shall apply:
(A) Fire And Explosion Hazards: All activities involving and all storage of flammable and explosive materials shall be provided at any point with adequate
safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate firefighting and fire suppression and equipment and devices standard in the
industry. Burning of waste materials in open fires shall be prohibited at any point unless authorized by fire department permit, subject to such conditions
as may be prescribed by the fire department in each case. The relevant provisions of state and local laws and regulations shall also apply.
(B) Radioactivity Or Electrical Disturbance: No activities shall be permitted which violate the requirements and standards of the radiation protection
regulations of the Illinois state department of health, and no electrical disturbance shall be tolerated which adversely affects the operation at any point
of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.
(C) Noise: At the point of measurement the sound pressure level of noise radiated from a facility at nighttime shall not exceed forty (40) decibels1 or the
average sound level of the street traffic noise nearest the noise generator, whichever is the higher, in any octave band of frequency above three
hundred (300) cycles per second. Between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. the sound pressure level of noise radiated
from a facility shall not exceed sixty five (65) decibels in R districts and ninety five (95) decibels in allother districts or ten (10) decibels above the
average sound level of the existing background noise in the locality of the noise generator, whichever is the higher, in an octave band of a frequency
above three hundred (300) cycles per second. The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter2 and an octave band analyzer3
that conform to the specifications published by the American Standards Association. Noise shall be so muffled or otherwise controlled as not to
become objectionable, due to intermittence, beat frequency, impulsive character (hammering, etc.), periodic character (humming, screeching, etc.), or
shrillness. Sirens, whistles, bells, etc., which are maintained and utilized solely to serve a public purpose, such as fire, ambulance, police and air raid
warning sirens, shall be excluded from the above regulations. Below three hundred (300) cycles per second maximum sound pressure shall conform to
the following table:
Octave Band In
Cycles Per Second
Decibels
0 - 75 72
75 - 150 67
150 - 300 59
300 - 600 52
600 - 1,200 46
1,200 - 2,400 40
2,400 - 4,800 34
Above 4,800 - 32
(D) Vibration: No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments at the points of measurement specified in section 5-15-5 of this
chapter.
(E) Smoke: No emission shall be permitted at any point, from any chimney or otherwise, of visible grey smoke of a shade equal to or darker than no. 2 on
the "Power's Micro-Ringelmann Chart", published by McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, Inc., and copyrighted 1956 (being a direct facsimile
reproduction of the standard Ringelmann chart as issued by the United States bureau of mines), except that visible grey smoke of a shade equal to no.
2 on said chart may be emitted for four (4) minutes in any thirty (30) minutes. These provisions applicable to visible grey smoke shall also apply to
visible smoke of a different color but with an apparently equivalent capacity.
(F) Odor: No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at thepoints of measurement
specified in section 5-15-5 of this chapter. There is hereby established as a guide in determining such quantities of offensive odors table III, "odor
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 202/460
thresholds", in chapter 5, "Air Pollution Abatement Manual", copyright 1951 by Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., or as
amended.
(G) Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases And Other Forms Of Air Pollution: No emission shall be permitted which can cause any damage to health, to
animals, vegetation or other forms of property, or which can cause any excessive soiling, at any point. It is hereby established as a guide in determining
the detrimental concentration for any dust, fume, mist, gas or vapor, chapter 5, "Air Pollution Abatement Manual", copyright 1951 by the Manufacturing
Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C. The fly ash or other particulate matter resulting from the burning of combustible materials shall not
exceed a loading in the stack or vent gases of eighty five one-hundredths (0.85) pounds per one thousand (1,000) pounds of conveying gas (0.25
grains per cubic foot measured at 500 degrees Fahrenheit and 50 percent excess air).
(H) Glare: No direct or sky reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as
to be objectionable at the points of measurement specified in section 5-15-5 of this chapter. This restriction shall not apply to signs otherwise permitted
by the provisions of this title or other regulation.
(I) Liquid Or Solid Wastes: No discharge at any point into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system or stream, or into the ground, except in accord
with standards approved by the appropriate agency of, or having jurisdiction in, the village, as the case may be, or standards equivalent to those
approved by said authorities for similar uses, of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with the
orderly operation of public sewage collection and treatment systems, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements. (Ord. 350)
Chapter 16
STORMWATER AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
5-16-1: PURPOSE:
The principal purpose of this chapter is to promote effective, equitable, acceptable, and legal stormwater management measures. Other purposes of this
chapter include:
(A) Managing and mitigating the effects of urbanization on stormwater drainage;
(B) Reducing the existing potential for stormwater damage to public health, safety, life, and property;
(C) Protecting human life and health from the hazards of flooding and degradation of water quality;
(D) Protecting and enhancing the quality, quantity, and availability of surface and ground water resources;
(E) Preserving and enhancing existing wetlands, buffers, and aquatic environments, and encouraging restoration of degraded areas;
(F) Controlling sediment and erosion in and from stormwater facilities, developments, and construction sites;
(G) Preventing the further degradation of the quality of ground and surface waters;
(H) Requiring appropriate and adequate provision for site runoff control, especially when the land is developed for human activity;
(I) Requiring the design and evaluation of each site runoff control plan consistent with watershed capacities;
(J) Encouraging the use of stormwater storage in preference to stormwater conveyance;
(K) Lessening the taxpayers' burden for flood related disasters, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations;
(L) Meeting the Illinois department of transportation, division of water resources' floodway permitting requirements delineated in 615 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/18g ("an act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the state of Illinois"), as amended from time to time;
(M) Making federally subsidized flood insurance available to the village of Lisle and village of Lisle property owners by fulfilling the requirements of the
national flood insurance program, and participating in the community rating system so that flood damages are further mitigated by improved regulation
and property owners benefit by discounted insurance premiums for floodplain properties;
(N) Complying with the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program codified in title 44 of the code of federal regulations;
(O) Encouraging cooperation between the village of Lisle, DuPage County, and other governmental entities with respect to floodplain and stormwater
management;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 203/460
(P) Requiring cooperation and consistency in stormwater management activities within and between the units of government having stormwater
management jurisdiction;
(Q) Restricting future development in the floodplain to facilities that will not adversely affect the floodplain environments or adversely affect the potential for
flood damage;
(R) Incorporating water quality and habitat protection measures in all stormwater management activities within the village of Lisle;
(S) Requiring regular, planned maintenance of stormwater management facilities;
(T) Encouraging control of stormwater quantity and quality at the most site specific or local level;
(U) Allowing the use of simple technologies whenever appropriate and realistic, but requiring the use of more sophisticated techniques when necessary to
ensure the adequacy of stormwater controls;
(V) Participating in a procedure by which communities throughout DuPage County may petition the DuPage County stormwater committee to implement
and enforce the provisions of their DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance; and
(W) Requiring strict compliance with and enforcement of this code. (Ord. 2012-4463, 12-17-2012)
5-16-2: APPLICATION OF OTHER REGULATIONS:
Before starting any of the work regulated by this chapter, an applicant shall comply with the requirements set forth in other applicable ordinances with
respect to submission and approval of preliminary and final subdivision plats, improvement plans, building and zoning permits, inspections, appeals and
similar matters, along with those set forth in this chapter and as may be required by federal, state, or DuPage County laws and the regulations of any
department of the state. Where provisions of this chapter are more restrictive than any other requirements, this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 98-2963, 3-2-
1998)
5-16-3: ADOPTION:
(A) Adoption Of DuPage County Countywide Stormwater And Floodplain Ordinance: It is hereby adopted by the village for the purpose of establishing
rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of land development and building construction in
accordance with proper floodplain and stormwater controls, including permits and penalties, that certain code known as the DuPage County stormwater
and floodplain ordinance being particularly the April 22, 2013, edition thereof, and all subsequent amendments, and the whole thereof, save and except
such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended per section 5-16-4 of this chapter, of which one copy has been and now is filed in the
office of the village clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length therein, and from the date on which this
chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the village. (Ord. 2013-4497, 7-17-2013)
(B) Adoption Of Flood Study And Flood Maps: While the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance includes a list of streams, maps,
and stream profiles, the following streams, maps, and stream profiles apply specifically to the village of Lisle and surrounding unincorporated DuPage
County areas that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village of Lisle and which may in the future be annexed to the village of Lisle:
1. The mapped streams with designated floodways and floodplains are:
(a) East branch of the DuPage River (EBEB #1) and tributaries EBEB #12, EBEB #13, and EBEB #15;
(b) Lacey Creek tributary EBLA #4;
(c) East branch tributary 5 (also known as Willoway Brook) (EBWI #1), and tributaries EBWI #2 and EBWI #3;
(d) St. Joseph Creek (EBSJ #1) and tributaries 1(A) (EBSJ #2) and 2(B) (EBSJ #3);
(e) East branch tributary 3 (also known locally as Schwartz Creek) (EBEB #14);
(f) Rott Creek (EBRC #1) and tributaries (EBRC #2, EBRC #3, and EBRC #4);
(g) East branch tributary 6 (also known as St. Procopius Creek) (EBE6 #1) and tributaries EBE6 #2, EBE6 #3, and EBE6 #4;
(h) Prentiss Creek tributaries EBPR #2 and EBPR #4; and
(i) West branch of the DuPage River Steeple Run tributary WBSR #1.
2. Flood insurance study, DuPage County, Illinois and incorporated areas, dated December 16, 2004, and all subsequent revisions, including the
following specific stream flood profiles:
(a) East branch of the DuPage River: 37P and 38P;
(b) Lacey Creek tributary EBLA #4: (no stream flood profile available);
(c) East branch tributary 5 (Willoway Brook): 51P and 52P;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 204/460
(d) St. Joseph Creek and tributaries 1(A) and 2(B): 69P, 70P, 76P, 77P, 78P, and 79P;
(e) East branch tributary 3 (Schwartz Creek): 47P and 48P;
(f) Rott Creek and tributaries: 65P, 66P, 67P, and 68P;
(g) East branch tributary 6 (St. Procopius Creek) and tributaries: 54P and 55P;
(h) Prentiss Creek tributary 1: (no stream flood profile available);
(i) West branch of the DuPage River tributaries: (no stream flood profile available).
3. Flood insurance rate map, DuPage County, Illinois, and incorporated areas, county number 14043C, panel numbers 0507, 0508, 0801, 0802, 0803,
0804, 0805, and 0806, dated December 16, 2004, and all subsequent revisions.
4. DuPage regulatory flood map, county number 17043C, panel numbers 0153, 0154, 0161, 0162, 0163, 0164, 0166, and 0168, dated July 7, 2010,
and all subsequent revisions. (Ord. 2012-4463, 12-17-2012)
5-16-4: AMENDMENTS TO THE DUPAGE COUNTY COUNTYWIDE STORMWATER AND FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE:
(A) Section 15-16.B of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing it
with the following:
The village of Lisle corporate authorities are designated as the oversight committee for purposes of this ordinance.
(B) Section 15-23.B.2 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance is hereby amended as follows:
15-23.B.2. Proposed developments that are listed on the official list of exempt developments for the village of Lisle are those lists attached as exhibits
to village of Lisle resolutions no. 91-1017, 92-1035, 2000-2026, and 2003-2433. All such developments on the list shall have met at least one of the
following criteria:
15-23.B.2.a. Building permits for such development were issued prior to February 15, 1992; or
15-23.B.2.b. Engineering of all stormwater facilities for such development was submitted to and approved by the village engineer prior to February 15,
1992; or
15-23.B.2.c. Annexation agreements or ordinances or other agreements were recorded or executed prior to February 15, 1992 which specifically
exempt such development from community codes; or
15-23.B.2.d. For other developments, contractual agreements executed prior to February 15, 1992 which specifically exempt such development from
community codes; or
15-23.B.2.e. Approvals resulting from judicial decrees preclude application of this ordinance.
(C) Section 15-28 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing it with
the following: (Ord. 2012-4463, 12-17-2012)
15-28. Building Protection
15-28.A. Within the boundary of the regulatory flood plain and in areas outside the boundary of the regulatory flood plain, except for the east branch of
the Du Page River, all usable space in new buildings, or added to existing buildings, shall either be elevated, flood proofed, or otherwise protected such
that the lowest entry shall be at least two feet above the nearest base flood elevation to prevent the entry of surface stormwater. Within the boundary of
the regulatory flood plain and in areas outside the boundary of the regulatory flood plain, for the east branch of the Du Page River, all usable space in
new buildings, or added to existing buildings, shall either be elevated, flood proofed, or otherwise protected such that the lowest entry shall be at least
three feet above the nearest base flood elevation to prevent the entry of surface stormwater. Floodproofing devices shall be operational without human
intervention. If electricity is required for protection against flood damage, there shall be a backup power source which will activate without human
intervention. Floodproofing measures shall be certified by a professional engineer.
15-28.B. All usable space in new buildings or added to existing buildings adjacent to a major stormwater system, site runoff storage facility overflow
path or site runoff storage facility, shall be elevated, flood proofed, or otherwise protected to at least two feet above the design elevation to prevent the
entry of surface stormwater. The design elevation is the higher elevation of either article X or the elevation associated with the design rate as
determined in section 15-81.B.2.
15-28.C. Other building protection standards for structures that may be implemented in the flood plain are listed in section 15-81.B in article X.
15-28.D. FEMA technical bulletin 10-01, titled "Ensuring That Structures Built On Fill In Or Near Special Flood Hazard Areas Are Reasonably Safe
From Flooding" and dated May 2001, shall be followed for all structures or additions to structures constructed with a lowest floor below the FPE or less
than two feet above the design elevation of a stormwater facility high water or overflow path, for structures or additions to structures built on a site
elevated by fill so that the ground surface is above the BFE, and where a letter of map change based on fill (LOMR-F or LOMA-F) has been issued by
FEMA to remove the site from the floodplain.
15-28.E. FEMA technical bulletin 10-01, titled "Ensuring That Structures Built On Fill In Or Near Special Flood Hazard Areas Are Reasonably Safe
From Flooding" and dated May 2001, and as amended herein, shall be followed for all structures or additions to structures constructed with a lowest
floor below the FPE or less than two feet above the design elevation of a stormwater facility high water or overflow path; for structures or additions to
structures built outside the floodplain whose lowest floor, including basement, is less than the FPE; or for structures or additions to structures located
within fifty feet of the high water line of a major stormwater facility, site runoff storage facility or overflow path, and whose lowest floor, including
basement, is less than the FPE, as determined in the as-built or approved engineering plans for the development, or section 15-73. In these cases,
technical bulletin 10-01 shall be amended as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 205/460
a. Page 15, paragraph 3: Change to "The setback is the distance from the edge of the SFHA to the nearest wall of the basement. The minimum
allowable setback distance is 20 feet in the front or rear yard and 10 feet in the side yard".
b. Page 15, paragraph 4: Change to "The ground around the building must be compacted fill; the fill material - or soil of similar classification and degree
of permeability - must extend horizontally at least five feet around the foundation, from the bottom of the aggregate layer beneath the basement floor to
one foot below the finished grade".
15-28.F. For new buildings required to comply with section 15-28.D., the spot survey must include the elevation of the top of the footing.
(Ord. 2014-4533, 5-19-2014)
(D) Section 15-42 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by adding the following:
15-42.F. Village of Lisle grading permit fees shall be as set forth in chapter 7-2 of the village code and annual fee ordinance, and engineering review
and inspection fees shall be reimbursed to the village of Lisle as set forth in section 1-14-1 of the village code.
(E) Section 15-72.D of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by adding the following:
15-72.D.8. For sites where depressional storage exists, existing depressional storage shall be provided on a one-to-one basis in addition to the
required on-site storage.
(F) Section 15-72.E of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing it
with the following: (Ord. 2012-4463, 12-17-2012)
15-72.E. The details of the design of a site runoff storage facility, which includes a site runoff storage control structure in accordance with section 15-73
(side slopes, depths, etc.), will be in accordance with any applicable ordinances of the village of Lisle, including but not limited to the following:
(Ord. 2013-4497, 7-17-2013)
15-72.E.1. The top of bank of stormwater storage or flow channel facilities shall not be closer than five feet to any public right-of-way or closer than ten
feet to any back of curb of street pavement.
15-72.E.2. Maximum slopes in any instance shall be limited to 3-1.
15-72.E.3. No site runoff storage facility shall have retaining wall or building structure along more than 50% of the pond perimeter.
15-72.E.4. Interlocking solid concrete block retaining walls may be allowed for stormwater storage facilities provided they are less than two feet in
height or otherwise provided with a proper railing or protection in accordance with the building code of the village. For all walls over two feet high, the
interlocking, solid, concrete block shall be 8" wide, 5.50" high, 15.75" deep, slope block Mark IV, as manufactured by Unilock or approved equal. For
walls two feet high and less, the interlocking solid concrete block shall be 8" wide, 6" high, and 12" deep, Pisa II, as manufactured by Unilock or
approved equal. All other design and construction standards shall be approved by the village engineer.
15-72.E.5. Dry storage facilities shall have a minimum bottom ground slope of two percent (2%) regardless if an underdrain system is provided.
15-72.E.6. In all retention facilities, minimum depth from normal water level to bottom of side slopes shall be four feet. To enhance aquatic life and
provide better water quality management, a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the pond area shall be a minimum of ten feet deep. Suitable
means, satisfactory to the village, shall be provided to prevent water from becoming stagnant. Where it is determined that basin soils are too
permeable to hold water, the soil shall be sealed by a suitable method such as a clay blanket or with bentonite. Sealings shall not be unduly detrimental
to natural ground water recharge.
15-72.E.7. Storm water storage areas shall be permitted underground subject to the following:
15-72.E.7.a. Storm water storage areas shall be constructed of concrete pipe, concrete boxes, concrete vaults or approved equal as determined by the
village engineer. All other design and construction standards shall be approved by the village engineer;
15-72.E.7.b. A storm water management and facilities maintenance agreement shall be entered into with the property owner to ensure that the
underground storm water facility is properly maintained. Maintenance of the facility is the responsibility of the owner of the land on which the storm
water facilities are constructed unless the responsibility is assigned to an entity acceptable to the village of Lisle; and
15-72.E.7.c. In order to ensure that the storm water facility is functioning and operating appropriately, inspection of the underground storm water
storage area will be required every three years or more often if determined to be necessary by the village engineer or stormwater administrator. The
inspection shall be performed at the expense of the property owner, by a qualified inspector. The inspector shall be a licensed professional engineer in
the state of Illinois and specializing in the practice of civil engineering, or other qualified professional as approved by the village engineer or stormwater
administrator. A written copy of the inspection report shall be submitted to the village of Lisle community development department. Written notification
will be sent to the property owner if corrective maintenance is necessary or required as a result of these field observations.
15-72.E.8. Pumping for stormwater facilities will not be permitted.
15-72.E.9. Piping for a storage system facility shall not be less than 12" in diameter and said pipe shall meet all design and material requirements of
village of Lisle code chapter 7-7.
15-72.E.10. Properties located in the area generally bounded by Ogden Avenue on the north, Burlington Avenue on the south, Center Avenue on the
east and Route 53 on the west may purchase off-site storm water storage and/or compensatory storage in the Garfield Basin, at a fee specified in the
annual fee ordinance under the guidelines adopted by the village of Lisle board of trustees in accordance with resolution 2008-2887 and as approved
by the village engineer.
15-72.E.10.a. Any property owner desiring to use the Garfield Basin for off-site stormwater storage and/or compensatory storage must submit to, and
receive approval from the village engineer, an engineering plan that depicts, without limitation, the estimated flow of stormwater and the conveyance
system proposed to be used to direct stormwater to the off-site Garfield Basin facility, and/or the volume of compensatory storage required, before
obtaining a building permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 206/460
15-72.E.10.b. Priority for use of the Garfield Basin shall be given to those properties with final approved engineering plans. In the event that there is
inadequate capacity in the Garfield Basin to accommodate the estimated stormwater flow or compensatory storage from one or more properties, any
such property or properties shall be required to provide an on-site stormwater storage and/or compensatory storage facility as otherwise required in this
chapter.
(G) Section 15-80.H of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing it
with the following: (Ord. 2012-4463, 12-17-2012)
15-80.H. The flood protection elevation (FPE) is the base flood elevation (BFE) plus two feet of freeboard, except within the regulatory floodplain of the
east branch of the DuPage River where the flood protection elevation (FPE) is the base flood elevation (BFE) plus three feet of freeboard.
(Ord. 2014-4533, 5-19-2014)
(H) Sections 15-81.B.2, 15-81.B.3, 15-81.B.4, and 15-81.B.5 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance are hereby amended
by deleting those sections and replacing them with the following:
15-81.B.2. New construction or substantial improvements of all structures within a SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least the FPE and
that the fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be
equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Adequate
drainage shall be provided.
15-81.B.3. Reserved.
15-81.B.4. Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within the SFHA on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or
subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured homes to at least the FPE, be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist floatation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile home tie-down act issued
pursuant to 77 Ill. adm. code 870, provide adequate access and drainage and if pilings are used for elevation, applicable design and construction
standards for pilings shall be met.
15-81.B.5. Manufactured homes to be placed in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within the SFHA not subject to the provisions of
section 15-81.B.4 shall be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least the FPE.
(I) Section 15-81.B.7 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting sections 15-81.B.7.f, 15-
81.B.7.g, and 15-81.B.7.h and adding the following: (Ord. 2012-4463, 12-17-2012)
15-81.B.7.f. The accessory structure must be less than five hundred seventy-six (576) square feet.
15-81.B.7.g. Shall be anchored to resist floatation and overturning.
15-81.B.7.h. All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the FPE. A sign shall be permanently
mounted on the interior of the accessory structure indicating the level of the FPE and prohibiting storage of these items below that level.
15.81.B.7.i. All construction below the FPE shall be flood resistant materials.
15.81.B.7.j. Accessory structures permitted under this code section shall be subject to annual inspection to ensure continued compliance with permit
and code requirements.
(Ord. 2013-4497, 7-17-2013)
(J) Section 15-81.B of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by adding the following:
15-81.B.8. New structures other than buildings shall either be elevated to at least the FPE or designed for protection against physical flood damages.
Structures that are flood proofed shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; use flood resistant materials
below the FPE; locate electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities above the FPE; and provide
adequate drainage. Floodproofing devices shall be operational without human intervention. If electricity is required for protection against flood damage,
then there must be a backup power source that will activate without human intervention. The floodproofing shall be certified by a professional engineer.
(K) Section 15-81.C.1 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing it
with the following:
15-81.C.1. Temporary or permanent storage in the flood plain of the following are prohibited unless elevated or flood proofed to the FPE:
15-81.C.1.a. Items susceptible to flood damage; or
15-81.C.1.b. Unsecured buoyant materials or materials that may cause off-site damage including bulky materials, firewood, building materials,
flammable liquids, chemicals, explosives, pollutants, or other hazardous materials; or
15-81.C.1.c. Landscape wastes.
(L) Section 15-97 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing it with
the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 207/460
15-97.A. Where a variance to the site runoff storage requirements of section 15-72 is granted, payment into the village of Lisle's site runoff storage
variance fee program shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit as a condition of the variance.
15-97.B. The village of Lisle site runoff storage variance fee program shall operate as follows:
15-97.B.1. Payment of a site runoff storage variance fee for the varied storage shall be made to the village of Lisle and is determined by applying the
first applicable criteria as follows:
15-97.B.1.a. If the village of Lisle program has an established off-site storage facility(ies), the fee shall be calculated by multiplying the per acre-foot
cost of the closest off-site storage facility times the varied storage where:
15-97.B.1.a.1. A design concept plan for the facility has been approved by the village of Lisle's stormwater committee and the village board containing
an estimate of the per acre-foot cost of constructing the storage, including operation and maintenance costs; and
15-97.B.1.a.2. A formula has been developed to determine that any investment in the facility shall be at least equal to the cost of planning, acquiring of
lands, constructing, operating, and maintaining the facility; and
15-97.B.1.a.3. The facility is located in the same watershed planning area as the variance, or within the village of Lisle.
15-97.B.1.b. Where the Village of Lisle program has not established off-site storage facility(ies) in accordance with sub-parts B.1.a.1 through B.1.a.3
above, the site runoff storage variance fee shall be charged in accordance with an adopted fee schedule, as set out in the annual fee ordinance. The
fees set forth in the annual fee ordinance shall identify reasonable and rational costs to provide site runoff storage in the same watershed planning area
as the subject variance. It is hereby determined that the fee as set out in the village of Lisle's annual fee ordinance includes the village of Lisle's cost of
planning, acquiring land, construction, operation, and maintenance.
15-97.B.2. Fee in lieu funds collected shall be accounted for in separate development or watershed planning accounts. Funds shall be used in the
same watershed planning area as collected or in the village of Lisle to enhance existing site runoff storage facilities and related components, construct
off-site facilities and related components, provide maintenance of stormwater facilities, or undertake other development that provides a watershed
benefit.
15-97.B.3. The finance director shall provide accounting on an annual basis of all funds deposited in each development or watershed planning account
and shall account for each fund on a first-in, first-out basis.
15-97.B.4. The corporate authorities may prioritize and allocate funds on an annual basis within each development or watershed planning account. The
community development director or the stormwater administrator may make a request to the corporate authorities for funds within the accounts for uses
identified in section 15-97.B.2.
15-97.B.5. All site runoff storage variance fees shall be refunded to the person who paid the fee, or to that person's successor in interest, in
accordance with section 15-97.B.6, whenever the village of Lisle fails to encumber fees collected within 10 years from the date on which such fees
were collected.
15-97.B.6. Refunds shall be made provided that the person who paid the fee, or that person's successor in interest, files a petition with the village of
Lisle within one year from the date on which such fees are required to be encumbered.
(Ord. 2012-4463, 12-17-2012)
15-97.C. Funds collected in the village of Lisle shall be used within the village of Lisle, or within the watershed planning area in which the fee was
collected. All accounting records shall be made available to the DuPage County stormwater committee upon request.
(Ord. 2013-4497, 7-17-2013)
(M) Section 15-98 of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing it with
the following:
15-98. Post Construction BMP Fee-In-Lieu Program
15-98.A. With the approval of the stormwater administrator, and provided the conditions of section 15-63 apply, the applicant may be allowed or
required to pay a PCBMP fee-in-lieu payment. Payment into a PCBMP fee-in-lieu program shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit. For
purposes of this section, payment of a VCBMP fee-in-lieu is interchangeable with payment of PCBMP fee-in-lieu.
15-98.B. The village of Lisle shall operate a PCBMP fee-in-lieu program as follows:
15-98.B.1. PCBMP fee-in-lieu payment shall be made to the village of Lisle. A BMP fee-in-lieu payment shall be calculated by applying the adopted fee
schedule as set out in the annual fee ordinance that identifies reasonable and rational cost to construct and maintain similar PCBMPs for those areas
of the development that remain without effective water quality treatment. For VCBMP, fee-in-lieu payment shall be as set out in the annual fee
ordinance.
15-98.B.2. PCBMP and VCBMP funds collected shall be separately accounted for in watershed planning area accounts. Funds shall be used in the
same watershed planning areas as collected solely to design, construct, and maintain water quality or runoff volume reduction improvements. Funds
may not be used to fulfill obligations required by the ordinance.
15-98.B.3. The finance director shall provide accounting on an annual basis of all funds deposited in each watershed planning account and shall
account for each fund on a first-in, first-out basis.
15-98.B.4. The corporate authorities may prioritize and allocate funds on an annual basis within each watershed planning account. The community
development director or the stormwater administrator may make a request to the corporate authorities by March 30 of each year for funds within the
accounts for uses identified in section 15-98.B.2.
15-98.B.5. All BMP fee-in-lieu payments shall be refunded to the person who paid the fee, or to that person's successor in interest, in accordance with
section 15-98.B.6, when the village of Lisle fails to encumber that development's fees collected within ten (10) years of the date on which such fees
were collected.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 208/460
15-98.B.6. Refunds shall be made provided that the person who paid the fee, or that person's successor in interest, files a petition with the village of
Lisle within one year from the date on which such fees are required to be encumbered.
(Ord. 2012-4463, 12-17-2012)
15-98.C. Funds collected in the village of Lisle shall be used within the village of Lisle, or within the watershed planning area in which the fee was
collected. All accounting records shall be made available to the DuPage County stormwater committee upon request.
(Ord. 2013-4497, 7-17-2013)
(N) Section 15-117.E of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting that section and replacing it
with the following:
All variance petitions filed pursuant to this article XVI shall be filed with the stormwater administrator of the village of Lisle. The fee shall be as set out in
title 5 chapter 20 section 3 of the village of Lisle code and the annual fee ordinance.
(O) Appendix A, Definitions of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance is hereby amended by deleting those definitions for
"flood protection elevation" and "substantial improvement" and replacing them with the following: (Ord. 2012-4463, 12-17-2012)
Flood Protection Elevation (FPE). The base flood elevation plus two feet of freeboard, except within the regulatory floodplain of the east branch of
the DuPage River where the flood protection elevation (FPE) is the base flood elevation (BFE) plus three feet of freeboard. If an approved FEQ
watershed plan model produces a higher elevation than the regulatory BFE, the FPE shall be the FEQ flood of record elevation plus three feet of
freeboard.
Substantial Improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a structure taking place during a ten year period, in which
the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is
started. Substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. This term includes structures that have incurred repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a
structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions,
or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" listed on the national register of historic places or the Illinois register of historic places, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
(Ord. 2014-4533, 5-19-2014)
5-16-5: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, the provisions expressed herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. (Ord. 98-2963, 3-2-1998)
5-16-6: SAVING CLAUSE:
(A) Separability: If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(B) Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
(C) Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
historical records, engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that areas outside the prescribed floodplain boundaries or land uses permitted within such floodplains will be free
from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
which may result from reliance on this chapter or on any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 98-2963, 3-2-1998)
Chapter 17
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
5-17-1: DWELLINGS ON LOTS OF RECORD:
In any district where dwellings are permitted, a one-family detached dwelling may be erected on any lot of official record at the effective date hereof,
irrespective of its area of width, provided the applicable yard and other open space requirements are complied with as nearly as possible. (Ord. 80-968,
12-16-1980)
5-17-2: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS NOT APPLICABLE:
The height limitations stipulated in this title shall not apply to the following:
(A) Architectural Features: Church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers, flagpoles, masts and aerials; and
parapet walls extending not more than four feet (4') above the limiting height of the building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 209/460
(B) Places Of Public Assembly: Places of public assembly in churches, schools and other permitted public and semipublic buildings, provided that these
are located on the first floor of such buildings and provided that for each three feet (3') by which the height of such building exceeds the maximum
height otherwise permitted in the district, its side and rear yards shall be increased in width or depth by an additional foot over the side and rear yards
required for the highest building otherwise permitted in the district.
(C) Elevator Penthouses, Etc.: Elevator penthouses, monitors and scenery lofts, provided no linear dimension of any such structure exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the corresponding street lot line frontage; or to towers and monuments, fire towers, hose towers and cooling towers. (Ord. 80-968, 12-16-
1980)
5-17-3: PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS:
(A) The following uses are permitted and may be obstructions in yards, as follows:
F Denotes front yard
S Denotes side yard
CS Denotes corner side yard
R Denotes rear yard
Arbors or trellises F
S
CS
R
Awnings, deck and patio R
Awnings, window, or canopies, to a distance of not more than 2'6" F
S
CS
R
Balconies, to a distance of not more than 3' into yards of less than 20' and to a distance of not more than 6' into yards of more than
20'
F
S
CS
R
Basketball nets and poles, not less than 5' from the property line F
S
R
Basketball/tennis courts, not less than 10' from the property line R
Bay windows, to a distance of not more than 2' provided the window does not occupy more than 1/3 the length of the building wall
on which they are located
F
S
CS
R
Chimney, to a distance of not more than 2' provided the chimney does not occupy more than 1/3 the length of the building wall on
which they are located
F
S
CS
R
Compressors for central air conditioning, not less than 5' from the property line S
R
Cornices, sills, dormers, belt courses or other similar architectural feature, to a distance of not more than 3' F
S
CS
Decks, not less than 10' from the property line R
Dog runs, not less than 10' from the property line R
Driveways for single-family homes to reach garages, not less than 3' from the property line F
S
Eaves and gutters, to a distance of not more than 3' F
S
CS
R
Flagpoles, not less than 5' from the property line F
S
CS
R
Gazebo, not less than 10' from the property line R
Open, roofed porches, to a distance of 6' and not closer than 20' from the front property line F
Patios and terraces, not less than 5' from the property line S
R
Uses Yards
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 210/460
Portable storage containers, shall be limited to 2 times per year and shall not exceed 30 days per occurrence, or, in the alternative,
shall not exceed 60 consecutive days once per calendar year
F
Portable storage sheds, not less than 5' from the property line S
R
Recreational structures and equipment, not less than 10' from the property line R
Retaining walls, not less than 1' from the property line F
S
CS
R
Service facilities -
1
-1
- 1
-1
Sidewalks and walkways F
S
CS
R
Stoops, unroofed porches and porticoes, to a distance of 4' F
CS
R
Sump pump discharge or drainage structures not less than 3' from the property line F
S
CS
R
Wing wall, not more than 4' in height and not less than 5' from the property line F
S
CS
Note:
1.See section 5-23-11 of this title.
(Ord. 2019-4815, 3-18-2019)
5-17-4: PUBLIC SANITARY FACILITIES NOT AVAILABLE:
In any R District where a public sanitary sewer is not accessible, the otherwise specified lot area and frontage requirements, if less than the following, shall
be:
Lot Area
Lot Frontage
At Building Line
40,000 square feet 100 feet
(Ord. 80-968, 12-16-1980)
5-17-5: MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING ON A LOT:
Not more than one principal building shall be located on a lot in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residence Districts.
In any district where there is to be located a unit group of residential buildings, there shall be provided on the lot an unobstructed accessway of not less
than thirty feet (30') wide from the street on which the lot fronts to all principal buildings on the lot. For any unit group of residential buildings, the lot
frontage shall be not less than one hundred feet (100'). There shall be no residential building on the same lot with another building devoted to any principal
use other than residential. Where there is only one principal building, such building may contain mixed occupancies provided such occupancies are for
uses permitted by the appropriate district regulations. (Ord. 80-968, 12-16-1980)
5-17-6: VISION CLEARANCE:
On a corner lot, no fence or other structure more than three and one-half feet (31/2') in height above the plane of the established grades of the street shall
be erected on any part of the front yard or side yard herein established that is included within the street lines of intersecting streets and a line connecting
such street lines at a point which is twenty feet (20') from their point of intersection, measured along such street lines, and no planting of foliage shall be
placed or maintained within such area that, in the judgment of the building commissioner, will materially obstruct the view of a driver of a vehicle
approaching the street intersection.
In any required principal front yard, no fence or wall shall be permitted which materially impedes vision across such yard above the height of forty two
inches (42") and no hedge or other vegetation shall be permitted which materially impedes vision across such yard between the heights of forty two inches
(42") and ten feet (10').
The provisions of this section shall apply to all districts unless the setback requirements of the district are less restrictive. (Ord. 91-2162, 6-3-1991)
5-17-7: PARKING AND STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAILERS:
Uses Yards
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 211/460
(A) Applicability And Definitions: These regulations shall apply to all recreational vehicles and trailers as defined below, in all residential zoning districts:
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any camping trailer, motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or van camper used primarily for recreational purposes; as
well as vehicles including, but not limited to, all-terrain vehicles, boats, snowmobiles, watercraft, and other similar vehicles.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without mobile power in operation designed for carrying property and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
(B) Location Of Recreational Vehicles And Trailers: Storage and parking of recreational vehicles and trailers shall be regulated as follows:
1. On any residential lot within any residential district, a maximum of one recreational vehicle or trailer per dwelling unit on said lot may be located
outside of a fully enclosed building or structure;
2. Recreational vehicles and trailers shall only be located on a residential lot if the vehicles and property are properly maintained including proper
drainage and compliance with tall grass and weed regulations;
3. Recreational vehicles and trailers shall not be located in the required front or corner side yards of a property if they exceed twenty five feet (25') in
length; and
4. Recreational vehicles and trailers shall not be located closer than five feet (5') to any rear property line and three feet (3') to any side property line. A
recreational vehicle or trailer stored on a driveway located closer than three feet (3') to the property line is permitted if the driveway was constructed
prior to 2006.
(C) Surface Of Parking Area: If a recreational vehicle or trailer is parked on a residentially zoned property pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, the
vehicle or trailer shall be parked on an improved surface constructed of a hard dustless material, generally asphalt, brick pavers, concrete, pervious
pavers, grasscrete or similar type material as determined by the zoning administrator.
(D) Ownership: Recreational vehicles, equipment or utility trailers stored or parked in a residence district shall be owned by the property owner or
occupant. Proof of ownership or a lease agreement shall be produced upon request by the village.
(E) Guest Parking: Any recreational vehicle owned by guests of the home may be parked on a residential driveway on a lot up to fourteen (14) days every
six (6) months.
(F) License And Registration; Condition Of Vehicle: All recreational vehicles shall be properly licensed, registered and in an operable condition.
(G) Prohibited Uses: No parked or stored recreational vehicle or trailer shall be used for living purposes or to conduct business.
(H) Public Right Of Way Not To Be Blocked; Setbacks: A recreational vehicle or trailer shall not be parked or stored so as to block the public right of way
and shall be set back at least three feet (3') from any sidewalk or five feet (5') from any street.
(I) Parking In A Driveway: Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, any recreational vehicle may be parked in a driveway on a residential lot
two (2) times per month for a period not to exceed ninety six (96) hours for the purpose of loading, unloading, maintenance or repairs of said vehicle.
All major repairs shall be within an enclosed garage in residential areas. "Major repairs" shall be defined as repair work on a vehicle that needs a
complete overhaul or substantial replacement of parts.
(J) Variations: Requests to increase the number of recreational vehicles and trailers located outside of a fully enclosed building or structure in excess of
one vehicle shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission (PZC) as a zoning variation. (Ord. 2010-4324, 6-7-2010)
5-17-8: SPECIAL SETBACKS REQUIRED FROM VILLAGE WELL SITES:
(A) Identification Of Well Sites And Minimum And Maximum Setbacks: On any property within the required minimum and maximum setback distances
shown for the village well sites identified below no person or corporation shall construct, install, erect, enlarge or establish any "potential contamination
sources" as defined below:
Well Site
Minimum And
Maximum Setback
2 4710 Walnut Avenue 400 feet
3 4925 Yackley Avenue 400 feet
5 6203 Abbeywood Drive 400 feet
6 4497 Arborview 200 feet
(B) Potential Contamination Sources Defined:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 212/460
POTENTIAL PRIMARY SOURCE: Any unit at a facility or site not currently subject to a removal or remedial action which:
1. Is utilized for the treatment, storage, or disposal of any hazardous or special waste not generated at the site; or
2. Is utilized for the disposal of municipal waste not generated at the site, other than landscape waste and construction and demolition debris; or
3. Is utilized for the landfilling, land treating, surface impounding or piling of any hazardous or special waste that is generated on the site or at other
sites owned, controlled or operated by the same person; or
4. Stores or accumulates at any time more than seventy five thousand (75,000) pounds aboveground, or more than seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) pounds belowground, of any hazardous substances.
POTENTIAL SECONDARY SOURCE: Any unit at a facility or a site not currently subject to a removal or remedial action, other than a potential
primary source, which:
1. Is utilized for the landfilling, land treating, or surface impounding of waste that is generated on the site or at other sites owned, controlled or
operated by the same person, other than livestock and landscape waste, and construction and demolition debris; or
2. Stores or accumulates at any time more than twenty five thousand (25,000) pounds but not more than seventy five thousand (75,000) pounds
aboveground, or more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) pounds but not more than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) pounds
belowground, of any hazardous substances; or
3. Stores or accumulates at any time more than twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons aboveground, or more than five hundred (500) gallons
belowground, of petroleum, including crude oil or any fraction thereof which is not otherwise specifically listed or designated as a hazardous
substance; or
4. Stores or accumulates pesticides, fertilizers, or road oils for purposes of commercial application or for distribution to retail sales outlets; or
5. Stores or accumulates at any time more than fifty thousand (50,000) pounds of any deicing agents; or
6. Is utilized for handling livestock waste or for treating domestic wastewaters other than "private sewage disposal systems" as defined in the
private sewage disposal licensing act1. (Ord. 95-2664, 7-5-1995)
Chapter 18
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
5-18-1: REGULATIONS:
The building commissioner shall administer and enforce this title. He may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the president of the
board of trustees may direct, all of whom shall be appointed by the president. The building commissioner and his assistants, in the discharge of their duties
and upon exhibition of proper credentials, shall have the right to enter at any reasonable hour upon any premises or in any building under construction or
alteration.
If the building commissioner shall find that any of the provisions of this title are being violated, he shall notify in writing the persons responsible for such
violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings
or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being
done; or shall take other action authorized by this title to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. (Ord. 350)
5-18-2: BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED:
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a permit therefor issued by the building commissioner1. No
building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this title, including the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance, as
hereinafter provided, except after written order from the corporate authorities, after a public hearing has been conducted and a recommendation submitted
by the board of zoning appeals.
Should any work for which a permit is required be commenced or be done before such permit is issued and obtained, the required permit may be issued
for such and subsequent work, however, the amount of the required fee as provided herein for all work shallbe double that otherwise so provided. The
issuance of such permit does not act to bar any other penalty, liability or action otherwise provided for in this chapter or village code but shall be in addition
thereto.
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be
built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or
alteration. The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the building commissioner, including existing or proposed
building or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; and the number of families, housekeeping units or rental units the building is
designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 213/460
enforcement of this title.
One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the building commissioner after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or
disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. The second copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the building
commissioner. (Ord. 97-2889, 6-2-1997)
5-18-3: EXPIRATION OF BUILDING PERMIT; SPECIAL BUILDING PERMIT:
If the work described in any building permit has not begun within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be
canceled by the building commissioner and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected.
If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially completed within one year of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire
and be canceled by the building commissioner and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as
described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a special building permit has been obtained.
At the discretion of the Building Commissioner, such special permit may be based on the original application or he may require submission of a new
application. The special permit may include limitations on time allowed for substantial completion of the work, and provisions for a reasonable performance
bond to ensure completion within the time limit set. (Ord. 350)
5-18-4: CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE:
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure, until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefor by
the Building Commissioner stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this title.
No nonconforming structure or use shall be renewed, changed or extended until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Building
Commissioner. The certificate of zoning compliance shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use differs from the provisions of this title.
No permit for erection, alteration, moving or repair of any building shall be issued until an application has been made for a certificate of zoning compliance,
and the certificate shall be issued in conformity with the provisions of this title upon completion of the work.
A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for a period not exceeding six (6) months during alterations or
partial occupancy of a building pending its completion; provided, that such temporary certificate may require such conditions and safeguards as will protect
the safety of the occupants and the public.
The Building Commissioner shall maintain a record of all certificates of zoning compliance, and copies will be furnished upon request to any person.
Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be a violation of this title and punishable under section 5-1-8 of this title.
No dwelling unit shall be occupied as a community residence until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the Building Commissioner. No
certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued for a community residence unless:
(A) The community residence is located at least six hundred sixty feet (660') from any existing community residence, as measured from lot line to lot
line, except when a special use permit issued in accordance with subsection 5-19-1(B) of this title is issued to allow a community residence to locate
closer than six hundred sixty feet (660') to an existing community residence; and
(B) The applicant demonstrates that it has obtained licensing or certification required by the State to operate the proposed community residence, or
that the proposed community residence has been licensed or certified, if required to be licensed or certified by the State.
The Building Official may revoke a certificate of zoning compliance for a community residence if its license or certification, or the operator's license or
certification to operate community residences, is revoked.
A certificate of zoning compliance is not transferable to another operator nor to another location. (Ord. 2017-4724, 5-1-2017)
5-18-5: SECURITY DEPOSITS:
Cash deposit for cleanup of site during and after construction and damage that may result to Village property from construction:
(A) Security Deposit Required: No building permit required under section 5-18-2 of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, shall be issued unless the
applicant has made a cash security deposit with the Village Treasurer in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(B) Purpose Of Security Deposit: The purpose of such security deposit is to guarantee performance by each building permit holder of the obligation to
maintain the building and adjacent public and private property in a clean condition both during and after the course of construction, addition, alteration,
removal or demolition of a building or structure, in accordance with applicable laws and ordinances of the Village. Said security deposit is also to
guarantee that each building permit holder will restore all Village property that may be damaged in the course of construction, addition, alteration,
removal or demolition of a building or structure to its condition prior to the construction, addition, alteration, removal or demolition of a building or
structure, in accordance with applicable laws and ordinances of the village.
(C) Amount Of Security Deposit: The amount of the cash security deposit required under this section shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 214/460
(D) Application Of Security Deposit: If the building official shall determine that a building site or the public or private property adjacent to a building site is,
by reason of construction work being conducted under the building permit therefor by the building permit holder or by any contractor or subcontractor
engaged for such work, not being maintained in a clean condition, free from an undue accumulation of rubbish, mud, debris or waste materials, the
building official shall serve a written notice or order upon the holder of the building permit directing that such condition be remedied within a time period
specified in such notice or order, which shall be not less than three (3) days. If such condition shall not be remedied within such time period, the
building official may request the village manager to direct the proper employees of the village to perform all work necessary to remedy such condition
and all costs thereof shall be charged against and deducted from the amount of the security deposit. If the building official shall determine that village
property adjacent to a building site is by reason of construction work being conducted under the building permit therefor by the building permit holder or
by any contractor or subcontractor engaged for such work, damaged, the building official shall serve a written notice or order upon the holder of the
building permit directing that such damage be remedied within a time period specified in such notice or order, which shall be not less than seven (7)
days. If such damage shall not be remedied within such time period, the building official may request the village manager to direct the proper
employees of the village to perform all work necessary to remedy such damage, and all costs thereof shall be charged against and deducted from the
amount of the security deposit.
(E) Return Of Deposit: After the construction, addition, alteration, removal or demolition at the building site has terminated, any holder of a building permit
may apply to the building official for a return of any unused portion of the security deposit. If, upon such application, the building official determines that
the building site and adjacent public and private property have been left in a clean condition and the adjacent village property has not been damaged,
the building official shall direct the village treasurer to refund to the holder of the building permit any unused portion of the security deposit, without
interest. Any security deposit of which refund is not applied for within five (5) years from the date of such deposit shall, to the extent permitted by
applicable law, become the property of the village. (Ord. 549, 1-21-1975)
(F) Application Fee: An application fee as established by the annual fee ordinance will be charged for each cash security deposit tendered to the village
treasurer pursuant to this section. (Ord. 84-1238, 10-1-1984)
5-18-6: LETTER OF CREDIT:
Prior to issuance of any building permit, the applicant or owner of the property to be improved shall provide the village with an irrevocable letter of credit in
a form approved by the village in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the approved village engineer's estimate of the cost of the
required public and quasi-public improvements for the project. In lieu of a letter of credit, the applicant may deposit cash with the village in the same
amount subject to approval by the village manager. The public and quasi-public improvements covered by the letter of credit shall include, but not be
limited to, street improvements, sidewalks, water systems, sanitary sewer systems, storm sewers, storm water management facilities, recreational
facilities, street lighting, traffic signals and landscaping.
If at any time the village determines that the amount of the irrevocable letter of credit as originally pledged, is insufficient to complete all of the work
guaranteed by such letter of credit, the applicant shall post additional security as required by the village. For such time as the village deems that the
amount of the then posted security is insufficient to cause the completion of the improvements, the village shall not be required to issue building,
occupancy or other permits. (Ord. 2000-3200, 2-21-2000)
5-18-7: ADMINISTRATIVE VARIATIONS:
Variations of six inches (6") or less from the maximum height or minimum yard requirement may be filed with the community development director. The
director, or authorized designee, may review the variation request and determine whether the variation request shall be granted.
(A) Application Requirements: Applications for administrative variations shall be filed with the community development director. The application must
include, but is not limited to, the following application requirements:
1. Plat of survey with legal description;
2. Site plan and architectural renderings, as appropriate;
3. Statement of hardship and neighborhood character, as set forth in subsection (B) of this section;
4. Application fee;
5. Reimbursement of fees agreement;
6. Notarized letters or survey from all adjoining property owners stating the following:
(a) Name of the applicant seeking the variation.
(b) Legal description and address of the subject property.
(c) Name and address of adjoining property owners.
(d) Statement of variation request.
(e) Statement that the adjoining property owner does understand the request and does not object to the variation request.
(B) Standards For Variation: Administrative variations shall only be granted when the variance request is consistent with the general purpose and intent of
the zoning code and the applicant has demonstrated in writing the satisfaction of the following three (3) standards:
1. Hardship Or Unintentional Human Error: That a particular hardship or practical difficulty exists that is unique to the subject property and does not
apply generally to properties in the zoning district, and that the strict enforcement of the zoning requirement deprives the applicant of the reasonable
use of the property.
2. Prohibitions: That the granting of the variation will not:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 215/460
(a) Impair an adequate supply of light and air to the adjacent property;
(b) Increase the hazard from fire or other dangers to said property;
(c) Diminish the value of land and buildings in the immediate neighborhood;
(d) Unduly increase traffic congestion in the public streets and highways;
(e) Increase the potential for flood damages to adjacent property;
(f) Otherwise impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or general welfare of the inhabitants of the village of Lisle;
(g) Each variance will not set a precedent and each case shall be considered on its own merits.
3. Neighborhood Character: That the granting of the variation will be in harmony with the essential character of the neighborhood.
(C) Application Notification: Upon receipt of a complete application conforming to the requirements set forth in subsection (A) of this section, the
community development director shall review the application within thirty (30) days and notify the property owner via certified mail of his or herdecision.
If an application for an administrative variation is denied, the community development director shall explain the reasons for such denial and advise the
applicant that he or she may petition for a nonadministrative variation pursuant to subsection 5-19-1(C) of this title.
(D) Adjoining Property Owner Objection: In the event that an adjoining property owner objects to the administrative variation, the application for an
administrative variation under this section shall be subject to the requirements for a public hearing for a variation with the planning and zoning
commission, as set forth in subsection 5-19-1(C) of this title.
(E) Approval: If the community development director finds the variation request to meet the standards contained in this section, the community
development director shall do the following:
1. Provide notification to the applicant via certified mail.
2. Provide notification to the mayor and village board of trustees.
3. Record the variation with the office of the DuPage County recorder of deeds. The applicant shall bear all costs of recording the variation. (Ord. 2006-
4042, 8-7-2006)
Chapter 19
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS, AUTHORITY; PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENT TO THE
ZONING CODE
5-19-1: AUTHORITY1:
The zoning board of appeals shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by law and by this chapter, which are more particularly specified as follows:
(A) Interpretation: Upon appeal from a decision by an administrative official, to decide any question involving the interpretation of any provision of the
zoning code of the village, including determination of the exact location of any district boundary if there is uncertainty with respect thereto. (Ord. 84-
1175, 1-17-1984)
(B) Special Uses: To conduct public hearings upon applications for special uses, except for planned unit developments, and to recommend to the president
and board of trustees that the special use be either approved, denied or approved with modifications. Applications for planned unit developments shall
be heard by the plan commission pursuant to chapter 14 of this title and nothing herein shall be construed as governing applications for planned unit
developments. The zoning board of appeals shall act only in an advisory capacity to the president and board of trustees, and the power to permit a
special use is expressly reserved to the corporate authorities.
The zoning board of appeals may request and receive written reports and recommendations from the building and zoning commissioner and the
village planner relative to the special use application, if desired.
No special use shall be recommended by the zoning board of appeals unless it finds:
1. (a) It is necessary for the public convenience at that location;
(b) It is so designated, located and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected; and
2. Will not cause substantial injury to the value of otherproperty in the neighborhood in which it is to be located; and
3. Such special use shall conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is to be located.
Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1.1, no special use shall be permitted by the corporate authorities unless such special use meets
the standards expressly established for such special use classification as set forth in this code.
(C) Variances: To conduct hearings on applications for variances from the strict application of any of the requirements of this chapter, and to recommend to
the president and board of trustees that the variance be either approved, denied or approved with modification. The zoning board of appeals shall act
only in an advisory capacity to the president and board of trustees and, pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-5, the power to determine and
approve variations is expressly reserved to the corporate authorities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 216/460
The use of variances is generally intended for cases of exceptional conditions whereby such strict application would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the land or building involved. In recommending approval of a variance, the
zoning board of appeals shall suggest any conditions that it deems to be necessary or desirable. The zoning board of appeals shall not recommend
approval of a variance unless it finds:
1. That there are special circumstances or conditions, fully described in the findings, applying to the property (properties) for which the variance is
sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such property (properties) and do not apply generally to properties in that zoning district,
and that said circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of this code would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the
subject property (properties).
2. That, for reasons fully set forth in the findings, the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the property (properties) and that
the variance proposed is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose.
3. That the result of granting by the corporate authorities of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of standards set forth
within this code and in harmony with the configuration and shape of lots within the subdivision in which the subject property lies, and will not be
injurious to adjacent property or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. (Ord. 85-1336, 10-7-1985)
(D) Procedure And Notice:
1. Procedure: The board of zoning appeals shall act in strict accordance with the procedures specified by law and by this chapter. All appeals and
applications made to the board shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the board accompanied by required plans and documents including, but
not limited to, proposed signage plans, if applicable, and shall be subject to notice and public hearing as provided herein and by statute. Every
appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision of the ordinance involved and shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the
purpose for which the special use is sought, or the details of the variance that it applied for and the grounds on which it is claimed that the variance
should be granted, as the case may be. Every decision of the board of zoning appeals shall be by resolution, each of which shall contain a full record
of the findings of the board in the particular case. Each such resolution shall be filed in the office of the village clerk, by case number under one or
another of the following headings: "Interpretations", "Special uses", "Variances", together with all documents pertaining thereto. The board of zoning
appeals shall notify the village board of its resolution to recommend or to not recommend. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the board of
zoning appeals, the corporate authorities, by ordinance, with or without further public hearing, may adopt any proposed special use or variance or
may refer it back to the board for further consideration. Any proposed variance which fails to receive the approval of the board of appeals shall not be
passed except by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all trustees of the village. (Ord. 2000-3252, 11-20-2000)
2. Notice: No action of the board of zoning appeals shall be taken on any case until after a public hearing held by the board of zoning appeals in
relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. No less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days'
notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be caused to be published by the village clerk at the applicant's expense in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village and shall contain the following information:
(a) The number designation of the petition (case no.).
(b) The scheduled date of the hearing.
(c) The scheduled location of the hearing.
(d) The purpose of the hearing.
(e) The name of the applicant.
(f) A description of the subject property. (Ord. 84-1175, 1-17-1984)
3. Signs: There shall be posted unobstructed notice of the public hearing on a sign to be located upon the subjectproperty for which a variance,
amendment or special use is requested. The sign shall be of size and coloring and with letters of sufficient size as to be clearly legible to the public
view from all adjacent public rights of way. The sign shall include and contain the number of the zoning case assigned by the village; the place, the
nature, the purpose and the date and time of such hearing; and the office address and phone number of the village clerk where information may be
obtained concerning the application. The applicant shall submit with his application, a fee as established by the annual fee ordinance to defer the
cost of erection, maintenance and removal of said sign by the village. Thereafter, said sign shall be furnished by the village and shall be posted not
more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearing. Provided, however, that the failure of the village to post said
sign shall not impair or in any way affect the validity of any variance, amendment or special use granted subsequent to published notice, the purpose
of this notice requirement being only supplementary for additional convenience to the public.
The sign shall be of a size and shall contain lettering substantially similar to that shown in the village "Specimen Zoning Hearing Sign". The sign
shall be removed by the village within seven (7) days after the zoning board of appeals acts upon the applicants' petition and shall not otherwise be
obscured or removed. (Ord. 89-1816, 3-20-1989)
(E) Decisions Of The Board Of Zoning Appeals: In exercising the above enumerated powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from to the extent and manner that the board may decide to be fitting and proper in
the premises, and to that end the board shall have all the powers of the building commissioner from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of
four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building commissioner or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is authorized by this title to render a decision.
No order of the board permitting the erection or alteration of a building or the use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than six
(6) months, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained and the work is started within such period or, where no erection or
alteration is necessary, the permitted use is established within such period. (Ord. 84-1175, 1-17-1984)
5-19-2: AMENDMENTS:
This title may be amended from time to time by ordinance. However, no amendments shall be adopted by the corporateauthorities of the village without a
hearing before the plan commission. Notice shall be given of the time and place of the hearing, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15)
days before the hearing, by publishing a notice thereof at least once in one or more newspapers published in the village. In case of a written protest
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 217/460
against any proposed amendment of the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage
proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by owners of
twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the village clerk, the amendment shall not be
passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the trustees of the village then holding office. In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall be
served by the protestor or protestors on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a copy upon the applicant's attorney, if any, by certified mail at the
address of such applicant and attorney shown in the application for the proposed amendment. (Ord. 84-1175, 1-17-1984)
Chapter 20
FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES
5-20-1: SCHEDULE:
No person shall erect, construct or enlarge, alter, repair or convert, move, improve or change the use of any building or structure in the village or cause the
same to be done without first obtaining a separate permit for each such building or structure from the building commissioner, in accordance with the
following procedure1. (Ord. 535, 11-5-1974)
5-20-2: PROCEDURE:
The owner, contractor or authorized agent thereof shall file an application for such permit, in writing, with the building commissioner on a form furnished for
that purpose. An agent may be required to submit evidence to indicate his authority. The building commissioner shall examine applications for building
permits within a reasonable time after filing, not to exceed fifteen (15) days.
If an examination by the building commissioner indicates that the proposed work will be in compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable thereto,
approval of such application shall be made and the building commissioner shall issue a permit for the proposed work. If examination and/or physical
inspection reveals that a permit shall not be issued by reason of the proposed work being in violation of existing laws or ordinances, rejection of such
application shall be made and a report showing the reason for rejection shall be attached to the application and returned to the applicant.
A permit under which work is not commenced within ninety (90) days after issuance shall expire by limitation. A new application shall be filed and a new
permit required before work is started, except as may be modified under section 5-18-3 of this title. A copy of the permit shall be posted on the premises
for public inspection during the prosecution of the work and until completion of the same.
Every application shall contain the following:
(A) A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot number, street address or by metes and bounds.
(B) Show the type of use or occupancy to be made of all parts of the building or premises.
(C) State the valuation of the proposed work, i.e., contract price or estimated construction costs.
(D) File a plot plan showing size and location of all new construction and all existing structures on the site, including distances from lot lines. (This is
required only on outside construction involving addition to existing buildings or new building construction.) Provision for required off street parking shall
also be shown on the plot plan.
(E) A brief description of the proposed work. (Ord. 535, 11-5-1974)
5-20-3: FEES:
The fee for issuance of a zoning certificate, variance or special use permit shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance. Anyone applying for a
hearing before the zoning board of appeals, the plan commission, the stormwater oversight committee, or for any change of zoning shall bear the expense
for any cost incurred resulting from the application, including, but not limited to, professional services fees, mailing and copying expenses and any legal
advertising costs by such application, and a filing fee as established by the annual fee ordinance. No action will be taken by the corporate authorities until
such costs incurred by the village are reimbursed.
Should any work for which a permit is required be commenced or be done before such permit is issued and obtained, the required permit may be issued
for such and subsequent work, however, the amount of the required fee as provided herein for all work shall be double that otherwise so provided. The
issuance of such permit does not act to bar any other penalty, liability or action otherwise provided for in this chapter or this code but shall be in addition
thereto. (Ord. 2008-4220, 8-4-2008)
Footnote 1: See the annual fee ordinance for building permit fees.
Chapter 21
MODEL HOMES AND SITE CONSTRUCTION
5-21-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 218/460
ADMINISTRATIVE AND/OR SALES SPACE: The area of a model home used actively for administration, supervision and clerical services in conjunction
with dwelling sales, rental, or project construction, but not including the area of model home used for decorated room mock up, materials and/or product
display, or material storage.
BUILDER, CONTRACTOR DEVELOPER OR MANAGEMENT COMPANY: The individual, company, or corporation responsible for the development,
sales, and/or rental of dwellings.
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS STORAGE TRAILERS: Any temporary movable trailer which is, was, or may be used for the storage of construction
materials or tools, a shelter for workmen or for construction supervision activity, and which is located at a site other than its permanent storage location.
MODEL HOMES: Any sample or archetype of a dwelling and its attendant accessory uses as "dwelling" and "accessory use" are defined in section 5-1-7
of this code. The term "model home" shall not include "structures" as defined in section 5-1-7 of this code, except archetypes of dwellings and accessory
uses. In addition, temporary buildings constructed as dwelling mock ups may be considered as model homes. Mobile homes, trailers, or construction
trailers shall not be considered as model homes for dwelling display purposes. A model home may be further defined as a dwelling used initially for display
purposes which typifies the type of dwelling that will be constructed and sold or rented in other parts of the development.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: As defined in section 5-1-7 of thiscode, which may be amended from time to time.
SUBDIVISION: As defined in section 6-1-6 of this code, which may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 85-1294, 5-20-1985)
5-21-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or operate within a residential district within the corporate boundaries of the village, a model home, a
temporary sales office construction trailer, a construction office trailer, or a construction materials storage trailer, without first obtaining a permit therefor in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Should any person establish or operate the above before such permit is issued and obtained, the required permit may be issued, however, the amount of
the required fee as provided herein shall be double that otherwise so provided. The issuance of such permit does not act to bar any other penalty, liability
or action otherwise provided for in this chapter or this code but shall be in addition thereto. (Ord. 97-2889, 6-2-1997)
5-21-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The building and zoning commissioner shall enforce all provisions of this chapter as described herein or such provisions as hereafter may be enacted, for
the purpose of securing such enforcement. The building and zoning commissioner shall have the right, and is hereby empowered, except as is otherwise
prohibited by law, to enter upon any premises and inspect the model home or other unit regulated under this chapter. The building and zoning
commissioner is further empowered to issue orders granting, renewing and revoking such permits in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
85-1294, 5-20-1985)
5-21-4: APPLICATIONS:
(A) Applicants for a permit under this chapter, whether a person, partnership or corporation, shall file a written, sworn application signed by the applicant,
upon forms provided by the village clerk, together with a permit fee in an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance per model home or each
trailer, in addition to other fees as set forth in this code. The application shall include the following information:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
2. The purpose, use and exact location of the proposed model home.
3. The zoning classification of the lot on which the model home is located.
4. Acknowledgment of the applicant that the permit shall terminate upon expiration or cancellation of the permit as set forth herein.
(B) Each application for a permit under this chapter must be accompanied by a site plan for the model home site. The site plan shall be drawn at a scale of
not less than one inch (1") for every one hundred feet (100') and shall include:
1. Location of principal building;
2. Location of accessory buildings or structures;
3. Driveway, walks, and patios;
4. Off street parking (if provided), including construction details and surface type. If parking lot is to be temporary, it should be so designated;
5. Fences or walls;
6. Landscape plans and details;
7. Signs;
8. Lighting plans;
9. Grading plans;
10. Refuse containers; and
11. Adjacent structures or uses, and screening if necessary.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 219/460
(C) In addition to the foregoing, each application for a permit must be accompanied by a certified check, cashier's check, negotiable security or a surety
bond made payable to the village in an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance in relation to the cost of restoring the land to its original,
unimproved condition. All lots must be so restored within three (3) months after the expiration of the above referenced permit. The amount of the
applicant's deposit shall be established by an estimate produced by the applicant, with any modifications made by the village engineer or building and
zoning commissioner. Any permanent improvements that comply with this code may remain after the termination of the permit and the land need not be
restored. Upon the approval of the building commissioner the aforesaid security bond shall be returned. (Ord. 85-1294, 5-20-1985)
5-21-5: R-1, R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS:
In any R-1, R-2 single-family residence districts, all model home permits shall be subject to the following regulations:
(A) In any subdivision in which one or more general contractor isoffering to construct residential buildings, each general contractor may maintain up to five
(5) model homes per subdivision.
(B) The permit for any model home under this section shall cease and terminate automatically and with no further action on the part of the village, when all
lots except the lot on which the model home rests have been sold. (Ord. 85-1294, 5-20-1985)
5-21-6: R-3, R-4 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS:
In any R-3 or R-4 multi-family residence district, all model home permits shall be subject to the following regulations:
(A) A model home in an apartment building or condominium building may be used to conduct sales for any dwelling unit within said building, or within
another building or temporary building on the same lot, or in the same planned unit development.
(B) The permit for any model home issued pursuant to this chapter shall cease and terminate automatically, and with no further action on the part of the
village, when all of the permittee's units except the model home unit have been sold.
(C) A management office with model rental units may remain within a rental complex as a continuing operation. (Ord. 85-1294, 5-20-1985)
5-21-7: STORAGE OF CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS:
No construction materials may be stored on the premises of the model home unless contained within a garage or basement of the model home. All such
materials stored in any garage or basement of a model home must be intended and used for construction of buildings within the same or an immediately
contiguous subdivision within the corporate boundaries of the village. (Ord. 85-1294, 5-20-1985)
5-21-8: USE OF MODEL HOME AS OFFICE:
No more than thirty percent (30%) of the living area of a model home, not including any garage or basement, may be used for administration and/or sales
space, as defined in section 5-21-1 of this chapter, but in no event shall such use occupy more than one thousand (1,000) square feet. (Ord. 85-1294, 5-
20-1985)
5-21-9: TEMPORARY TRAILERS AS OFFICE USE:
Trailers may not be used as sales offices, except during the time a model or models are being constructed, at which time it may be possible to obtain a
permit under this chapter and operate a temporary sales office. After the model home is completed or six(6) months elapses, the temporary trailer must be
removed. (Ord. 85-1294, 5-20-1985)
5-21-10: TRAILERS USED AS CONSTRUCTION OFFICES:
After obtaining a permit as provided in this chapter, a trailer may be used as a construction office until construction is substantially completed, provided
that the trailer is located within the same or in an immediately contiguous subdivision within the corporate boundaries of the village. If the building and
zoning commissioner determines that the use of a trailer as a construction office constitutes a "nuisance", as defined by section 1-3-2 of this code, the
building and zoning commissioner may initiate proceedings to revoke the model home permit, as provided in subsection 5-21-14(A) of this chapter. (Ord.
85-1294, 5-20-1985)
5-21-11: CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS STORAGE TRAILERS:
(A) Construction trailers shall not be located as a part of the model home complex, except when used as an office, as permitted under section 5-21-10 of
this chapter.
(B) The use of construction materials storage trailers in the village are subject to the following regulations:
1. Construction materials storage trailers must be permitted as set forth in section 5-21-2 of this chapter and as otherwise provided by this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 220/460
2. A minimum of four inches (4") of compacted gravel shall be overlaid on the site on which the construction trailer will rest, on the surrounding area,
and on parking areas and access roads to such areas.
3. Construction trailers shall not be located within any public or private right of way nor shall they be located so as to interfere in any way with a public
or private easement.
4. All areas where construction trailers are located shall be screened from abutting residential areas and set back twenty feet (20') from any public right
of way.
5. All construction trailers shall be located and maintained in accordance with a site plan approved by the building and zoning commissioner.
6. All construction trailer areas shall have adequate facilities for depositing refuse which shall be screened from abutting residential areas. Refuse in
each dumpster shall be removed periodically or as necessary to an appropriate waste disposal facility to prevent littering and the escape or removal
of refuse by wind or other means. In addition, all trailers shall be policed on a regular basis to maintain the area in a neat andorderly condition.
7. All construction trailers shall be removed when either of the following events occur:
(a) The construction activity requiring such trailers has ceased; or
(b) The trailers have not been in use for a period of fifteen (15) days or more.
8. All construction trailers shall be secured against unauthorized entry. (Ord. 85-1294, 5-20-1985)
5-21-12: SIGNAGE:
The use of any outdoor advertising or signs of any type, whether temporary or permanent, used in connection with a model home permitted hereunder,
shall be in conformance with the Lisle sign code as set forth in title 4, chapter 4 of this code, except as hereinafter set forth:
(A) Signs shall be located and designated on the site plan, which is required as a part of the application procedure;
(B) A graphic presentation shall be made of the design, wording, and composition of the sign;
(C) Illuminated signs are permitted, but specifications for the lighting must be presented, approved, and in accordance with subsection 4-4-4(M) of this
code;
(D) No more than one principal sign, not exceeding thirty two (32) square feet in area for any one sign face may be permitted. Additional directional and
informational signs may be permitted that do not exceed two (2) square feet in area for any one sign face with the total aggregate square footage not to
exceed twenty (20) square feet;
(E) Landscaping shall be included as an integral part of the sign composition. The permit fee for signs shall be as set forth in title 4, chapter 4 of this code;
(F) No sign shall exceed six feet (6') in height; and
(G) All signs shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from all property lines. (Ord. 85-1294, 5-20-1985)
5-21-13: RENEWAL:
(A) The permit granted herein shall be valid for a period of not more than one year, and be renewed prior to its expiration for a period not to exceed one
year. In order to renew a permit, the permittee must submit to the building and zoning commissioner arenewal application, upon forms provided by the
village clerk, together with a renewal permit fee in an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance.
(B) If the permitted model home is located in a district improved with single-family homes, a condition of renewal shall be that the permittee must
demonstrate that he has sold at least one lot during the one hundred eighty (180) day period immediately preceding the expiration of the permit. Such
lot must be located either within the same subdivision as the model or within an immediately contiguous subdivision within the corporate boundaries of
the village in order to render the permittee eligible for renewal of his permit. Evidence of the sale of a lot must be provided in the form of an instrument
of conveyance to an individual who will reside on the premises, or in the form of an occupancy permit.
(C) If the permitted model home is located in a district improved with multi-family dwellings, renewal shall be conditioned upon a showing that some units
still remain for sale within the same building, upon the same lot, or in the same planned unit development. However, if the model home is operated in
conjunction with a management office for rental units, no such showing need be made. (Ord. 85-1294, 5-20-1985)
5-21-14: REVOCATION:
(A) In the event the building and zoning commissioner determines that a violation of any of the regulations set forth in this chapter have occurred, the
commissioner may initiate proceedings to revoke the permit for that model home or other unit regulated herein.
(B) At the time the building and zoning commissioner decides that a revocation should occur, the village clerk shall give written notice to the permittee by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. The revocation will become effective forty five (45) days from the date notice was sent by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 221/460
village clerk.
(C) Any permittee may appeal the building and zoning commissioner's decision to revoke said permit by requesting a hearing before the board of zoning
appeals of the village, pursuant to the provisions of chapter 19 of this title. Such request shall be made by completing the appropriate request for
hearing form and filing such document with the building and zoning commissioner and the board of zoning appeals within forty five (45) days from the
date that notice of revocation was sent.
(D) If a permittee files a timely request for hearing, the revocation shall be stayed until a hearing before the board of appeals can be held.
(E) If the building and zoning commissioner certifies to the board of zoning appeals that, by reason of facts stated in saidcertificate, a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property, then the revocation shall not be stayed unless the board of zoning appeals issues a restraining order to prohibit the
building and zoning commissioner from revoking the subject permit. (Ord. 85-1294, 5-20-1985)
5-21-15: PENALTIES:
(A) Any permittee violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or continues to occur. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
(B) In addition to the foregoing, the building and zoning commissioner may initiate revocation proceedings as provided in section 5-21-14 of this chapter if
he determines that a violation of any of the regulations set forth in this chapter has occurred upon the premises of a model home or other unit regulated
herein. (Ord. 85-1294, 5-20-1985)
Chapter 22
HOME OCCUPATION REGULATIONS
5-22-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of this chapter to allow as home occupations only those uses that conform to the standards of this chapter. In general, a home occupation is
an accessory use so located or conducted that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence. The standards for
home occupations are intended to ensure compatibility with other permitted uses and the residential character of the neighborhood and to maintain the
subordinate and incidental status of the home occupation. It is intended that the home occupation shall be incidental to the principal use of the dwelling
unit as a residence. No home occupation shall interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring residential properties. (Ord. 2018-4789, 10-
1-2018)
5-22-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The enforcement of this chapter will be the responsibility of the Building and Zoning Commissioner. (Ord. 2018-4789, 10-1-2018)
5-22-3: APPLICATION:
These home occupation regulations shall apply to all residential zoning districts. (Ord. 2018-4789, 10-1-2018)
5-22-4: STANDARDS:
(A) The operator(s) of the home occupation shall make the dwelling unit within which the home occupation is conducted his/her legal and primary place of
residence.
(B) One person at a time who is not a resident of the dwelling may be permitted to assist in the home occupation.
(C) The home occupation shall not regularly or frequently attract more than four (4) people simultaneously to the premises for reasons related to the home
occupation, with the noted exception only of State licensed daycare homes and part day childcare facilities/services as described in subsection (J) of
this section.
(D) The home occupation shall be subordinate and incidental to the use of the dwelling unit as a residence. Among other considerations, a home
occupation will be considered to be subordinate and incidental if it occupies thirty five percent (35%) or less of the gross square footage of all floors of
the house, including the basement. Such gross square footage shall not include the area of a garage, accessory or ancillary building. Further, the home
occupation may be conducted anywhere within the house, including the basement, and within a garage located upon the same lot as a residence from
which a home occupation is conducted in any ancillary building upon the property, as defined in section 5-1-7 of this title. For example, if the total area
of a house, including all floors, is equal to one thousand (1,000) square feet, the home occupation may occupy only three hundred fifty (350) square
feet in order to be considered subordinate and incidental. Whether the home occupation itself is conducted within the house or in a garage, three
hundred fifty (350) square feet would be the maximum area that could be devoted to the home occupation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 222/460
(E) No home occupation shall cause an increase in traffic or parking congestion in excess of those which normally occur in that residential neighborhood.
(F) Supplies and equipment shall be delivered by U.S. postal service, parcel delivery services, private passenger automobiles or vans, or by trucks that
customarily make deliveries to residences that do not have home occupations, such as, but not limited to, those servicing furniture and appliance
stores.
(G) There shall be no signs, advertising, display, or activity that will indicate from the exterior of any building that it is being used, in part, for any use other
than dwelling. No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies or equipment related to the operation of a home occupation, including vehicles
associated with the operation of a livery service operating from the residence, shall be visible from the outside of any building located on premises on
which the home occupation is conducted. Further, the parking of vehicles within residential districts must be in compliance with all Village ordinances,
including those restrictions on heavy weight vehicles as set forth in subsection 5-13-1-5(A) of this title.
(H) All home occupations must comply with all restrictions set forth in this Code regarding noise, odors, radiation, solvents, electronic interference or any
other consequence, result or byproduct of the home occupation. Further, no home occupation may generate noises, odors or any other byproduct in
excess of the level normally occurring in that residential neighborhood.
(I) Any home occupation required to be licensed by the State or any other governmental body shall not be permitted until and unless a current license from
such body is obtained.
(J) Babysitting services, daycare homes and part day childcare facilities/services, as defined by Illinois Compiled Statutes, shall comply with the standards
of the State, take a maximum number of eight (8) children, which includes the natural or adopted children of the person operating the babysitting
service or daycare home under the age of fourteen (14). Said services shall be allowed to operate within that home and have limited supervised
outdoor activity within the compliance of the State Statute on childcare. This subsection shall not be construed to permit a daycare center, childcare
institution, daycare agency, group home or child welfare agency, as defined in the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(K) No use shall require internal or external alterations or involve construction features or the use of electrical or mechanical equipment that would change
the fire rating of the structure or the fire district in which the structure is located.
(L) The home occupation shall not require internal or external alterations or construction features not customary in residential areas.
(M) The home occupation shall not interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring residential properties and shall be located or
conducted so that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence.
(N) No home occupation shall be operated in such a manner as to cause a nuisance or be in violation of any applicable statute, ordinance or regulation.
(O) The home occupation shall be conducted in a manner which would not cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by use of
colors, materials, lighting or the emission of sounds, noises, or vibrations.
(P) The building or structure in which the home occupation is located shall be subject to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located, except
as provided herein.
(Q) Any owner or occupant of a dwelling unit may conduct not more than a total of two (2) garage sales (also known as patio sales, basement sales, yard
sales, rummage sales, lawn sales, driveway sales) during any twelve (12) consecutive months. Such sales shall extend over not more than three (3)
days and shall be limited to household goods and furnishings which have been in use in the dwelling unit located on the premises on which sales are
conducted or which have been in use in another dwelling unit on the same block. No merchandise purchased for intentional sale or resale at a profit
may be sold from a residence. Signs pertaining to the sales may be erected in accordance with subsection 4-4-6(A)5 of this Code. The regulations of
subsections (B), (C), (D), (E), (G) and (M) of this section will be temporarily suspended during any garage sale conducted in accordance with this
section. No garage sale shall be conducted before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. (Ord. 2018-4789, 10-1-2018)
5-22-5: PROHIBITED USES:
The following uses, in addition to those uses which do not meet the standards set forth within this chapter shall be prohibited as home occupations:
Animal hospitals;
Auto repair shops;
Barbershops or beauty parlors;
Eating and drinking establishments;
Hospitals and sanitariums;
Kennels;
Medical offices, clinics;
Private clubs;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 223/460
Rental of mobile homes, trailers and camper trailers;
Sale of firearms, ammunition or explosives;
Stables;
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors. (Ord. 2018-4789, 10-1-2018)
Chapter 23
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
5-23-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide specific regulations for the placement, construction and modification of telecommunications facilities. The
provisions of this chapter are not intended and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or to have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless
services, nor shall the provisions of this chapter be applied in such a manner to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent
personal wireless services. Notwithstanding specific statutory direction related to small wireless facilities, the goals of this chapter are to encourage the
location of towers in nonresidential areas, minimize the total number of towers in the Village, encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites,
encourage users of towers to locate and configure them in a way that minimizes adverse visual impact and to enhance the ability to provide
telecommunications services to the Village. Accordingly, the Village Board finds that the promulgation of this chapter is warranted and necessary:
(A) To direct the location of communications facilities in the Village;
(B) To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of communications towers, including support structure failure and falling ice;
(C) To minimize adverse visual impacts of communications facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging
techniques;
(D) To accommodate the growing need for communications facilities;
(E) To promote and encourage shared use/collocation of existing and new communications towers as a primary option rather than construction of
additional single use towers, and to reduce the number of such structures needed in the future; and
(F) To consider the effect of communications facilities on the public health and safety.
In the course of reviewing any request for approval required under this chapter the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Board of Trustees, as the case may be,
shall act within a reasonable period of time after the request is duly filed with the Village, taking into account the nature and scope of the request, and any
decision to deny or approve such a request shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. Should the application
of this chapter have the effect of prohibiting a person or entity from providing personal wireless service to all or a portion of the Village, such a provider
may petition the Board of Trustees for a variance or an amendment to this chapter. The Board of Trustees upon receipt of such a petition, shall promptly
undertake review of the petition and shall make a determination on the petition within a reasonable period of time, taking into account the nature and
scope of the petition, and any decision to deny or approve such petition shall be in writing and be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written
record. (Ord. 2018-4785, 9-10-2018)
5-23-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein are hereby defined as follows:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of any type of wireless
communications services. An antenna includes any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television communications through the sending
and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
ANTENNA HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure even if
said highest point is an antenna. Measurement of communications tower height shall include antenna, base pad, and other appurtenances and shall be
measured from finish grade to the top of the antenna. If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest
grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod, or other freestanding structure which supports a device used in the
transmitting or receiving of radio frequency energy.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure
or utility pole.
COMMUNICATION FACILITY: A facility used to provide a communication service.
FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 224/460
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, small wireless facilities, as defined in this chapter, and
appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the
term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the Village.
GOVERNING AUTHORITY: The Village of Lisle Board of Trustees.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE AND PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITIES: As used in this chapter, shall be defined in the same manner as in title 47,
United States Code, section 332(c)(7)(C), as amended now or in the future.
SATELLITE RECEIVING DISH: A generally dish shaped signal receiving device, the purpose of which is to receive communications or other signals from
satellites in earth's orbit and other extraterrestrial sources.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A communication facility that meets both of the following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of
no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit
within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
TOWER: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers or monopole towers. This term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative towers structures, and the like. (Ord. 2018-4785, 9-10-2018)
5-23-3: USES ALLOWED:
All new communications antennas shall comply with this chapter upon the date of passage. All communications antennas existing on the date of passage
of this chapter shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist and in accordance with continuance of nonconformity regulations set forth in
section 5-2-3 of this title. New construction, other than routine maintenance, on existing communications towers shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
In all zoning districts communications facilities shall be permitted only if specifically authorized as a special use by the President and Board of Trustees
upon recommendation by the Board of Zoning Appeals, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 19 of this title. For properties already enjoying special
use permit approval through the terms of a planned unit development ordinance communications facilities may be permitted in accordance with the
minor/major change provision of subsection 5-14-4-4(A)5 of this title. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a small wireless facility shall be a permitted use on
any property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use in the following districts: O, B-1, B-2, B-3, O-R and I-1, provided a small wireless facility
shall comply with the applicable height limitations for such districts.
This chapter shall not apply to the placement of small wireless facilities located in the right-of-way. Small wireless facilities located in the right-of-way shall
be subject to the provisions of title 7, chapter 1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-4785, 9-10-2018)
5-23-4: SITE SELECTION AND PROTOCOLS:
(A) Site Selection: As a fundamental element of this chapter, the telecommunications company proposing to construct an antenna support structure or
mount an antenna on an existing structure is required to demonstrate, using technological evidence, that the antenna must go where it is proposed in
order to satisfy its function in the company's grid system. Further the company must demonstrate by technological evidence that the height requested
is the minimum height necessary to fulfill the communications facilities function in the grid system.
Given the unquestioned visual impact of communications towers on their surrounding environment, no antenna support structure may be constructed
on a speculative basis. Applications for necessary permits will only be processed when the applicant has in place agreements with an FCC licensed
telecommunications provider for lease/utilization of the support structure space, written proof of which must be offered by the applicant.
Telecommunications facilities and small wireless facilities must be located and designed to minimize any adverse effect they may have on residential
property values. Sites shall be placed in locations where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount
of screening. Location and design of all sites shall consider the impact of the site on the surrounding neighborhood. In residential districts and
residential land use areas, the minimum lot size for commercial communications towers shall be three (3) acres, except for government owned
properties. There shall be no minimum lot size for small wireless facilities.
With respect to personal wireless service facilities and small wireless facilities located on property which is not used exclusively for commercial or
industrial purposes, specific locations will be evaluated using the following criteria which are not listed in order of priority:
1. Topography as it relates to line of sight transmissions for optimum efficiency in service.
2. Availability of road access.
3. Availability of electrical power.
4. Availability of land based telephone lines or microwave link capability.
5. Leasable lands and landlords who want facilities to be located on their properties.
6. Screening of potential and existing vegetation, structures and topographic features.
7. Compatibility with adjacent land uses.
8. The least number of sites to cover the desired area.
9. The greatest amount of coverage, consistent with physical requirements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 225/460
10. Opportunities to mitigate possible visual impact.
11. Availability of suitable existing structures for antenna mounting.
(B) Protocols: The following establishes the order of priorities for locating new communications facilities:
1. Place antennas on Village owned property and structures.
2. Place antennas on other government owned property and structures.
3. Place antennas on private institutional property and structures.
4. Place antennas on other appropriate existing structures such as buildings, communications towers, water towers, and smokestacks.
5. Place new communications towers in residential districts only if locations for which a need has been demonstrated are not available on existing
structures or in nonresidential districts. The telecommunication company is required to demonstrate that it contacted, in writing, the owners of other
more appropriate properties and was denied, in writing, for reasons other than economic ones. (Ord. 2018-4785, 9-10-2018)
5-23-5: COLLOCATION; ABANDONMENT:
(A) Collocation: Collocation of communications antennas is desired to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of
communications facilities. Collocation of communications facilities by more than one carrier on existing or new antenna support structures shall take
precedence over the construction of new single use communications facilities. An applicant for a new antenna support structure shall demonstrate that
a diligent effort has been made to locate the proposed communications facilities in accordance with the site selection and protocol requirements of this
chapter and that, due to valid considerations including physical restraints and economic or technological feasibility, no more appropriate location is
available. The telecommunications company is required to demonstrate that it contacted, in writing, the owners of tall structures within a one thousand
five hundred foot (1,500') radius of the site proposed, asked for permission to install the antenna on those structures, and was denied in writing, for
reasons other than economic ones. Except for small wireless facilities located on property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial uses, the
Village may deny the application to construct a new facility if the applicant has not made a diligent effort, described in writing, to mount the antenna on
an existing structure.
In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in the Village in the future, any new proposed support structure shall be designed
to accommodate antennas for more than one user, unless the applicant demonstrates in writing why such design is unfeasible for technical or physical
reasons. Unless collocation has been demonstrated to be unfeasible the site plan shall delineate an area on the tower or near the base of the tower to
be used for the placement of additional equipment/buildings for other users.
(B) Abandonment: In the event the use of any communications facility has been discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days,
the facility shall be deemed to be abandoned. Any small wireless facility which has not been operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months
shall be deemed abandoned, after which the owner shall notify the Village within ninety (90) days. Even where there is no notice from the owner of the
facility, a determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the Building and Zoning Commissioner, who shall have the right to request
documentation and/or affidavits from the communications facility owner/operator regarding the issue of facility usage. Upon such abandonment the
owner/operator of the facility shall have ninety (90) days within which to reactivate the use of the facility, transfer the facility to another owner/operator
who makes actual use of the facility, or dismantle and remove the facility. If there are two (2) or more users of a single facility then this provision shall
not become effective until all users cease using the facility. When a facility has been abandoned and removed the Village will take necessary action to
vacate any previous special use or planned unit development approval for the particular abandoned facility. (Ord. 2018-4785, 9-10-2018)
5-23-6: DESIGN CRITERIA:
(A) New communications facilities shall be located in accordance with the site selection and protocol requirements of this chapter and shall be designed to
accommodate antennas for more than one user. All communication facilities and small wireless facilities must be architecturally compatible with
surrounding buildings and land uses or otherwise integrated, through location and design, to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site to the
extent practical. All facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the Federal
government with the authority to regulate such facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the communications
facilities shall bring those facilities into compliance with the revised standards and regulations within three (3) months of the effective date of such
standards and regulations unless a more stringent schedule is mandated by the controlling Federal agency. Failure to bring facilities into compliance
with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the facility.
(B) All communications facilities must be located on properties that comply with the lot area requirements of the Zoning Code. Except small wireless
facilities, any communications facility located in a residential zoning district must be located on a lot with a minimum size of three (3) acres.
(C) Except for small wireless facilities, all communications facilities must be separated from communications facilities on other properties by at least one
thousand five hundred feet (1,500').
(D) The maximum height for any small wireless facility, communication facility or antenna support structure shall not exceed the height allowed in the
zoning district in which the facility is located unless additional height is approved by variation by the President and Board of Trustees after a proper
public hearing and recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals, or Plan Commission in the event of a planned unit development amendment.
(E) All antenna support structures must be set back from property lines a distance equal to their height, unless the applicant presents a structural analysis,
certified by a professional engineer, that the structure is designed to fail within a smaller setback radius. Additionally, any antenna support structure
must comply with all setback requirements of the zoning district in which the structure is located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 226/460
(F) Small wireless facilities and communications towers shall have a noncontrasting blue, grey, or black finish, or a similar color that minimizes their
visibility, unless a different color is required by the FCC or FAA.
(G) No signals, lights or signs shall be permitted on towers unless required by the FCC or the FAA. Dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA
when a tower is within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of a residential zoning district.
(H) Communications towers shall be constructed in accordance with standards of the Electronic Industries Association and all applicable Construction and
Building Codes, as may be amended from time to time. Surrounding areas shall not be negatively affected by support structure failure, falling ice or
other debris or interference. All support structures shall be fitted with anticlimbing devices as approved by the manufacturers.
(I) Building mounted facilities must be architecturally compatible with the building on which they are mounted and designed and located so as to minimize
any adverse aesthetic impact. Any support structure or mechanical equipment must be screened or enclosed in such a manner as to mask such
equipment. Said screening shall be of noncombustible material and of the same color, character and design as the building upon which the screening is
erected. An antenna may be mounted to the wall of a building or extend above the roof of a building without said screening provided the antenna is
painted, or otherwise made to match the color of the building or structure or background against which they are most commonly seen. Communications
facilities shall not occupy more than an aggregate total of ten percent (10%) of the roof area of any building.
(J) Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the site as much as possible. Existing vegetation must be preserved or
improved, and disturbance of the existing topography of the site must be minimized. For communication facilities all ground mounted facilities and
equipment shall be enclosed with a solid six foot (6') high fence. Landscaping shall be required to screen as much of the support structure as possible,
the fence surrounding the support structure and any other ground mounted facilities, and in general soften the appearance of the facility. As a condition
of permit the Village may set conditions concerning existing vegetation, topography, walls, fences or other landscaping to achieve an acceptable
degree of screening.
(K) Driveways and parking areas constructed in compliance with this Code must be provided as necessary for each communications facility. If any site is
not automated, the number of required parking spaces shall equal the number of people on the largest shift. Any security fencing must be of a color
and design to blend into the character of the existing environment.
(L) No communications facility shall cause interference with the reception of television and radio broadcasts to the property on which they are located or to
surrounding properties. (Ord. 2018-4785, 9-10-2018)
5-23-7: PERMITS AND PLANS:
A proper building permit must be obtained for any small wireless facility or communications facility installation. Applications for special use permit, planned
unit development approval, and building permit shall include any combination of site plans, surveys, maps, technical reports or written narratives
necessary to convey the following information:
(A) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of any proposed small wireless facility or communications facility, on site land uses
and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the
proposed facilities and any other structures.
(B) Map and/or aerial photograph showing the proposed facility location and surrounding areas within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500').
(C) Legal description of the property proposed for telecommunications facility.
(D) Exact distances, locations and identifications of surrounding residential properties or other telecommunications facilities.
(E) A landscape plan in compliance with this Code.
(F) Method of fencing, color of facilities, and, where applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination.
(G) Plans must be completed and sealed by a professional engineer registered with the State of Illinois and must include a statement that the facilities will
comply with the Electronic Industries Association's standards and all Village Building and Construction Codes. If a small wireless facility or
communication facility is to be collocated on an existing structure or building, the engineering plans shall certify that the support structure has the
strength to support the additional facility.
(H) A statement by the applicant as to whether the construction of the facility will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future users.
(I) Any telecommunications company must demonstrate that it is licensed by the FCC.
(J) The applicant must demonstrate how the proposed site fits into its overall network within the Village and plans must include any expected future
facilities to be constructed within the Village. (Ord. 2018-4785, 9-10-2018)
5-23-8: SATELLITE RECEIVING DISHES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 227/460
The following requirements shall be observed for any satellite dishes exceeding one and two-tenths meters (1.2 m) in diameter in residential zoned
districts and two meters (2 m) in diameter in all other zoning districts. Satellite receiving dishes less than one and two-tenths meters (1.2 m) in residential
districts and less than two meters (2 m) in all other districts shall be exempt from the terms of this chapter.
(A) Location Of Satellite Receiving Dishes:
1. Satellite receiving dishes shall be located only in the rear yard of any lot in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts and shall be located only in the rear
yard on any lot or on the roof of any building in the B-1, B-2, B-3, O, O-R, and I-1 Zoning Districts, provided that a building permit is obtained prior to
such installation and further that the satellite receiving dish shall be screened in accordance with the Building Code and shall comply with all other
applicable provisions of this Code.
2. Any satellite receiving dish erected under the provisions of this Code shall be set back from property lines of the lot on which said satellite receiving
dish is erected a distance no less than that equal to said dish height.
3. No more than one satellite receiving dish shall be allowed on any parcel of property. For the purposes of this subsection, a "parcel of property" shall
be defined as a contiguous quantity of land, in possession of, owned by, or recorded as property of the same person or entity.
(B) Size And Height Limitations:
1. Mesh fabricated satellite receiving dishes shall not exceed nine feet (9') in diameter and shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height including any
platform or structure upon which said satellite receiving dish is mounted or affixed.
2. Solid or nonmesh fabricated satellite receiving dishes shall not exceed eight feet (8') in diameter and shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height
including any platform or structure upon which said satellite receiving dish is mounted or affixed.
(C) Specifications: A satellite receiving dish must meet all manufacturer's specifications. A mast or tower shall be of noncombustible or corrosive resistant
material. The miscellaneous hardware, such as brackets, turnbuckles, clips and similar type equipment subject to rust or corrosion shall be protected
with a zinc or cadmium coating by either galvanizing or sherardizing process after forming. The finishes are selected to guard against corrosion and to
protect the elements against electrolytic action due to the use of adjoining dissimilar metals.
(D) Grounded: Every satellite receiving dish must be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of lightning, with an adequate ground wire.
Ground wire shall be installed in a mechanical manner with as few bends as possible, maintaining a clearance of at least two inches (2") from
combustible materials. Lightning arresters shall be used, which are approved as safe by the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., and both sides of the line
must be adequately protected with proper arresters to remove static charges accumulated on the line. When lead-in conductors of polyethylene ribbon
type are used, lightning arresters must be installed in each conductor. When coaxial cable shielded twin lead is used for lead-in, suitable protection
may be provided without lightning arresters by grounding the exterior metal sheath. (Ord. 2018-4785, 9-10-2018)
5-23-9: EXEMPTIONS:
(A) Proposed communications facilities and small wireless facilities may, and are encouraged to, collocate onto existing approved structures. Provided
such collocations are accomplished in a manner consistent with the terms of this chapter, then such collocations may be approved without any new or
additional special use or planned unit development approval. Proper plans must be submitted and permits obtained for such collocated facilities as
required by the terms of this chapter.
(B) Any communications facilities and small wireless facilities on properties owned by the Village are exempt from the terms of this chapter subject to any
condition set by the Village President and Board of Trustees.
(C) Nothing in this Code shall apply to receiving only communications facilities for use by an individual residential dwelling unit or business provided such
facilities comply with the height requirements of the zoning district in which they are located and provided that satellite receiving dishes be in
compliance with section 5-23-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-4785, 9-10-2018)
5-23-10: TELECOMMUNICATIONS CODE:
All applications for telecommunications facilities must also comply with the requirements included in title 11 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-4785, 9-10-2018)
5-23-11: ABOVEGROUND SERVICE FACILITIES:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the construction and placement of aboveground service facilities ("service
facility" or "service facilities"), as defined herein, in the Village of Lisle. The goals of this section are to encourage the location of service facilities in
nonresidential areas; to minimize the total number of service facilities throughout the community; to encourage users of service facilities to locate them,
to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; to encourage users of service facilities to configure them in a
manner that minimizes the adverse visual impact; and to enhance the ability of the providers of services to provide such services to the community
quickly, efficiently and effectively.
(B) Applicability: No service facility shall be erected or installed except in compliance with the provisions of this section. Service facilities located on
property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the Village of Lisle shall be exempt from the requirements of this section, provided a lease or license
authorizing such service facilities has been approved by the Village Board. Where conflicts exist between this section and the remainder of the Lisle
Zoning Code, the provisions of this section shall govern.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 228/460
(C) General Definitions, Guidelines And Performance Standards:
1. Definitions: As used in this section and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the terms "aboveground service facility" and "service entity"
shall have the meaning ascribed to them in section 5-1-7 of this title.
2. Additional Use Permitted On Lot: For purposes of determining whether the installation of a service facility complies with district bulk regulations,
including, but not limited to, setback and lot requirements, the dimensions of the entire zoning lot shall control, even though the service facility may
be located on leased property within such zoning lot.
3. Number Of Service Facilities: Only one service facility shall be located on any zoning lot.
4. Sound, Lighting, Color And Appearance: No visible or audible signals or lights or illumination shall be permitted on a service facility. Service facilities
shall be of earth tone colors and be maintained in good condition, including, but not limited to, being free of peeling paint and graffiti, and shall be
maintained as level.
5. Signage: No advertising shall be allowed on any service facility, other than a plaque no larger than four inches by six inches (4" x 6") identifying the
service entity, which shall be required.
6. Compatibility With Structure: When included as part of an existing building or structure, the service facility shall be of a material and color, or shall be
screened using building materials of a material and color, which substantially match the exterior of the building or structure, and shall be located or
screened in an aesthetically acceptable manner so as not to be visible from the adjacent properties and rights-of-way. The Community Development
Director shall determine whether the material and color of a service facility mounted on a building, structure or rooftop matches the building, structure
or rooftop and is screened from adjacent rights-of-way and properties.
7. Abandonment: In the event the use of any service facility has been discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, the
service facility shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the Community Development
Director, who shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits from the service entity regarding the determination of the service
facility's term of use. Upon the Director's determination and written notification to the service entity of such abandonment, the service entity shall
have an additional ninety (90) days with which to either: reactivate the actual use of the service facility, transfer the service facility to another service
entity which makes actual use of the service facility, or dismantle and remove the service facility and notify the Director in writing of the completion of
such removal. At the earlier date of either two hundred seventy (270) days from the date of discontinuance without reactivation or completion of
dismantling and removal, any special use permit and/or zoning variation approval for the service facility shall automatically expire without further
action by the Director.
8. Equipment And Noninterference: Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a service facility shall not be stored or parked on the
site of a service facility unless and while repairs to such facility are being made. Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages and
for testing and maintenance purposes, and shall not be placed on site except when in use or where integrated within the service facility's cabinet.
Noise attenuation measures shall be included to reduce noise levels to satisfy applicable State and Village performance standards. Testing and
maintenance of generators shall only take place on weekdays between the hours of eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M.
Service facilities shall not physically interfere with access to existing structures or utilities.
9. Substantial Written Evidence Of Denial: In the course of reviewing any request for approval required under this section, the Planning and Zoning
Commission or the Village Board, as the case may be, shall act within a reasonable period of time after the request is duly filed, taking into account
the nature and scope of the request. Any decision to deny such a request shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a
written record.
10. Petition For Amendment: Should the application of this section have the effect of prohibiting a person or entity from providing services to all or a
portion of the Village of Lisle, such provider may petition for a variance from this section in the manner described in section 5-19-1 of this title. Any
decision to deny such a petition shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.
11. Nonconformities: Any service facility installed and operating prior to enactment of the Illinois Competitive Cable and Video Act of 20071, which
would be otherwise prohibited by or subject to this section, shall be considered a lawful, existing, nonconforming use and/or structure, as the case
may be, and shall be subject to the rules on existing nonconforming lots, buildings, structures and uses provided in chapter 2 of this title.
12. Independent Technical Expert: The Community Development Director is explicitly authorized to employ on behalf of the Village an independent
technical expert to review any technical materials submitted by the service entity or by other participants submitting an application or petition,
including, but not limited to, those materials required under this section. The applicant or petitioner shall pay all reasonable costs of said review,
including any administrative costs incurred by the Village. Hourly rates charged by the independent technical expert shall not exceed those hourly
rates customarily charged by similar technical experts within the engineering profession. Any confidential, proprietary or other such information
exempted from disclosure by the Illinois Freedom of Information Act and disclosed to the Village or the expert hired shall remain confidential and
exempted from public disclosure in accordance with the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
(D) Administrative Approvals:
1. General:
(a) The Community Development Director may administratively approve the uses listed in subsection (D)2, "Specific Administratively Approved
Uses", of this section. Nevertheless, all such uses shall comply with subsections (C), "General Definitions, Guidelines And Performance
Standards", of this section and all other applicable ordinances. Aboveground service facilities are subject to the bulk regulations of the Lisle Zoning
Code and are subject to the regulations of the Lisle Building Codes.
(b) Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the Community Development Director for a building permit, which application shall
include: a plat of survey, engineering plans, site plans, electrical plans, landscape plans, structure elevations, and other documents and plans as
may be deemed necessary. Said plans and documents shall provide the information set forth in subsections (F)2 and (F)3 of this section.
(c) The Community Development Department shall respond to each such application, resubmission or supplemental application within thirty (30)
days after receiving it by either approving the application, approving it with conditions, denying it, describing the additional information necessary to
consider the application complete or requesting additional information to determine whether the application complies with this chapter. If the
Community Development Department fails to respond to the applicant within said thirty (30) days, then the application shall be deemed to be
denied.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 229/460
(d) If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant may appeal said denial in accordance with the provisions of the Lisle Zoning Code
concerning appeals of administrative decisions.
(e) The Community Development Director may refer an application for administrative approval, that otherwise meets the standards contained herein,
to be considered and approved as required by this section if the Community Development Director determines in writing that the public interest
would be furthered by requiring a special use permit to construct the service facility in question.
(f) Except as provided in subsection (D)2(b)(3) of this section, the landscaping requirements of subsection (F)3 of this section shall apply to service
facilities granted an administrative permit.
2. Specific Administratively Approved Uses: The following uses shall be approved by the Community Development Department after conducting an
administrative review unless the Community Development Director concludes that the public interest would be furthered by requiring a special use
permit in conformance with subsection (D)1(e) of this section.
(a) Service facilities installed within the rear yard in any zoning district, provided the service facility is set back three feet (3') from the side property
line and five feet (5') from the rear property line, and further provided:
(1) A service facility shall not be located within a two hundred fifty foot (250') radius from any existing or approved service facility.
(2) The separation requirement of subsection (D)2(a)(1) of this section may be waived by the Community Development Director for the I-1
Industrial District, the B-2 Community Business District, the B-3 Central Business District and the O-R Office-Research District, provided that the
applicant establishes:
a. No other site or current technology could be used to provide intended services to the residents of the Village; and
b. A denial of a permit for the proposed site would create a gap in providing intended services to the residents of the Village.
(3) If one or more of the foregoing factors do not exist, the Community Development Director shall inform the applicant that it may request a
special use permit in conformance with subsection (F) of this section.
(b) Service facilities installed within the side yard in any nonresidential zoning district and in any residential zoning lot that maintains a nonresidential
principal use and/or structure (school, park, or church), and further provided:
(1) The service facility is set back three feet (3') from the side property line.
(2) A service facility shall not be located within a two hundred fifty foot (250') radius of any existing or approved service facility.
(3) A service facility shall be landscaped with an evergreen and/or deciduous hedge equal in height at the time of planting to the service facility,
and installed and maintained in accordance with subsection (F)3 of this section.
(E) Prohibited Uses:
1. Residential Yards: Service facilities are prohibited in the front yard or side yard adjoining a street of any lot used for residential purposes within the
R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts.
2. Prohibited Equipment: Aboveground service facilities containing an "Avestor lithium battery" are prohibited from every zoning district as a result of a
demonstrable history of such batteries resulting in explosions and creating an undue risk to the public's health, safety and welfare.
(F) Special Use Permits:
1. General: The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special use permits.
(a) Service facilities not permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to subsection (D) of this section, and not otherwise prohibited by
subsection (E) of this section, shall require a special use permit. Special use permit applications for service facilities shall be processed and heard
in conformance with the requirements of the Zoning Code.
(b) In granting a special use permit, conditions may be imposed to the extent the Village Board determines necessary to minimize any adverse effect
of the proposed service facility. Where a service facility is to be located in a front yard, the special use permit shall require that the service facility
be no closer than five feet (5') from the lot line of a front yard or a side yard abutting a street, or such greater distance as determined by the Village
Board.
(c) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a professional
engineer, licensed in the State of Illinois.
2. Factors Considered In Granting Special Use Permits: In addition to the standards identified in this subsection (F), the following factors may be
considered in determining whether to recommend or issue a special use permit:
(a) Whether the service facility is the smallest size capable of providing the intended service;
(b) Proximity of the service facility to residential district boundaries;
(c) Nature and intensity of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(d) Topography of site and surrounding areas;
(e) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(f) Design of the service facility, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
and
(g) The physical relationship between the service facility and existing structures and utilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 230/460
3. Landscaping/Screening: The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding service facilities requiring a special use permit.
(a) A service facility shall be landscaped/screened with a variety of plant materials that effectively screen the view of the service facility from adjacent
property and public rights-of-way on a year round basis. In some cases, such as a service facility sited on a large, wooded lot, natural growth
around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer. Appropriate care and maintenance of plant material shall be provided to keep such
growth alive and in good condition for a period of one year after approval by the Community Development Director. Diseased or dead plant
material shall be replaced. All trees shall be maintained until established. All trees not in a vigorous growing condition after one growing season
shall be replaced at the beginning of the next succeeding planting season.
(b) In locations where the visual impact of the service facility would be and is likely to remain minimal for the foreseeable future, the landscaping
requirement may be reduced or waived.
(G) Fire: Any aboveground service facility which spontaneously combusts, explodes or otherwise becomes set afire for any reason shall not be removed
from the location on which it is located so that the Lisle-Woodridge Fire District, or its designee, can investigate the cause thereof and develop
regulatory recommendations for minimizing the risk in the future. (Ord. 2018-4785, 9-10-2018)
Chapter 24
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATIONS
5-24-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to minimize and control the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented
businesses within the municipality in order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the municipality. The provisions of this chapter have
neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials or communication, including
sexually oriented entertainment. Similarly, it is not the purpose nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented
entertainment protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended
market. Furthermore, it is not the intent or effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution or exhibition of entertainment that is obscene. (Ord.
2004-3848, 6-7-2004)
5-24-2: FINDINGS:
Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses presented to the municipality from findings incorporated in
the cases of City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120 S.Ct. 1382 (2000); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); City of Renton v. Playtime
Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); Berg v. Health and Hospital Corporation, 865 F.2d 797 (7th Cir.
1989); Ellwest Stereo Theaters v. Wenner, 681 F.2d 1243 (9th Cir. 1982); Bamon Corp v. City of Dayton, 730 F.Supp 80 (S.D. Ohio, 1990); and EWAP Inc.
v. City of Los Angeles, 97 Cal. App 3d 179, 158 Cal. Rptr. (1979), and on studies in other cities including the "Report Of The Attorney General's Working
Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses" (Minnesota, 1989); "Memorandum Re: Adult Entertainment Ordinance", of the assistant chief
of police of Tucson, Arizona (May 1, 1990); Hecht, Peter R., Ph.D., "Report To The American Center For Law And Justice On The Secondary Impacts Of
Sex Oriented Businesses"(March 31, 1996); "Adult Entertainment Businesses In Indianapolis, An Analysis" (1984) and McCleary, Richard, Ph.D., and
Meeker, James W., Ph.D., "Final Report To The City Of Garden Grove: The Relationship Between Crime And Adult Business Operations On Garden
Grove Boulevard", (Garden Grove, California, October 23, 1991), this legislative body finds:
(A) Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary, unlawful and unhealthy activities.
(B) Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral sex and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semiprivate booths or rooms for viewing films, videos, or live sexually oriented entertainment. Such activities may result in spreading communicable
diseases such as syphilis, gonorrhea, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
(C) Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation between sexually oriented business and a decrease in the residential and
commercial property values that surround them, especially those properties within one thousand feet (1,000') of such businesses.
(D) Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation between sexually oriented businesses and increased crime in the neighborhood,
including sex related crimes like prostitution, obscenity, and sexual assault. This correlation is especially acute when more than one sexually oriented
business is located in a neighborhood, and when a sexually oriented business is located near a public open space such as a park, cemetery or school.
(E) Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation between sexually oriented businesses and increased harassment and propositioning
of women, children and the elderly in the neighborhood.
(F) Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation between sexually oriented businesses and offensive material such as pornographic
magazines and used condoms being discarded in the surrounding neighborhood, making them available to children.
(G) Location of sexually oriented business in a neighborhood can create a "sex for sale" reputation in a neighborhood.
(H) The foregoing findings raise substantial governmental interests and concerns.
(I) The municipality cannot entirely prohibit sexually oriented businesses which are not obscene from locating within the municipality.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 231/460
(J) The municipality can effect reasonable location regulations which it believes will ameliorate these deleterious secondary effects associated with
sexually oriented businesses.
(K) Locating sexually oriented businesses in the industrial zone will ameliorate these deleterious secondary effects associated with sexually oriented
businesses.
(L) Requiring sexually oriented businesses to be located four hundred fifty feet (450') from any other sexually oriented businesses will ameliorate these
deleterious secondary effects associated with sexually oriented businesses.
(M) Requiring sexually oriented businesses to be located four hundred fifty feet (450') from any school, daycare center, cemetery, public park including any
linear recreational area like a bike path, public housing, place of religious worship, lot zoned for residential purposes and lot used for residential
purposes, complies with the requirements of state law, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-5-1.5, and will ameliorate these deleterious secondary effects
associated with sexually oriented businesses.
(N) Ogden Avenue is the main thoroughfare in the municipality, and more than any other location in the municipality reflects on the economic status of the
municipality.
(O) Accordingly, a decrease in the property values and an increase in visible crime along Ogden Avenue will affect the property values of the municipality
as a whole in a way that other locations would not.
(P) Preventing sexually oriented businesses from locating directly on, or within five hundred feet (500') of Ogden Avenue will help to conserve property
values in the municipality as a whole, while still providing an adequate number of sites and acreage available for the location of sexually oriented
businesses.
(Q) At the time this chapter was approved, the regulations set forth herein permitted approximately 9.16 acres and approximately seven (7) sites available
for sexually oriented businesses in the municipality. (Ord. 2004-3848, 6-7-2004)
5-24-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
EMPLOYEE: A natural person who performs any service or work on the premises of a sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, providing
entertainment, performing work of a management or supervisory nature, or performing support functions, on a full time, part time or contract basis, whether
or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include a person on the premises exclusively for repair or maintenance of the
premises orequipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS: Urination, defecation, lactation, ejaculation and menstruation. It shall not mean urination and defecation performed in a public
or employee only restroom in the manner in which those facilities are intended to be used, and when not performed or presented for a commercial
purpose. It shall not mean lactation as part of breast feeding an infant, unless performed or displayed for a commercial purpose other than education and
training in the art, science or technique of breast feeding an infant.
MUNICIPALITY: The village of Lisle, Illinois.
NUDITY OR NUDE: Exposing to view specified anatomical areas or any device, costume, or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates any
specified anatomical areas.
PATRON: Any natural person who is not an employee.
SEMINUDITY OR SEMINUDE: Exposing to view, with less than a fully opaque covering, any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or
any portion of the buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other clothing, provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine or device which is designed, intended, displayed or kept as an amusement or
entertainment, and may be operated upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, electronic key, credit card, debit card or any similar item, or the
use of which is made available for any valuable consideration, and which displays a natural person, people, or characters as in cartoons and animation,
live or by any medium, including, without limitation, film, motion picture machine, projector, filmstrip, videotape, digital video disc (DVD), laser disc,
compact disc (CD), floppy disc, photograph, slide, television, book, magazine, and computer software, engaged in specified sexual activity or displaying
specified anatomical areas.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any of the following when done in a place where the public is invited or permitted, or when done for any commercial
purpose including sale and rental, regardless of who pays or receives the consideration therefor, and regardless of the form of consideration:
(A) Exhibition or display of a natural person or people in the state of nudity or seminudity, or engaged in specified sexual activities or excretory
functions;
(B) Premises with a sexually oriented amusementdevice;
(C) Rental or leasing of a hotel room, motel room or similar room for a period not exceeding ten (10) hours, but not including dining rooms, banquet
rooms, ballrooms, conference rooms and similar facilities unless they are used or to be used for specified sexual activities or excretory functions;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 232/460
(D) Offering of physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between natural persons of the opposite sex, when one or more of the persons is
nude or seminude, and also the offering of physical contact which constitutes specified sexual activities regardless of the sex of the person
performing or receiving the contact;
(E) Offering of products, services or activities by or with a natural person or people when one or more of the people, whether a patron, agent, employee
or otherwise, is in a state of nudity or seminudity;
(F) Displaying or offering to others any recorded depiction of a natural person, or created image or character, as in cartoons and animation, by any
medium, including, without limitation, film, videotape, closed circuit television, digital video disc (DVD), laser disc, compact disc (CD), floppy disc,
photograph, slide, television, book, magazine, and computer software, which is:
1. Characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified
anatomical areas; or
2. Advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas, including, without limitation, the use of the term "adult" and the use of the
designation of one or more "X" such as, but not limited to, "XXX";
(G) The display and offering to others of novelties, instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with
specified sexual activities or that give the appearance of or simulate any of the specified anatomical areas;
(H) The term sexually oriented business shall exclude the following:
1. The display and offering to others of condoms, spermicide or other nonprescription contraceptives, unless displayed and offered to others on the
premises of a business which would otherwise be considered a sexually oriented business;
2. The display and offering to others of drugs, instruments or devices which require a prescription, that are designed primarily for use in connection
with specified sexual activities, and which are in fact dispensed by or under the supervision of a pharmacist licensed by the state of Illinois;
3. The display and offering to others of instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with specified sexual
activities if they are displayed and offered to others on the premises where a pharmacist licensed by the state of Illinois is employed to dispense
prescription drugs, instruments or devices;
4. Breast feeding an infant, unless performed or displayed for a commercial purpose other than education and training in the art, science or
technique of breast feeding an infant;
5. The display and offering to others of motion pictures, by any format, which have received a rating from the Motion Picture Association of America
of G, PG, PG-13, R or NC-17, when offered or displayed substantially in their entirety;
6. Libraries and museums funded in whole or in part by federal, state or local governmental funds;
7. The display and offering to others of items which would otherwise qualify as a sexually oriented business pursuant to this section, if and only if the
display and offering are done for a commercial purpose, and all of the following apply to the business displaying and offering such items to others:
(a) Less than twenty percent (20%) of its gross income comes from the sale, rental or exhibition of the following types of items:
(1) Items which are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory
functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof; and
(2) Items which are advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, including, without
limitation, the use of the term "adult" and the use of the designation of one or more "X" such as, but not limited to, "XXX"; and
(b) Less than twenty percent (20%) of its display space is used for the sale, rental or exhibition of the items described in subsections (H)7(a)(1)
and (H)7(a)(2) of this definition; and
(c) Less than twenty percent (20%) of the items it offers to others are the items described in subsections (H)7(a)(1) and (H)7(a)(2) of this definition;
and
(d) The items described in subsections (H)7(a)(1) and (H)7(a)(2) of this definition are segregated from all other displays and retail areas of the
premises by a solid partition from floor to ceiling with no openings or windows and with entrance and egress by means of a solid door posted
with a sign not less than one foot by one foot (1' x 1') with the words "UNDER 18 NOT ADMITTED" lettered on the sign, except that magazines
characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified
anatomical areas or any combination thereof may be displayed on racks or other display cases only if the magazine is encased or otherwise
covered up and concealed from common view of anything other than the magazine title or text or other materials which would not be described
as sexually oriented;
(e) Certain uses which fall within the definition of sexually oriented business may also constitute uses which are illegal under local, state or federal
law, such as obscenity or child pornography. Even if such illegal uses constitute a sexually oriented business under the definition set forth
herein, they shall not be permitted uses in any district.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, any portion of the areola of the
female breast if less than fully and opaquely covered; and the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque covering. In
determining whether any of the foregoing portions of the anatomy are fully and opaquely covered, coverage by makeup, paint, orsimilar matter applied
directly to the skin, shall not be considered to be fully and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following, whether actual or simulated:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 233/460
(A) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, buttocks, or female breasts,
regardless of whether the performer or recipient is clothed, in a state of nudity or in a state of seminudity;
(B) The manipulation of the human body of another, including massage, by the use of any portion of manipulator's body, whether covered or
uncovered, or by any device, if the person performing the manipulation or the person receiving the manipulation is in a state of nudity or seminudity;
(C) Sex acts, normal or perverted, heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual, including, without limitation, intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, analingus,
masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism and masochism, and any other act intended to cause sexual arousal;
(D) Sex acts between animals when offered or displayed for the purpose or with the intent of causing the sexual arousal of a human viewer. (Ord.
2004-3848, 6-7-2004)
5-24-4: SPECIAL USE:
Any other ordinance or section of any ordinance notwithstanding, and subject to the setback requirements of section 5-24-5 of this chapter, sexually
oriented businesses shall be a special use only in the I-1 industrial district. Sexually oriented businesses shall not be a permitted use in any district. (Ord.
2004-3848, 6-7-2004)
5-24-5: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
No sexually oriented business shall be located:
(A) Within four hundred fifty feet (450') of the property boundary of any other sexually oriented business, and any school, daycare center, cemetery, public
park including any linear recreational area like a bike path, public housing, place of religious worship, lot zoned for residential purposes, and lot used
for residential purposes; and
(B) Within five hundred feet (500') of the centerline of OgdenAvenue, which five hundred feet (500') shall be measured from the nearest point of the
building, or portion of the building in which the sexually oriented business is located to the nearest point of the centerline of Ogden Avenue; and
(C) On a lot which physically touches Ogden Avenue. (Ord. 2004-3848, 6-7-2004)
5-24-6: RESTRICTIONS ON USE:
All sexually oriented businesses shall be conducted entirely within a fully enclosed business. No sexually oriented business shall be operated in any
manner that permits the observation from outside the building of any image, material or entertainment depicting or describing excretory functions, specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or any person in a state of nudity or seminudity, whether by means of display, decoration, sign, window or
any other means. (Ord. 2004-3848, 6-7-2004)
5-24-7: SIGNAGE:
No sexually oriented business shall advertise by way of billboard, sign boards or sign, within four hundred fifty feet (450') of any school, daycare center,
cemetery, public park including any linear recreational area like a bike path, public housing, and place of religious worship. (Ord. 2004-3848, 6-7-2004)
5-24-8: OTHER REGULATIONS:
The restrictions set forth in this chapter shall supersede any other restrictions found in other ordinances or other sections of any ordinance as applied to
sexually oriented businesses, if the terms of the restrictions are in conflict. (Ord. 2004-3848, 6-7-2004)
5-24-9: AMORTIZATION:
If at the time this chapter becomes effective, any sexually oriented business exists in a location not permitted by this chapter or is otherwise not in
compliance with this chapter, then the sexually oriented business shall constitute a legal nonconforming use. However, notwithstanding any other
ordinance or section of any ordinance to the contrary, the legal nonconforming sexually oriented business shall come into compliance with the
requirements of this chapter within one year of the effective date of this chapter. No sexually oriented business shall constitute a legal nonconforming use
after one year after the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-3848, 6-7-2004)
Chapter 25
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-4789, 10-1-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 234/460
Chapter 26
LANDSCAPING AND TREE PRESERVATION
5-26-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
(A) Purpose: This chapter is established to create uniform landscaping, screening and tree preservation standards for development of property in the
village and review of plans therefor, in order to ensure that the village remains attractive, safe and comfortable. The landscape standards herein are
established:
To promote, protect and preserve the general health and safety of the people of the community and, as part of the general welfare, ensure aesthetic
compatibility among land uses within the community;
To conserve soil and reduce soil erosion, reduce stormwater runoff, to provide oxygen regeneration to enhance air quality, and to reduce the effects of
urban heat islands;
To minimize the harmful or nuisance effects resulting from noise, dust, debris, motor exhaust, headlight glare, artificial light intrusions, objectionable
sight or activities, or similar incompatible impacts conducted or created by adjoining or nearby land use;
To safeguard the environmental quality and aesthetic character of the community by limiting the removal and ensuring replacement of trees upon
private property within the village;
To preserve, insofar as practical, existing vegetation and topographical features by limiting unnecessary clearing and modification of land, encouraging
the retention of existing mature trees, requiring the replacement of indigenous trees with approved species; and
To encourage the energy efficient operation of land uses in the public interest.
Landscaping required by this chapter shall be a condition to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any improvements built on a zoning lot in the
village.
(B) Applicability: Single-family detached residential and two-family residential uses shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter except for those
requirements outlined in section 5-26-5, "Intersection Visibility Requirements", of this chapter. Residential lots with underlying commercial zoning,
residential subdivisions, entry features, stormwater detention facilities, public ROW and open space amenities within new single-family detached and
two-family developments shall conform to the requirements of this chapter, and be subject to site plan review. All other uses in any district shall conform
to the applicable requirements of this chapter.
(C) Enforcement: No building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued for any lot or use that is subject to the requirements of this chapter unless all the
requirements of this chapter have been fulfilled. Where a landscape plan is required, no building permit shall be issued unless the zoning official has
approved such landscape plan. Failure to implement the landscape plan, or to maintain the lot or use in substantial conformance with the landscape
plan, shall be cause for revocation of the occupancy permit and/or the application of fines and penalties, as established in section 5-26-12 of this
chapter. (Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-3979, 1-9-2006)
5-26-2: LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
On any parcel of land requiring site plan approval by the village, a landscape plan shall be submitted. No permit for work, including site plan approval shall
be issued until the landscape plan has been approved by the zoning administrator, or his designee. Landscaping plans shall comply with the following:
(A) Landscape Architect: All landscape plans must be prepared by a state of Illinois registered landscape architect. Under special circumstances a request
to waive this requirement may be submitted to the zoning administrator for his consideration.
(B) Landscape Plan Content:
1. The name, address and phone number of the landscape architect or other person who prepared the plan; scale, north arrow, date of preparation and
any revision, project name and address, and identification of the plans as a preliminary or final landscape plan.
2. Location and dimensions of existing and proposed buildings and structures within the development site and within one hundred feet (100') of the
development site.
3. The locations and dimensions of all existing and/or proposed parking lots, drives, roadways, loading areas, and rights of way, sidewalks,
freestanding signs, refuse disposal areas, bicycle parking areas, freestanding electrical equipment, building mounted signs, heating, ventilation and
air circulation equipment, and all fences.
4. The location of all existing and proposed utilities and easements.
5. The location of all proposed site, building and parking lighting.
6. The location, quantity, size, root ball condition and type, scientific and common names of all proposed plant materials. All trees used to satisfy a tree
replacement requirement must be clearly identified.
7. The location of all proposed grading, berming and swales indicating contours at one foot (1') intervals.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 235/460
8. Specification of the type, boundaries, size and spacing of all proposed ground cover, turf and method of installation including grass seed mixes.
9. The location, size, and common name of all existing plant material intended to be preserved on the site and within twenty five feet (25') of the site.
10. A tree survey and tree preservation plan as set forth in section 5-26-13 of this chapter.
11. Details of all fences, bridges, retaining walls, or other similar elements proposed to be located on the site (section 5-26-10 of this chapter).
12. Typical planting details for trees, shrubs, ground covers, etc. (section 5-26-15 of this chapter).
13. Final opinion of probable landscape construction costs.
(C) Plan Coordination: The final landscape plan base sheet and site plan must match the final, approved engineering plans. It is strongly encouraged to
use a gray tone copy of the final engineering plan as a base sheet for the final landscape plan preparation.
(D) Plan Size: Landscape plans must be prepared at a traditional engineering scale, and on a sheet size not exceeding twenty four inches by thirty six
inches (24" x 36"). (Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-3979, 1-9-2006)
5-26-3: PLANT MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Selection: Plant materials installed pursuant to this chapter shall be of good quality and of species normally grown in northeastern Illinois and shall be
capable of withstanding the extremes of the individual site microclimates. The size and density of selected plant materials at the time of planting, and at
maturity, are additional criteria which shall be considered in preparing the landscape plan.
All plant material installed must be either balled and burlapped (B&B) or containerized. The use of bare root material is prohibited.
(B) Minimum Plant Sizes: Minimum sizes for plant material at the time of installation for all landscape areas required by this code shall be as follows:
Shade trees, deciduous 3 inch caliper
Parkway trees 3 inch caliper
Evergreen trees 6 feet high
Ornamental trees, deciduous 8 feet high or 21/2 inch caliper
Shrubs, evergreen 24 inches (height or width)
Shrubs, deciduous 36 inches high
18 inch dwarf variety
Perennials/ornamental grasses 1 gallon container
Ground cover 3 inch pots1
Note:
1. Planted at a spacing to achieve complete coverage of the area within 2 years of installation.
(C) Prohibited Trees: Tree species that detract from the village's appearance due to their tendency to produce numerous "weed seedlings" or which
produce dead wood due to their soft wood nature or short span of life shall be prohibited, except where determined appropriate by the zoning
administrator. Specifically, prohibited tree species for new planting shall include, but not be limited to:
Black locust;
Box elder;
Buckthorn;
Elm (except new hybrids);
Mountain ash;
Osage orange;
Poplar (all species);
Red mulberry;
Russian olive;
Silver maples (except new hybrids);
Tree of heaven;
Weeping willow (except in large, wet areas); and
White birch.
In addition, the zoning administrator shall have the right to prohibit plant materials other than those listed above based on current agricultural practices,
regional diseases/insect infestations and recommendations of the American Association of Nurserymen.
(D) Installation: All plant material shall be installed in accordance with the planting procedures established by the American Association of Nurserymen,
latest edition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 236/460
(E) Planting Design: Innovative landscape design or treatments are encouraged and shall be considered as a positive attribute in connection with any
request for a variation from the requirements of this chapter.
Plant material shall be carefully selected to satisfy all size requirements of this chapter at both installation and at maturity.
(F) Planting Beds: All planting beds shall be mulched in their entirety with shredded hardwood bark mulch or other similar organic material, three inches
(3") deep. Color dyed mulch, lava rock or large diameter bark chips ("chunk bark") are not acceptable. Gravel and stone mulches are not permitted.
Mulch beds at time of planting shall extend a minimum of two feet (2') beyond the center of all shrubs and have a four inch (4") deep spaded edge
around the perimeter.
(G) Maintenance: All landscaping and plant materials installed pursuant to an approved landscape plan shall be properly maintained by the owner thereof
(section 5-26-12 of this chapter). Plant material which dies shall be promptly replaced in compliance with the approved landscape plan.
All new landscape installations shall be warranted by the installing landscape contractor for a period of one year from the date of substantial
completion. (Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-3979, 1-9-2006)
5-26-4: PUBLIC ROW LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Parkway Turf: All parkways shall be fine graded with a minimum of six inches (6") of topsoil and sodded. Sod shall be a Kentucky bluegrass blend and
grown on a mineral soil base.
In situations where establishment watering is not possible, drill seeding with a straw blanket cover will be permitted.
(B) Parkway Trees: All parkway trees shall be provided and planted as follows:
1. Minimum tree size shall be three inch (3") caliper, measured six inches (6") above the ground at time of planting.
2. Trees shall have a straight, clear trunk, free of branches to a minimum height of five feet (5').
3. Trees must be balled and burlapped (B&B) with no exceptions. Tree height, width and root ball size shall meet the standards of "American Standard
For Nursery Stock", ANSI Z60.1, latest edition.
4. Substandard "B grade" or "park grade" plants are not acceptable.
5. Trees shall be spaced evenly and planted not more than forty feet (40') apart. Driveways or other pavement areas do not reduce the parkway tree
requirement, which is determined by the total length of street frontage divided by forty (40).
6. Parkway trees shall be planted in all parkways having a width of five feet (5') or more. The village shall have the right to require trees to be planted
outside of the right of way if the parkway is less than five feet (5') wide, or in the case of utility conflicts.
7. Parkway trees shall be installed to maintain the following minimum separations:
Driveways 10 feet
Fire hydrants 8 feet
Intersections See section 5-26-5 of this chapter
Streetlights 15 feet
Other aboveground utilities 5 feet
8. Parkway tree species shall be limited to those identified in exhibits A and B of this section.
9. To ensure genetic diversity, multiple tree species must be planted to avoid a monoculture situation.
10. If requested, evidence must be provided that trees come from state inspected, commercially licensed nurseries.
(C) Prohibited Activities: No person, unless permitted by the village, shall:
1. Plant, treat, prune, remove or otherwise disturb any parkway tree except that normal watering and fertilizing will be permitted.
2. Trim, prune, or remove any tree or portions thereof if such tree or portions thereof may reasonably be expected to fall on village property or
otherwise cause damage to persons or property.
3. Place on village property any planters or plant containers.
4. Damage, cut, tap, carve or transplant any parkway tree.
5. Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster or other manmade object to any parkway tree.
6. Excavate, grade or ditch any village property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 237/460
(D) Other Improvements: Other decorative elements, mailboxes, traffic control devices, etc., shall be as regulated in section 7-1A-5 of this code.
EXHIBIT A
RECOMMENDED PARKWAY TREES
The following deciduous tree species and varieties are recommended for parkway planting. This list may be periodically reviewed and revised by the
community and economic development director in consultation with the village arborist and/or landscape architect. All other tree species proposed must
be approved by the community and economic development director.
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer platanoides
Emerald lustre Emerald lustre Norway maple
Emerald queen Emerald queen Norway maple
Acer saccharum Sugar maple
Bonfire Bonfire sugar maple
Green mountain Green mountain sugar maple
Acer x freemanii Autumn blaze maple
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry
Chicagoland Chicagoland hackberry
Prairie pride Prairie pride hackberry
Corylus colurna Turkish filbert
Ginkgo biloba (male only) Ginkgo
Autumn gold Autumn gold ginkgo
Fairmount Fairmount ginkgo
Princeton sentry Princeton sentry ginkgo
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Thornless honey locust
Green glory Green glory honey locust
Halka Halka honey locust
Shademaster Shademaster honey locust
Skyline Skyline honey locust
Gymnocladus dioicus Kentucky coffee tree
Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip tree, yellow poplar
Nyssa sylvatica Black tupelo
Quercus
Bicolor Swamp white oak
Imbricaria Shingle oak
Macrocarpa Bur oak
Muehlenbergii Chinkapin oak
Rubrum Red oak
Taxodium distichum Bald cypress
Mickelson Shawnee brave bald cypress
Tilia americana American linden
Redmond Redmond linden
Tilia cordata Littleleaf linden
Glenleven Glenleven linden
Greenspire Greenspire linden
Olympic Olympic linden
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 238/460
Tilia tomentosa Silver linden
Sterling silver Sterling silver silver linden
Tilia x euchlora Crimean linden
Ulmus carpinifolia
Frontier Frontier elm
Homestead Homestead elm
Morton Accolade elm
Regal Regal elm
EXHIBIT B
RECOMMENDED INTERMEDIATE PARKWAY TREES
The following intermediate tree species are recommended for use in restricted height areas such as under overhead wires. This list may be periodically
reviewed and revised by the community and economic development director in consultation with the village arborist and/or landscape architect. All other
tree species proposed must be approved by the community and economic development director.
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer campestre Hedge maple
Acer ginnala Amur maple
Amelanchier canadensis Apple serviceberry
Chionanthus virginicus White fringe tree
Cornus mas Corneliancherry dogwood
Golden glory Golden glory dogwood
Crataegus crusgalli
Inermis Thornless, cockspur hawthorn
Crataegus phaenopyrum Washington hawthorn
Hamamelis virginiana Common witch hazel
Magnolia stellata Star magnolia
Malus
Adams Adams crabapple
Floribunda Japanese flowering crabapple
Prairie fire Prairie fire crabapple
Red jewel Red jewel crabapple
Snowdrift Snowdrift crabapple
Syringa japonica Japanese tree lilac
Ivory silk Ivory silk tree lilac
Viburnum prunifolium Blackhaw viburnum
Effective Date: This list was accepted and approved by the village of Lisle tree commission on October 13, 2004, and replaces all prior lists. (Ord. 2016-
4639, 4-4-2016)
5-26-5: INTERSECTION VISIBILITY REQUIREMENTS:
Landscaping must be designed and installed to minimize potential obstruction of critical sightlines. Specifically, at the intersection of all commercial
driveways, parking lot aisles, or public and private streets and alleys (including residential lots) unobstructed visibility between twenty four inches (24") and
six feet (6') above the height of the pavement must be maintained. To maintain this visibility, no berms, shrubs or other landscape material which will reach
a mature height greater than twenty four inches (24") shall be permitted within a twenty five foot (25') sight triangle. The sight triangle is measured from the
intersecting property or ROW lines as shown in the illustration below. Trees are allowed in sight triangles provided the lowest branching begins not less
than eight feet (8') above the pavement grade.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 239/460
(Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-3979, 1-9-2006)
5-26-6: BUILDING AND PERIMETER/BUFFER YARD REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Building Foundation Landscaping: All buildings (except single-family residential) shall provide a continuous eight foot (8') wide (minimum) landscape
area around the full perimeter, excluding pedestrian and vehicle access points. This landscape area shall be one hundred percent (100%) planted
along the front, fifty percent (50%) planted along each side and twenty five percent (25%) planted in the rear. Plantings shall be a combination of trees,
shrubs, perennials and ground covers used to enhance the building's architecture, soften its mass and break up blank walls. The remaining areas not
planted must be vegetated with sod or seed and blanket.
(B) Perimeter/Buffer Yard Landscaping: All developments (except single-family residential) shall provide a perimeter landscape buffer as follows:
1. Nonresidential Property Abutting Residential Property: Where nonresidential property abuts property in a residential district, landscaping shall be
provided as follows:
(a) A solid screen six feet (6') in height shall be provided along the entire length of the abutting property line. Such screen shall consist of a solid
wood fence, berms, trees, evergreens, shrubbery, and/or other live planting materials, necessary to provide one hundred percent (100%)
coverage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 240/460
(b) Shade trees shall be provided at the equivalent of one for each thirty feet (30') of frontage along the abutting property line. Such trees may be
clustered or spaced linearly as determined appropriate.
2. Nonresidential Property Abutting Nonresidential Property: Where nonresidential property abuts property in a business, office or industrial district,
landscaping shall be provided as follows:
(a) Shade trees shall be provided at the equivalent of one for each fifty feet (50') of frontage along the abutting property line. Such trees may be
clustered or spaced linearly as determined appropriate.
(b) Other landscaping materials, including berms if possible, ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubbery, hedges, and/or other live planting materials
shall be provided across thirty percent (30%) of the abutting property line.
3. Multiple-Family Residential Property: Where multiple-family residential use abuts property in any zoning district, landscaping shall be provided as
follows:
(a) Shade trees shall be provided at the equivalent of not less than one for each forty feet (40') of frontage along the abutting property line. Such
trees may be clustered or spaced linearly as appropriate.
(b) Other landscaping materials, including berms if possible, ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubbery, hedges, and/or other live planting materials
shall be provided across fifty percent (50%) of the abutting property line. (Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-3979, 1-9-2006)
5-26-7: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping: The perimeter of every parking lot shall be landscaped with a minimum five foot (5') wide buffer area and planted
as follows:
1. Front And Corner Side Yards:
(a) Where a parking lot is located in or adjacent to a front or corner side yard in a residential district, continuous landscaping shall be provided across
one hundred percent (100%) of the parking lot frontage to a minimum height of three feet (3'). Such landscaping shall consist of any combination
of hedges, and/or other live planting material. Plantings shall be a minimum fifty percent (50%) evergreens.
(b) Where a parking lot is located in or adjacent to a front or corner side yard not in a residential district, continuous landscaping shall be provided
across sixty percent (60%) of the parking lot frontage to a minimum height of three feet (3'). Such landscaping shall consist of any combination of
berms, shade and ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubbery, hedges and/or other live planting material. Plantings shall be a minimum fifty percent
(50%) evergreens.
2. Rear And Side Yards:
(a) Where a parking lot is located in a yard adjacent to a residential zoning district, landscaping shall be provided as follows:
(1) Screening between the parking lot and the residential property line shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height along one hundred percent
(100%) of the parking lot.
(2) Shade trees shall be provided at the equivalent of one for each thirty (30) linear feet, or fraction thereof, of parking lot frontage and shall be
clustered or spaced linearly as determined appropriate.
(3) Other planting material, including ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubbery, hedges, and/or other live planting materials shall be provided to
achieve one hundred percent (100%) screening.
(4) Where appropriate, berming or a six foot (6') high board on board wood fence may be used.
(b) Where a parking lot is located in a yard adjacent to a nonresidential property, landscaping shall be provided across not less than fifty percent
(50%) of that portion of the parking lot abutting the property line to a minimum height of three feet (3'). Such landscaping shall consist of any
combination of berms, shade and ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubbery, hedges, and/or other live planting materials.
(B) Internal Parking Lot Landscaping: For all parking lots with five (5) or more spaces the following internal landscaping is required:
1. Parking lots must contain a minimum of one landscape island for every ten (10) parking spaces.
2. Landscape islands must be located at the end of every row of parking and be a minimum plantable size of eight feet by eighteen feet (8' x 18') for
single rows, and eight feet by thirty six feet (8' x 36') for double rows. All islands must be fully curbed and crowned six inches (6").
3. In addition to end row islands, no more than fifteen (15) parking spaces shall be used in a row without a landscape island break.
4. Landscape islands shall contain one deciduous shade tree for single row islands and two (2) deciduous shade trees for double islands.
Note: Parking lot light pole locations must be designed to accommodate the above shade tree requirement.
5. In addition to required shade trees, all islands must be fully sodded, seeded (with erosion blanket) or planted with low shrubs, perennials or ground
cover and maintained at a maximum height of thirty inches (30").
(C) Alternative Parking Lot Landscaping: As an alternative to traditional parking lot design, lots which use conservation design techniques to slow water
runoff, increase infiltration and improve water quality will be permitted. These lots must be properly designed, graded and planted utilizing "best
management practices". Vegetation shall be established using a combination of seeding and plugs. (Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-3979,
1-9-2006)
5-26-8: LOADING, STORAGE AND REFUSE AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 241/460
(A) Loading And Storage Areas: All outside loading and/or storage areas visible from any adjacent property or public right of way must be permanently
screened. Screening shall be provided by a six foot (6') high solid commercial grade wood fence or wall, or a combination berm and dense evergreen
tree planting totaling eight feet (8') in height at the time of planting.
(B) Refuse Disposal Areas: All refuse disposal and grease storage containers shall be screened on three (3) sides by a solid commercial grade wood
fence, wall or equivalent material to a height of six feet (6'). The enclosure shall be used strictly for the confinement of refuse and grease containers
and shall not be used for the outside storage of any other materials or equipment. The open side of said enclosure shall be gated and situated such
that, to the greatest extent possible, it does not face toward an adjacent property or public right of way.
Additionally, a continuous hedge of deciduous or evergreen shrubs is required along the three (3) fixed sides of the enclosure.
(C) Utility Equipment And Ground Level Mechanical Equipment: All equipment visible from any adjacent lot or public right of way must be permanently
screened by dense deciduous or evergreen plantings equal to the height of the equipment. Plant material must be carefully arranged to provide
maintenance and meter access while maintaining the required opacity. (Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-3979, 1-9-2006)
5-26-9: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT BASINS:
(A) Plant Material: Landscaping shall be provided around the perimeter of detention/retention basins generally above the high water level. Only trees
adapted to temporary flooding may be planted below the high water level. Such landscaping shall consist at a minimum of two (2) shade trees three
inch (3") caliper, one ornamental tree eight feet (8') tall, and one evergreen tree six feet (6') tall for every one hundred (100) linear feet of perimeter, as
measured at the high water level. Trees should be clustered or grouped to provide a natural appearance.
(B) Turf Establishment: Turf selection and establishment around detention/retention basins should also tolerate temporary flooding. A turf type tall fescue
grass seed mix, drill seeded at a rate of five (5) pounds per acre and covered with a straw erosion blanket is recommended. For wet basins the area
from eighteen inches (18") below normal water level to five feet (5') above normal level shall be reinforced to prevent erosion from wave action. A five
(5) year coconut erosion blanket, or equivalent, is recommended.
(C) Alternative Native Basin Landscaping: As an alternative to traditional basins, wetland bottom storm water basins with native vegetation slopes are
encouraged to slow water runoff, increase infiltration, improve water quality and reduce goose populations. These basins must be properly designed
and graded utilizing "best management practices" (see example in section 5-26-15 of this chapter). Vegetation shall be established using a combination
of seeding and plugs.
For alternative wetland basins, the ornamental and evergreen tree requirement shall be waived in lieu of an equal dollar value of wetland plug
plantings. (Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-3979, 1-9-2006)
5-26-10: SIGNAGE, FENCING AND WALLS:
(A) Signage: All freestanding or ground signs shall have a landscaped area (exclusive of lawn area) equal to one and one-half (11/2) times the sign surface
area. This landscaped area shall be planted with a mix of plant material proportionate to the size of the proposed sign, in keeping with sign/building
theme and maintaining adequate sightlines and visibility.
See title 4, chapter 4 of this code for additional information on signage.
(B) Fencing: Fences provided for screening purposes shall be six feet (6') high, commercial grade board on board wood fence (see section 5-26-15,
"Village Standard Landscape Details", of this chapter). Alternative fence styles or heights must be approved by the zoning administrator.
Fences shall always be installed with the "finished side" out, facing the adjacent lot.
All fences in nonresidential districts that abut residential districts must be located inside the property line and buffered with berming and/or landscaping
so that no more than fifty percent (50%) of the fence is visible from the adjoining residential district.
(C) Retaining Walls: All retaining walls shall be an interlocking solid concrete block wall system or approved equal (see section 5-16-4 of this title). Where
wall heights exceed forty eight inches (48") terracing walls should be considered and may be required by the village.
All retaining walls shall be designed and installed to ensure public safety. For wall heights from eighteen inches (18") to thirty six inches (36") a densely
planted hedge, minimum thirty inches (30") high at installation, or railing must be installed along the top of the entire wall length.
For wall heights over thirty six inches (36") a railing or approved fence must be used (see section 4-1-1 of this code). (Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005;
amd. Ord. 2006-3979, 1-9-2006)
5-26-11: CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
New buildings and development in the central business district shall improve adjacent sidewalk areas from the street curb to the face of the building. This
requirement shall also apply to building additions or renovations as determined by the zoning administrator. The types of streetscape improvements
required shall include decorative sidewalk paving, plant material, ornamental lighting and streetscape accessories. Plans for streetscape improvements
shall be incorporated into project plans submitted for building permit applications. Streetscape and building facade improvements shall conform with the
design guidelines of the "Village Of Lisle Downtown Master Plan" as prepared by the Lakota Group, Inc., and dated May 1999, or any subsequent
revisions thereto. (Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-3979, 1-9-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 242/460
5-26-12: FINAL ACCEPTANCE, PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE, MAINTENANCE AND PENALTIES:
(A) Final Acceptance: All required landscaping materials, both living and nonliving, shall be in place prior to the time of issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy, weather permitting.
(B) Performance Guarantee: In periods of adverse weather conditions, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued, subject to the posting of a
cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit in an amount equal to one and one-half (11/2) times the estimated cost of the landscaping, with said
estimated cost to be certified by a landscape contractor. The cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit may be forfeited if the landscaping is not
completed within one year after the issuance of the temporary certificate. Forfeiture of any cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit shall not relieve
the owner of the responsibility to complete the required landscaping. The performance guarantee shall also be accompanied by a statement of the
owner giving the village the right to enter upon the property to complete landscaping in the case of forfeiture.
(C) Plant Substitutions: No deviations in size of plant material or substitution of species shall occur from the approved landscape plan without prior written
approval from the zoning administrator, or his designee.
(D) Maintenance: Trees, shrubs, and other landscaping materials depicted on landscaping plans approved by the village shall be considered to be
elements of the project in the same manner as parking, building materials and other details. The developer, its successor and/or subsequent owners
and their agents shall be responsible for maintenance of landscaping on the property on a continuous basis for the life of the development. Plant
materials which exhibit evidence of insect pests, disease and/or damage shall be appropriately treated, and dead plants promptly removed and
replaced within the next planting season after installation. All landscaping will be subject to periodic inspection by the zoning administrator, or his
designee. Should landscaping not be installed, maintained and replaced as needed to comply with the approved plan, the owner and its agent or
agents shall be considered in violation of the terms of the certificate of occupancy.
(E) Penalties: Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on
each day that a violation hereof is permitted to exist. (Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-3979, 1-9-2006)
5-26-13: TREE PRESERVATION AND REMOVAL REGULATIONS:
(A) Scope: It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause the removal of any parkway tree and any other tree having a caliper of six inches (6") or
greater in the village of Lisle without having first obtained approval from the village of a tree preservation and removal plan as described herein.
Nothing in this section shall apply to tree removal on private property by an owner of a lot having a single-family, two-family or duplex dwelling located
thereon unless said lot has an underlying commercial zoning, or is located in any floodplain area.
(B) Tree Preservation And Removal Plan Required: A tree preservation and removal plan shall be required for any parcel of land involving the construction
of any new building(s) or structure(s) or other site improvements or the removal of any parkway tree, or a tree having a caliper of six inches (6") or
greater. All tree preservation and removal plans shall include or have attached thereto the following information:
1. A tree location survey, prepared by a licensed Illinois arborist, landscape architect, or other qualified professional is required for all areas to be
developed. This plan shall be at the same scale as the plans for the development, but not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') and is to be
submitted as part of the preliminary plan.
The survey shall show all trees six inches (6") in diameter and larger, and all parkway trees. All trees over twelve inches (12") in diameter must be
identified by size and species. In addition, all key trees (i.e., a tree classified by the arborist as significant, or those trees which are exceptionally
good examples of their species) shall be identified on the tree survey. Each tree surveyed must be identified with a number on the drawing and
tagged in the field.
2. The location of those trees to be removed, those to be preserved, and the methods which are to be used to preserve such trees during site
development.
3. A written statement indicating the reason for removal of the tree(s). A report from a licensed Illinois arborist or landscape architect may be requested
by the zoning administrator if deemed appropriate.
4. Details, specifications and/or technical information of procedures to be used to preserve and protect trees.
(C) General Tree Preservation And Removal Standards And Criteria:
1. Every reasonable effort shall be made to preserve existing trees through the integration of those trees into the site plan and landscape plan for a
proposed development. Existing trees, when preserved, may be used to satisfy site landscape requirements for parking lots or buffers.
2. Grading and construction equipment shall be forbidden from encroaching within the drip line of a tree. The drip line area is the ground area under a
tree canopy from the trunk to the outermost branches.
3. Crushed limestone and other material detrimental to trees shall not be placed within the drip line of any tree nor at any higher location where
drainage toward the tree could conceivably affect the health of the tree.
4. Snow fencing shall be temporarily installed at the periphery of the tree's drip line and maintained throughout the entire project. The ground area
inside of this fencing shall be protected and storage of any material in this area is prohibited.
5. Tree trunks and branches shall be protected when construction must occur within tree drip line areas.
6. No grade changes shall be allowed under the drip line of any trees designated for preservation.
7. To improve the survival rate of trees, root pruning and/or thinning shall be performed in accordance with industry standards and practices.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 243/460
8. In the event that underground utility lines are proposed within ten feet (10') of the trunk of a tree, auguring of the utility line should be considered and
may be required by the village.
9. Tree replacement required.
(a) Any tree intended to be removed, or unintentionally removed or damaged during construction shall be replaced with new trees in accordance with
the following schedule:
Caliper (Inches) Of
Tree To Be Removed
Number Of
Replacement Trees
30 or greater 6
13-29 5
6-12 4
The above replacement schedule does not apply to the following undesirable tree species:
Black locust (Robinia psueodoacacia),
Box elder (Acer negundo),
Buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica),
Cottonwood (Populus deltroides),
Mulberry (Morus sp.),
Osage orange (Maclura pomifera),
Russian olive (Elaeagnus angustifolia),
Siberian elm (Ulmus pumila),
Tree of heaven (Ailanthus altissima),
White willow (Salix alba).
(b) In the event that a tree designated for preservation is destroyed, damaged, or removed during the construction process, such tree shall be
replaced with new trees in accordance with the following schedule:
Caliper (Inches) Of
Tree To Be Removed
Number Of
Replacement Trees
30 or greater 10
13-29 8
6-12 6
(c) All replacement trees shall have a minimum caliper size of three inches (3").
(d) Replacement trees shall be limited to those species included on exhibit A, section 5-26-4 of this chapter.
(e) The landscape plan shall identify each replacement tree as a replacement tree and indicate its location, species, and size. No replacement trees
shall be used to satisfy the requirements for tree planting in public rights of way, parking lots, or buffer areas.
(f) Removal of trees designated for preservation shall be allowed only by amending the landscape plan.
(g) Tree preservation and replacement required by this section shall be a condition to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any
improvements constructed on a zoning lot in the village.
(h) If it is impractical to plant the required number of replacement trees on the same zoning lot due to space limitations or the density of existing
trees, the village shall require the property owner to plant said tree(s) at the village's discretion on other public property or require a cash donation
to be used for village tree maintenance activities.
(D) Guidelines For Reviewing Tree Removal Plans: The village of Lisle shall approve removal of a tree without penalty or mitigation if one or more of the
following conditions exist:
1. It is necessary to remove a tree which poses a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or threatens to cause disruption of public safety.
2. It is necessary to remove a tree which poses a safety hazard to structures.
3. It is necessary to remove a tree which is diseased or has been weakened by age, storm, fire or other injury.
4. It is necessary to observe good forestry practice; i.e., the number of healthy trees a given parcel of land will support.
5. There exists a unique site condition, or extenuating circumstance, which is approved by the zoning administrator.
(E) Tree Removal Permit: When tree removal is necessary by any development or land use requiring the submission of a landscape plan, tree
preservation and removal plan, site plan, or subdivision plan, said plan shall, upon approval by the village, constitute a tree removal permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 244/460
(F) Failure To Comply: If, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, the necessary precautions as specified in the tree preservation and removal plan were
not undertaken before or maintained during construction, the land development permit of the parcel shall not be issued or, if previously issued, shall be
revoked until such time as these precautions have been satisfied. (Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-3979, 1-9-2006)
5-26-14: DEAD, DISEASED OR INFESTED TREES; NUISANCES:
(A) Enforcement; Inspection: The community development director is charged with enforcement of this section. The community development director may
authorize an appropriate village employee or officer to enter upon private property, subject to constitutional limitations, at all reasonable hours for
purposes of:
1. Inspecting trees on any such property having the appearance of or suspected of having:
(a) Dutch elm disease,
(b) Elm yellows disease (formerly called Phloem necrosis),
(c) Oak wilt,
(d) Pine wilt,
(e) Any other infectious disease,
(f) Exhibiting an infestation of the emerald ash borer (Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire),
(g) That appears dead or dying, regardless of cause,
(h) Parts thereof in a dead or dying condition which serve as a breeding place for the European elm bark beetle, Scolytus multistristus or other
disease spreading insect, bug or vector, or
(i) Any combination of the preceding diseases or infestations or conditions, and
2. Taking tree and plant samples as required to determine whether a tree or plant is diseased or infested.
It is unlawful for any person to prevent the community development director, or his or her designee, from entering on private property for purposes of
carrying out his or her duties under this section, or to interfere with the community development director, or his or her designee, in the lawful
performance of his or her duties under this section.
(B) Nuisances Declared: In the event that it is determined that the tree or plant from which said samples have been taken is in fact dead, dying, diseased
or infected with:
1. Dutch elm disease,
2. Elm yellows disease (formerly called Phloem necrosis),
3. Oak wilt,
4. Pine wilt,
5. Any other infectious disease,
6. Exhibiting an infestation of the emerald ash borer (Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire),
7. That appears dead or dying, regardless of cause,
8. Parts thereof in a dead or dying condition which serve as a breeding place for the European elm bark beetle, Scolytus multistristus or other disease
spreading insect, bug or vector, or
9. Any combination of the preceding diseases or infestations or conditions are hereby declared a nuisance.
It may be declared a nuisance regardless of the ability to diagnose a disease, if the subject tree is determined to represent a threat to public safety.
(C) Removal: The owner, occupant or agent of a property on which there is any tree confirmed to be diseased, infested, or having any condition listed in
subsection (B) of this section must remove any such tree from the village within ten (10) days of notification to the owner, occupant or agent. All trees
diseased, infested or having any such condition must be legally disposed of in compliance with state and federal regulations. It is unlawful for the
owner, occupant, or agent of any property in the village to permit any tree, portion thereof, including logs, infected with an infectious disease to remain
on his or her property or to be retained for any use. Chipping of tree materials will be permitted provided that any material that is chipped must not
exceed one square inch of final chip surface.
(D) Abatement Of Nuisance: In all cases where the owner, occupant or agent of a property on which there is any tree confirmed to be diseased, infested,
or having any condition listed in subsection (B) of this section cannot be found, or if found and notified, neglects or refuses for any reason to abate the
nuisance within ten (10) days of notification, thereafter the community development director, or his or her designee, may enter upon the property to
abate the nuisance by removal and disposal of the tree. The owner, occupant, or agent charged with removal and disposal of a nuisance tree may
request that the removal and disposal be done by the community development director, or his or her designee. The owner, occupant, or agent will be
charged with any expenses incurred by the village in the removal or abatement of a nuisance tree.
(E) Lien For Abatement Costs:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 245/460
1. Whenever billing for removal or abatement of a nuisance pursuant to this section by or under the supervision of the community development director,
or his or her designee, remains unpaid thirty (30) days after billing for such service has been rendered, the community development director may file
a sworn statement of lien claim with the office of the DuPage County recorder of deeds. This sworn statement will contain the legal description of the
property served, the amount of the billing plus administrative costs, the date or dates the removal costs were incurred and a notice that the village
claims a lien for the total amount.
2. The community development director, or his or her designee, will also personally serve or deliver via certified mail, notice of lien to the taxpayer of
record, based on the property tax records for the year immediately preceding the date of the removal activity, for the property served. The notice
must state the substance of section 11-20-15 of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-15 as well as this section, identify
the property served by common description, and describe the removal activity.
3. The village attorney may institute foreclosure proceedings, in the name of the village, in the circuit court against any property for which a lien claim
for unpaid service charges and administrative costs has been duly filed in accordance with section 11-20-15 of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-15. (Ord. 2013-4491, 5-20-2013)
5-26-15: VILLAGE STANDARD LANDSCAPE DETAILS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 246/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 247/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 248/460
(Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-3979, 1-9-2006)
Chapter 27
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
5-27-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
Outdoor lighting shall be designed to provide the minimum lighting necessary to ensure adequate safety, night vision, and comfort, and shall not create or
cause excessive glare on adjacent properties and public street rights of way. (Ord. 2006-4025, 6-19-2006)
5-27-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 249/460
FIXTURE: The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps and can include all or some of the following parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a
lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor or lens.
FOOT-CANDLES (fc): A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light (illumination) falling onto a given point, one foot-candle equals one lumen per
square foot.
GLARE: The effect produced by a light source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted, to cause
annoyance, discomfort, or loss of visual performance and ability.
HEIGHT OF LUMINAIRE: The height of a luminaire shall be the vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the luminaire to the
lowest direct light emitting part of the luminaire.
LAMP: The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.
LUMEN: A quantitative unit used to identify the amount of light emitted by a light source. A lamp is generally rated in lumens.
LUMINAIRE: A complete lighting system, and includes a lamp or lamps and a fixture.
MAINTAINED FOOT-CANDLES: Illuminance of lighting fixtures adjusted for a maintenance factor accounting for dirt buildup andlamp output depreciation.
The maintenance factor used in the design process to account for this depreciation cannot be lower than 0.72 for high pressure sodium and 0.64 for metal
halide and mercury vapor.
NONCONFORMING LUMINAIRES: Luminaires not conforming to this chapter that were in place at the time this chapter was voted into effect. The
luminaire shall be changed if other site related improvements are proposed on the property which requires a building permit.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING: The nighttime illumination of an outside area or object by any manmade device located outdoors that produces light by any
means. (Ord. 2006-4025, 6-19-2006)
5-27-3: NONCONFORMITIES:
(A) All luminaires lawfully in place prior to the effective date hereof shall be grandfathered. However, at the time that a nonconforming fixture is replaced,
moved, upgraded, or otherwise changed, the fixture must be brought into compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Any expansion of, or
addition to, an existing lighting system must conform to the requirements of this chapter.
(B) A luminaire shall be changed if other site related improvements are proposed on the property which requires a building permit.
(C) Nonconforming luminaires that direct light toward streets or parking lots that cause disability glare to motorists or cyclists should be either shielded or
redirected within one hundred twenty (120) days of notification, so that the luminaires do not cause a potential hazard to motorists or cyclists. (Ord.
2006-4025, 6-19-2006)
5-27-4: LIGHT MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUE:
Light level measurement shall be made at the property line of the property upon which the light to be measured is being generated. If measurement on
private property is not possible or practical, light level measurements may be made at the boundary of the public street right of way that adjoins the
property of the complainant or at any other location on the property of the complainant. Measurements shall be made at finished grade (ground level), with
the light registering portion of the meter held parallel to the ground point up. The meter shall have cosine and color correction and have an accuracy
tolerance of no greater than plus or minus five percent (5%). Measurements shall be taken with a light meter that has been calibrated within the previous
two (2) years. Light levels are specified, calculated and measured in foot-candles (fc). All fc values are maintained foot-candles unless specified otherwise.
See the definition for "maintained foot-candles" in section 5-27-2 of this chapter formaximum allowed light loss factors. (Ord. 2006-4025, 6-19-2006)
5-27-5: ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be fined in an amount as specified in the annual fee ordinance, and every such person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day such violation shall continue, and shall be subject to the penalty provided hereunder for each and every
separate offense. (Ord. 2006-4025, 6-19-2006)
5-27-6: PARKING LOT LIGHTING:
Land uses required herein to provide six (6) or more parking spaces, or one or more loading spaces, shall provide lighting facilities to illuminate all parking
spaces, aisles and loading spaces in accordance with the following requirements:
(A) Photometric Plan: Site plans for proposed off street parking facilities shall be submitted to the village for approval and shall contain a photometric plan.
The photometric plan shall include all of the following information:
1. Identification of all proposed light fixtures, including those used for site lighting, canopy lighting and exterior building lighting.
2. Identification of all proposed control equipment, conduit and wiring, including material, size and location.
3. Photometric calculations, showing a grid of individual illumination values as well as a summary of the maximum, minimum and average illumination
of the pavement surface in foot-candles.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 250/460
4. Construction details of the pole, pole foundation, electrical trench with warning tape and pole handhole wiring.
5. Catalog cut sheets for the proposed light poles, fixtures and any exterior control equipment.
(B) Illumination Standards: The maximum horizontal illumination at the property line adjacent to or across from detached or attached single-family
residential zoned properties shall be 0.2 foot-candle. Parking lots shall be classified as follows:
1. Low activity level parking lots: These are parking lots in which most of the parking spaces will be occupied by employee vehicles, with very few
parking spaces occupied by customer vehicles after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. The average illumination on the pavement area shall be between 0.5 and
2.0 foot-candles and shall have an average to minimum uniformity ratio of six to one (6:1) or better.
2. Medium activity level parking lots: These are parking lots inwhich most of the parking spaces will be occupied by employee vehicles, but with
significant parking spaces occupied by customer vehicles after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. The average illumination on the pavement area shall be
between 1.5 and 3.0 foot-candles and shall have an average to minimum uniformity ratio of six to one (6:1) or better.
3. High activity level parking lots: These are parking lots in which most of the parking spaces will be occupied by customer vehicles after six o'clock
(6:00) P.M. The average illumination on the pavement area shall be between 2.5 and 4.0 foot-candles and shall have an average to minimum
uniformity ratio of four to one (4:1) or better.
4. Exception for gasoline station canopies: The average illumination on the pavement area under the canopy and around the fuel pumps shall be
between thirty five (35) and seventy (70) foot-candles. The remainder of the gasoline station pavement shall meet the requirements for high activity
level parking lots.
5. Exception for bank and credit union canopies: The average illumination on the pavement area under the drive-up canopy and around automated
teller machines must meet federal regulations. The remainder of the bank and credit union parking lot pavement shall meet the requirements for high
activity level parking lots.
6. Exception for automobile sales lots: The average illumination on the first twenty five feet (25') of pavement area adjacent to the street shall be
between thirty five (35) and seventy (70) foot-candles. The remainder of the automobile sales lot shall meet the requirements for high activity level
parking lots.
(C) Fixture Specifications: All exterior luminaires, except for decorative fixtures and/or architectural lighting approved by the board of trustees, shall be
horizontally mounted, with flat lenses and full cutoff optics. No portion of the lens may protrude below the fixture housing. The luminaires shall utilize
four hundred (400) watt or smaller lamps.
(D) Mounting Height: Light fixtures for parking lots adjacent to or across from detached or attached single-family residential zoned properties shall have a
maximum mounting height of twenty six feet (26') above the pavement. All other parking lot lighting fixtures shall have a maximum mounting height of
thirty two feet (32') above the pavement.
(E) Glare: Sources of light (the bulb) shall be directed, shaded, shielded, or otherwise located to minimize perceived glare on adjacent properties or
streets. Accordingly, canopy lighting with refractive drop lenses, tilting fixtures, floodlights, and wall mounted nonhorizontal fixtures (commonly referred
to as wall packs) are specifically prohibited. Architectural lighting shall be permitted as long as it is ground mounted near the building, utilizes seventy
(70) watt or smaller lamps, and is approved by the board of trustees. (Ord. 2006-4025, 6-19-2006)
5-27-7: STREET LIGHTING:
Subdivisions shall provide lighting facilities to illuminate all public streets in accordance with the following requirements:
(A) General Requirements: Streetlights shall be designed in accordance with the national electrical code as well as the American national standard
practice for roadway lighting report RP-8, prepared by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. All street lighting equipment shall be
certified by Underwriters Laboratories.
Streetlights in residential subdivisions shall be spaced approximately one hundred eighty (180) to two hundred feet (200') apart and shall be located
in line with side yard property lines wherever feasible. Additional streetlights shall also be provided at intersections, sharp curves and dead ends.
Streetlights in commercial, business or industrial areas shall be spaced to provide lighting levels recommended by the American national standard
practice for roadway lighting report RP-8 and photometric calculations shall be submitted to the village engineer for review and approval.
Streetlights shall be placed six feet (6') behind the back of curb. Barrier curb shall be provided in front of all streetlights to ensure that they do not
constitute a roadside hazard.
Street lighting systems shall include a pedestal box containing a main circuit breaker located as close as possible to the electric service drop. The
pedestal box shall have a locking cover and shall be clearly labeled "Street Lighting".
(B) Poles: Streetlight poles shall be reinforced prestressed concrete, octagonal in cross section with a central cable raceway, and suitable for butt type
mounting. The poles shall have a black, natural polished finish. The poles shall be equipped for cable entrance from below ground level and shall have
a wiring handhole with an aluminum cover above finished grade. The aluminum cover shall be attached with tamperproof screws.
Poles in residential subdivisions shall be Ameron Centrecon series "M" medium octagonal poles, catalog no. MEO-7.5-612 (providing a 24 foot 7
inch mounting height). Poles in commercial, business or industrial areas shall be Ameron Centrecon series "M" medium octagonal poles, catalog no.
MEO-8.5-612 (providing a 27 foot 11 inch mounting height). Poles in commercial and business areas shall be supplied with a GFI outlet near the top of
the pole.
Unless otherwise approved by the village engineer, mast arms shall be manufactured of tapered aluminum with a smooth internal cable raceway and
shall have a tenon to accommodatethe slip fitter of the luminaire. Mast arms shall be six feet (6') in length. Mast arms shall be attached to the concrete
pole with aluminum castings and stainless steel or silicone bronze screws.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 251/460
An in line fuse holder assembly (Buss no. 1A0512, or approved equal) equipped with the proper fuse for the protection of the luminaire shall be
provided at the handhole of each pole.
Streetlight poles shall be plumbed while carrying the load of the mast arm and luminaire. All voids between the pole butt base and undisturbed earth
shall be backfilled with low strength Portland cement concrete and the pole shall be braced in a plumb position until the concrete has set.
(C) Luminaires: Luminaires in residential subdivisions shall be one hundred fifty (150) watt high pressure sodium General Electric M-250A2 fixtures.
Luminaires shall be fastened to the mast arms with a slip fitter, and shall be provided with an individual photocell and an adjustable lamp socket. The
luminaires shall have an IES type III lighting distribution pattern and cutoff optics. The luminaires shall be provided with auto regulator ballasts, a flat
glass lens and a charcoal filter with an elastomer gasket.
Luminaires in commercial, business or industrial areas shall be two hundred fifty (250) watt high pressure sodium General Electric M-250A2 fixtures.
Luminaires shall be fastened to the mast arms with a slip fitter, and shall be provided with an individual photocell and an adjustable lamp socket. The
luminaires shall have an IES type III lighting distribution pattern and semicutoff optics. The luminaires shall be provided with auto regulator ballasts, a
glass globe lens and a charcoal filter with an elastomer gasket.
(D) Cable And Wiring Methods: Cable shall be single conductor copper, XLP type USE, with six hundred (600) volt insulation. Minimum wire size shall be
#6 AWG for feeder cables to the light poles and #12 AWG for wiring within the pole between the fuse holder and the luminaire and GFI outlet.
Maximum wire size shall be #2 AWG for feeder cables to the light poles. Voltage drop calculations shall be submitted to the village engineer for
approval. Individual conductors within cable shall have solid (nonstriped) color coded insulation for identification as follows:
Black First 120V "hot" leg
Red Second 120V "hot" leg
White Grounded neutral
Green Grounding conductor
Bare copper grounding conductors are not permitted. All underground wiring shall be encased in polyethylene unit duct or schedule 40 PVC conduit.
Galvanized steel conduit sleeves shall be installed under all street crossings andshall extend two feet (2') past the back of curb on each side. After unit
duct or PVC conduit has been placed through the sleeve, the ends shall be sealed watertight. Unit duct and PVC shall be placed in trenches six inches
(6") wide by thirty inches (30") deep and shall be backfilled with materials free from lumps and foreign objects. Plastic warning tape shall be placed in
the trench six inches (6") below finished grade during the backfill operation.
Concrete handholes with cast iron or steel covers shall be required at locations where there is a change in the alignment of the cable greater than
forty five degrees (45). Underground cable splices, including splices in handholes, are not permitted. (Ord. 2006-4025, 6-19-2006)
Chapter 28
WIND AND SOLAR ENERGY DEVICES
5-28-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
Uniform standards and procedures shall be established to manage the development, siting, installation, and operation of small wind energy systems
(SWES) and solar energy collection panels (SECP) to ensure that these devices are installed in a manner that will protect and promote public health and
safety and preserve the village's character. (Ord. 2011-4377, 4-4-2011)
5-28-2: DEFINITIONS:
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (SWES): A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower or post and associated controls or
conversion electronics that is mounted on a principal structure or on the ground as an accessory use/structure and with a nameplate capacity of less than
fifty (50) kilowatts for residential systems and less than one hundred (100) kilowatts for nonresidential systems.
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTION PANELS (SECP): Solar energy collection panels are a type of photovoltaic (PV) system that collects energy from sunlight
and converts it into usable energy for a building. (Ord. 2011-4377, 4-4-2011)
5-28-3: SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (SWES):
(A) SWES shall be permitted on any roof in any nonresidential zoning district as a permitted accessory use.
(B) SWES shall be permitted on any roof in any residential zoning district as a permitted special use. No freestanding SWES shall be permitted in any
residential zoning district.
(C) SWES shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height above the elevation of the roof installation point, measured from the point of attachment to the top of
the turbine blade at its highest point. SWES that exceed fifteen feet (15') in height shall be subject to review and approval in accordance with a special
use permit. SWES shall be located no closer than ten feet (10') from the property line in a residential zoning district. No more than one SWES shall be
allowed per zoning lot.
(D) A ground mounted SWES shall maintain a twenty foot (20') clearance between the blades and the ground.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 252/460
(E) In a nonresidential district, all ground mounted SWES shall be set back a distance of at least one hundred ten percent (110%) of the height of the tower
and extended blades from the property line.
(F) SWES shall have a nonreflective finish and shall be neutral in color. No SWES shall be artificially lighted.
(G) SWES shall not be permitted in any location other than the surface of the structure roof, unless otherwise specified in the subject zoning district.
(H) SWES shall have an electronic braking system installed to regulate and limit the speed of the turbine in high wind events.
(I) SWES shall be primarily used to generate energy for the property where it is located.
(J) Any SWES not in service for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days shall be removed and the property on which it is located restored to its original
condition within thirty (30) days.
(K) SWES shall utilize single monopole type tower without guywires. Satellite dishes, antennas and other accessory devices shall not be collocated on an
SWES pole or device. Guyed towers and lattice towers are prohibited.
(L) The maximum noise level allowed for all SWES shall not exceed fifty five (55) decibels measured at all property lines at operational wind speed.
(M) A building permit shall be required prior to erecting any SWES. Mounting for such systems shall be in conformance with all electrical and building code
requirements to ensure wind and weight loading requirements are adhered to. Plans shall be stamped by an Illinois licensed structural engineer. (Ord.
2011-4377, 4-4-2011)
5-28-4: SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTION PANELS (SECP):
(A) Solar panels shall be permitted on any roof in any zoning district as permitted accessory uses. No freestanding solar panels shall be allowed in any
residential district.
(B) Solar panels shall be parallel with the roof line when possible and shall not be elevated more than thirty degrees (30) off the roof pitch where it is
attached or no more than five feet (5') whichever is less. Panels shall not extend beyond the roof line and shall be located no closer than ten feet (10')
from an adjacent property line. Panels shall not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the total roof surface of a structure.
(C) All frame and visible structural parts of a solar panel shall be neutral in color. No solar panel shall be artificially lighted.
(D) Solar panels shall not be permitted in any location other than the surface of the structure roof, unless otherwise specified in the subject zoning district.
(E) Any solar panels not in service for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days shall be removed and the property on which it is located restored to its
original condition within thirty (30) days.
(F) Solar shingles shall be permitted to cover any amount of roof without the above area and location limitation, provided that they are incorporated into
and made to appear as part of the roof, continuous in area without gap and do not cause glare to reflect onto adjacent properties.
(G) A building permit shall be required prior to erecting any solar panel. Mounting for such systems shall be in conformance with all electrical and building
code requirements to ensure that wind and weight load requirements are adhered to. Plans shall be stamped by an Illinois licensed structural engineer.
(Ord. 2011-4377, 4-4-2011)
Chapter 29
SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS, AND AQUATIC RECREATION FACILITIES
5-29-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is the intent of this chapter to establish setback requirements for swimming pools, spas, and aquatic recreation facilities. (Ord. 2019-4815, 3-18-2019)
5-29-2: STANDARDS:
Setback requirements for swimming pools, spas, and aquatic recreation facilities shall be as follows:
R-1 Not permitted in front of the principal building 20' 10' 10'
Zoning District Front Yard
Corner
Side Yard
Interior
Side Yard
Rear
Yard
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 253/460
R-2 Not permitted in front of the principal building 15' 10' 10'
R-3 Not permitted in front of the principal building 15' 10' 10'
R-4 20' 10' 10' 10'
C/U Per the Benedictine University Master Land Use Plan
O 20' 20' 10' 10'
B-1 25' 25' 10' 10'
B-2 25' 25' 10' 10'
B-3A1 10' 10' 10' 10'
B-3B 10' 10' 10' 10'
O-R 100' 100' 50' 10'
I-1 25' 25' 25' 10'
Notes:
1. Exception: Rooftop swimming pools and spas.
No swimming pool or spa shall be located nearer to the front lot line than the principal building.
(Ord. 2019-4815, 3-18-2019)
Title 6
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
6-1-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE PLATTING AND SUBDIVIDING OF LAND IN
THE VILLAGE OF LISLE, ILLINOIS, and is hereinafter referred to as the "village subdivision regulations" or as "this title". (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970)
6-1-2: PURPOSE:
Land subdivision is the first step in the process of community development. Once land has been divided into streets, blocks, lots and open spaces a
pattern has been established which determines how well community needs for residence, business and industry will be met. It also determines to a great
extent how well the community will be able to handle its traffic circulation problems, how well it will be able to meet the demand for home sites and how
efficiently and economically it will be able to provide the many services that are required.
After land has been subdivided and publicly recorded, it is very difficult and costly to correct defects and deficiencies in the subdivision layout and in the
facilities provided. In addition, a subdivided area sooner or later becomes a public responsibility. The roads and streets must be maintained and various
public services customary to urban areas must be provided. The welfare of the entire community is affected in many important respects. The guidance of
land development through subdivision regulation is therefore a matter of public concern. It is in the interest of the public, the developer and future owners
that subdivisions be conceived and designed and developed in accordance with sound rules and proper minimum standards.
These subdivision regulations are designed to provide for harmonious development of a subdivided area; for a coordinated layout; for the proper
arrangement of streets; for adequate and convenient spaces for traffic, utilities, recreation, light, air and access for firefighting equipment; and for adequate
provision of water, drainage, sewer and other sanitary facilities. These regulations shall not apply to landused only for agricultural purposes. (Ord. 365, 11-
3-1970)
6-1-3: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
This title is enacted by the 24th Illinois general assembly in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-5(1)(a) of the "Illinois enabling legislation for municipal
planning and zoning". (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970)
6-1-4: TERRITORIAL LIMITS OF REGULATIONS:
This title applies to all property located within the incorporated area of the village and up to a distance of one and one-half (11/2) miles of its corporate
Zoning District Front Yard
Corner
Side Yard
Interior
Side Yard
Rear
Yard
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 254/460
limits.
Should the village enter into a boundary agreement with any other municipality, then the terms and provisions of this title shall apply within such adjacent
unincorporated areas as provided in any applicable boundary agreement. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970)
6-1-5: SUBDIVISION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to subdivide land as defined in this title unless by plat in accordance with the regulations contained herein. No plat shall
be recorded and no property shall be sold from such plat unless approved as herein required. Further, if a development is a subdivision within the meaning
of subsection (E) under the definition of "subdivision" set forth in section 6-1-6 of this chapter, then the required plat of subdivision must unify or
consolidate the individual lots into one unified lot or parcel, unless an alternative configuration is approved by the board of trustees pursuant to subdivision
plat review. (Ord. 87-1525, 3-16-1987)
6-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
As used in these regulations, certain terms and conditions are herewith defined as follows:
BLOCK: The distance as measured along a street between intersecting streets from centerline to centerline; and where the context requires, it also means
the enclosed area within the perimeter of the streets or property lines enclosing it.
COMMISSION: The plan commission of the village of Lisle, Illinois.
DRAINAGE COURSE: A watercourse or indenture for the drainage of surface water.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a stripof land for the purpose of constructing and maintaining utilities, including, but not limited to,
sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewer or storm drainage courses and gas lines.
ENGINEER: The retained village engineer, or his authorized representative.
LOT: A piece or parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a building or a use, or as a unit for the transfer of ownership.
LOT WIDTH: The dimension of a lot measured on the building setback line.
MAP: A drawing showing one or more parcels of land.
OWNER: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the
land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this title.
PARKS: Areas of public land developed and maintained primarily as pleasurable landscaped areas providing for both active and passive recreational
pursuits, including tot lots, playgrounds, neighborhood parks, play fields and special purpose areas.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate or partnership, corporation, trust or any legal entity.
PLAT: A map showing a plan for the subdivision of land which is submitted for approval and is intended in final form for recording.
PRIVATE STREET: A purported street, way or strip of land reserved for the use of a limited number of persons or purposes as distinguished from a
publicly dedicated street.
PUBLIC WALKWAY: A public way designated for the use of pedestrian traffic.
SANITARY SEWER: A constructed conduit connected with a sewer system for the carrying of liquids and solids other than storm waters to a sanitary
treatment facility.
SETBACK: The building setback line of distance as measured from the nearest street, road or water shoreline.
STORM SEWER: A constructed conduit for carrying surface waters to a drainage course.
STREET: A way set aside for vehicular traffic, regardless of size or designation, but excluding private driveways serving only one parcel of land.
Alleys: Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the backs or to the sides of properties which otherwise abut on streets.
Arterial Streets And Highways: Those designed or utilized primarily for high vehicular speeds and/or for heavy volumes of traffic.
Collector Streets And Highways: Those designed or utilized to carry intermediate volumes of traffic from minor streets to arterial streets.
Local Streets: Those which are used or will be used primarily for access to abutting properties and which carry limited volumes of traffic.
Service Access Streets: Minor streets which are parallel and adjacent to higher classified thoroughfares and which serve to reduce the number of
access points to those thoroughfares and thereby increase traffic safety.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person commencing proceedings under this title to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION: Any of the following shall constitute a subdivision as that term is used in this title:
(A) The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous units on the last preceding tax roll, into two (2) or more parcels, sites or lots, any
one of which is less than five (5) acres for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 255/460
(B) Any construction or development which has an impact upon, involves or relates to present or proposed facilities fostering the public health, safety
and welfare, including, but not limited to, streets, alleys and ways, easements of access, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds,
storm water drainage and/or management facilities, water supply and distribution systems, sanitary sewers, or sewage collection and treatment;
(C) Any changes or alterations or any other activity having an impact upon existing topography or grades, or any other surface features, including,
but not limited to, changes to same made in connection with the construction, development, installation or operation of irrigation or sprinkler systems
designed to distribute water, excavation or other disturbance of the surface for construction of storm water managementfacilities, or of ornamental or
reflecting ponds; and partial or complete installation of new or reconfiguration of existing outdoor amusement or sporting facilities; and
(D) The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential, commercial or industrial structures involving the division or allocation of land for
the opening, widening or extension of any street or streets except private streets serving industrial structures;
(E) The revision or amendment of a recorded plat of subdivision or planned unit development if such revision constitutes a subdivision under
subsections (A), (B) or (C) of this definition; or
(F) The development of one or more lots or parcels as one unified use or development. Example: A five (5) lot parcel developed as one unit, improved
with a shopping center containing several buildings and a parking lot.
SURVEYOR: A duly registered land surveyor or engineer employed by the subdivider for the preparation of subdivision surveys or plats as required by this
title.
THOROUGHFARE PLAN: The part of the comprehensive plan1, now or hereafter adopted, which includes a major street and highway plan and sets forth
the location, alignment, dimensions, identification and classification of existing and proposed streets, highways and other thoroughfares.
VILLAGE: The village of Lisle, Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD: The board of trustees of the village of Lisle, Illinois.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The part of the comprehensive plan, now or hereafter adopted, including the ordinance and official zoning map which divides the
jurisdiction of the board of trustees into districts with regulations, requirements and procedures for the establishment of land use controls2. (Ord. 365, 11-3-
1970; amd. Ord. 87-1525, 3-16-1987)
Chapter 2
PRELIMINARY PLATS
6-2-1: ADVISORY MEETING:
Before preparing a preliminary plat, the subdivider should meet and consult informally with the plan commission for the purpose of ascertaining the
locations of proposed major streets, parks, playgrounds, school sites and other planned projects which may affect the property being considered for
subdivision. At the same meeting, the subdivider should review with the plan commission the minimum standards of subdivision design set forth in chapter
4 of this title. This informal review should prevent unnecessary and costly revisions in the layout and development of the subdivision. Formal application or
filing of a plat with the plan commission is not required for this informal advisory meeting. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6-2-2: APPROVAL:
After meeting informally with the plan commission, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat prior to the making of any street
improvements or the installation of any utilities. (Ord 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6-2-3: DATA:
The preliminary plat shall meet the standards of design as set forth in chapter 4 of this title, and shall show the following information:
(A) Scale of one hundred feet to one inch (100' = 1") or larger.
(B) Name of subdivision, name and address of the owners, the engineer or surveyor, and the owners of the adjacent property.
(C) Location of subdivision by section, town, range or other legal description together with small scale sketch showing location within the section.
(D) Date, approximate north point and graphic scale.
(E) Acreage of land to be subdivided.
(F) Zoning classification of lands to be subdivided and all adjacent lands.
(G) Contours at an interval of not greater than two feet (2') or at lesser intervals if deemed necessary by the plan commission.
(H) Boundary lines of area to be subdivided and their bearings and distances. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 256/460
(I) Existing and proposed easements and their locations, widths and distances, and identification of all village easements for water mains, sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, and/or overland storm drainage routes as well as for all utility easements for gas, electric, telephone and cable television. (Ord. 85-1345,
10-21-1985)
(J) Streets on and adjacent to the tract and their names, widths, approximate grades and other dimensions as may be required.
(K) Utilities on and adjacent to the tract showing proposed conditions to existing utility systems. Rear easements for utility poles and wires shall be
provided wherever possible.
(L) Lot lines and lot numbers.
(M) Sites and their acreages, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, schools or other public uses. Sites, if any, for semipublic,
commercial or multi-family uses.
(N) Minimum building setback lines.
(O) Location of railroads, drainage courses, permanent buildings or other structures and wooded areas.
(P) Water elevation of adjoining lakes, rivers and streams at the date of survey, and their approximate high and low water elevations. All elevations shall be
mean sea level or some other assumed markable datum. When the subdivision borders a lake, river or stream, the distance and bearings of a meander
line shall be established five feet (5') above the required high water elevation of the lake, river or stream.
(Q) All subdivided lots within the village limits must be served by public sewer facilities. Any subdivision over two (2) acres in size must be served by public
water facilities.
(R) Other reasonable information, such as soil tests, if so requested by the commission in order to make a proper review of the site.
(S) Copies of proposed deed restrictions, if any, shall beattached to the preliminary plat. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6-2-4: PROCEDURE:
Any person desiring to subdivide land as herein defined shall comply with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 87-1525, 3-16-1987)
(A) The person requesting a subdivision shall present thirty six (36) copies of a preliminary plat and supplementary material to the building department,
along with a written application for conditional approval of same. Simultaneously, the subdivider shall file copies of same with any or all of the following,
as appropriate:
1. The Illinois department of transportation with respect to roadway access where such access is a state highway;
2. The relevant local highway authority with respect to all other roadway access; or
3. The DuPage County health department with respect to sewage disposal systems if any part of the platted land will not be served by a public sewer
system.
The subdivider shall request that each department or authority listed above review the application based solely upon safety or access control
standards and shall request that the department or authority provide written approval or disapproval, and if disapproval, the reasons therefor along
with improvements that would remove the disapproval, to the plan commission and corporate authorities not later than ninety (90) days from the date
the application is received. (Ord. 92-2299, 8-3-1992)
(B) The preliminary plat shall not be forwarded to the plan commission until it receives approval by the village engineer.
(C) The plan commission chairman shall submit a copy of the preliminary plat to the following:
1. Lisle township supervisor;
2. Lisle Community Unit School District 202 and/or Naperville Community School District 203, as the case may be;
3. Superintendent of schools, District 202 and/or District 203;
4. Lisle/Woodridge fire protection district;
5. Lisle park district and/or other appropriate park districts;
6. Lisle library district; and
7. Appropriate agencies providing sewer and water services, if other than the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 257/460
(D) The plan commission chairman, when submitting the copy of a preliminary plat to the above, shall request that each return a copy of the preliminary
plat along with notations and recommendations to the plan commission within fourteen (14) days of receipt of said preliminary plat.
(E) The plan commission shall approve, disapprove or approve subject to modification the said preliminary plat within ninety (90) days from the date of the
application or the date of filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by
mutual consent.
1. If a plat is disapproved, then within said ninety (90) days the plan commission shall furnish to the applicant a written statement setting forth the
reasons for such disapproval.
2. If a plat is approved subject to modifications, then within said ninety (90) days the plan commission shall furnish to the applicant a written statement
specifying the nature of the required modifications.
3. If the proposed plan of subdivision as shown on the preliminary plat is approved, the original plat and two (2) prints or copies of the plat shall be
endorsed by the plan commission as follows:
The proposed plan of subdivision as shown on this plat and accompanying documents, has received tentative approval by the plan commission of
the village, and said plan commission is now ready to receive the final plat for consideration.
PLAN COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DU PAGE )
APPROVED THIS day of , A.D., 20 .
PLAN COMMISSION
VILLAGE OF LISLE, ILLINOIS
By:
Chairman of Plan Commission
4. The action of the plan commission shall be noted on three (3) copies of the preliminary plat with any notations made at the time of approval or
disapproval of the specific changes required. The original of the preliminary plat, so endorsed, shall remain on file with the plan commission. One
copy, so endorsed, shall be returned to the subdivider, and one copy, so endorsed, shall be forwarded to the village board of trustees.
(F) If a plat is approved by the plan commission, the village board of trustees shall accept or reject said plat within thirty (30) days after its next regularly
scheduled meeting following the action of the plan commission. (Ord. 87-1525, 3-16-1987)
That upon receipt of an application for a residential subdivision (excluding plats of consolidation and vacation) and accompanying subdivision plat
and prior to the planning and zoning commission regular meeting on the request, the village shall send notice of subdivision request to all surrounding
property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') (excluding public rights of way) of the subject property. (Ord. 2007-4145, 10-15-2007)
(G) The village clerk shall attach a certified copy of the resolution of approval or disapproval to a copy of thepreliminary plat. If the proposed plat is
disapproved, the resolution shall state the reasons for the disapproval. A copy of the resolution shall be filed in the office of the village clerk.
(H) Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute acceptance of the final plat and shall not qualify a plat for recording. The approval of the preliminary
plat shall lapse unless a final plat based thereon is submitted to the village within one year from the date of such approval in the manner specified in
this title. (Ord. 87-1525, 3-16-1987)
6-2-5: SUBDIVISION OF A PORTION OF A LARGER TRACT:
Whenever part of a tract is proposed to be subdivided and it is intended to subdivide additional parts of the tract in the future, a sketch plan for the entire
tract shall be submitted to the plan commission at the time the preliminary plat for the first part of the tract to be platted is submitted. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970;
amd. 1979 Code)
6-2-6: REVIEW CHARGE:
A charge shall be made for the examination and approval or disapproval of every preliminary plat reviewed by the plan commission. At the time a
preliminary plat is submitted for approval, the subdivider shall also submit a check payable to the village according to the schedule of fees for plat review,
which the village may establish from time to time. The subdivider submitting a plat shall be responsible for all fees incurred by the village pertaining to
legal, engineering and land planning expenses incurred by the village as a result of the submission of said preliminary plat. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd.
1979 Code)
Chapter 3
FINAL PLATS
6-3-1: APPROVAL:
A final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and it may constitute only a portion of the preliminary plat which the subdivider
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 258/460
proposes to record and develop. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970)
6-3-2: DEDICATION OF PARK LANDS AND SCHOOL SITES:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or a final plat of planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will be required to
dedicate land for park and recreational purposes and for school sites, to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development. The
dedication of aforesaid land and any other land dedicated to the village shall be accompanied by a title insurance policy acceptable to the village attorney.
A cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the village, will be acceptable in accordance with the
following criteria and formula. (Ord. 88-1765, 12-5-1988)
6-3-2-1: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING PARK AND RECREATION LAND DEDICATION:
(A) Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for
dedication. The total requirement shall be five and five-tenths (5.5) acres of land per one thousand(1,000) of ultimate population in accordance with the
following classifications:
Types Of
Recreation Areas
Size Range
Minimum
Acres Per
1,000 People
Play lot Minimum 8,000 square feet Not applicable
School-park (neighborhood playground) Minimum park of 5 acres 1.25
Neighborhood park Minimum 31/2 acres 1.0
Districtwide park or play field Minimum 4 acres up to 30 acres 1.25
Communitywide recreation park Minimum 12 acres up to 30 acres 2.0
Total 5.5
(B) Location: The comprehensive park and recreation plan and/or the "Standards By Types Of Recreation And Park Areas", as adopted by the Lisle park
district, shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. A park site adjoining all elementary school sites of not less than five (5) acres shall be considered
a requirement. A central location which will serve equally the entire development is most desirable. In large developments, these sites can be located
throughout the development according to established standards for park area distances.
(C) Credit For Private Open Spaces And Recreation Areas: When subdividers or developers provide their own open spaces for recreation areas and
facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for local public recreational services. Depending on the site of the development, a portion of the park
and recreation area in subdivisions or planned unit developments may, at the option of the village board, be provided in the form of "private" open
space in lieu of dedicated "public" open space. The extent of same shall be determined by the village board, based upon the needs of the projected
residents and in conformance to the total park and recreation land forthe general area.
In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation of
recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer as part of his obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including specifications of facilities to
be installed, must be approved by the village and before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or developer must guarantee
that these private recreation areas will be permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal documents. Private
"swimming clubs" are included in this provision. When an adjustment for private recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the total
park land dedication that would have been required from the subdivision or planned unit development and then subtract the credit to be given. (Ord.
674, 1-18-1977)
6-3-2-2: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION:
(A) Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate number of students to be generated by a subdivision or planned unit development shall bear directly
upon the amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites. The land dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of: 1)
estimated children to be served in each such school classification over the 2) maximum recommended number of students to be served in each such
school classification as stated herein, and then applying such ratio to the 3) said minimum recommended number of acres for a school site of each
such school classification as stated herein. The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed to have sufficient land for school sites to
serve the estimated increased children in each such school classification.
(B) School Classifications And Size Of School Site: School classifications and size of school sites within the village shall be determined in accordance with
the following criteria:
School Classification
By Grades
Maximum Number Of
Students For Each
Minimum Number Of Acres Of Land For Each School Site Of Such Classification
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 259/460
Such School
Classification
Elementary schools,
600 11
Junior high schools, grades 6 through 8 900 19
High schools, grades 9 through 12 2,300 48
(C) Location: The comprehensive school plan and/or the standards adopted by the affected school district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites.
(Ord. 674, 1-18-1977)
6-3-2-3: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF PARK AND SCHOOL SITES:
The village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of or in combination with the land dedication required when so
determined by the village. The cash contributions in lieu of park and recreation land as hereinbefore classified, shall be available to serve the immediate or
future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for the improvement of other existing local park and recreation land which already
serves such needs. The cash contributions in lieu of school sites shall be held in trust by the village, or other public body designated by the village, solely
for use in the acquisition of land for a school site to serve the immediate or future needs of children from that subdivision or development or for the
improvement to any existing school site which already serves such needs. Improvement under this section shall be liberally construed and shall include,
but shall not be limited to, the development of parking lots; sidewalks; traffic signals; arterial streets; collector streets; internal roadways; connections with
sewer, water and electrical lines; and street lights; playgrounds; recreation grounds; athletic fields; excavation and site preparation, and the purchase of
any material, goods or equipment necessary to said development and construction. Improvement shall further include the construction of buildings;
additions to existing school buildings; remodeled or renovated noninstructional spaces in classrooms and the purchase of prefabricated classroom units to
be used at a school site. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land dedication, or cash contribution in lieu of school site is not
expended for the purposes set forth herein within ten (10) years from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded to the developer who made such contribution.
(Ord. 97-2843, 2-3-1997)
(A) Fair Market Value: The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the area improved as specified
herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated as park and recreation and school sites. It has been determined that the impact fee of such improved
land in and surrounding the village is established in the village of Lisle annual fee ordinance per acre and such figure shall be used in making any
calculation herein unless thesubdivider or developer files a written objection thereto. In the event of any such objection, the developer shall submit an
appraisal showing the fair market value of such improved land in the area of his development or other evidence thereof and final determination of said
fair market value per acre of such improved land shall be made by the village board based upon such information submitted by the subdivider or
developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the village board by the park district, school district or others. (Ord. 99-3166, 12-6-1999;
amd. Ord. 2006-4026, 6-19-2006)
(B) Criteria For Requiring Dedication And A Fee: There will be situations in subdivisions or planned unit developments when a combination of land
dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These occasions will arise when:
1. Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location for a park or school site. That portion of the land within the subdivision falling
within the park or school location shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional
land that would have been required to be dedicated;
2. A major part of the local park or recreational site or school site has already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the
development to complete the site. The remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required.
(Ord. 97-2843, 2-3-1997)
6-3-2-4: DENSITY FORMULA:
The following table of population density or the most current version of such table as prepared from time to time by the Illinois School Consulting
Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc., is generally indicative of current and short range projected trends in family size for new construction and
shall be used in calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu thereof unless a written objection is filed
thereto by the subdivider or developer: TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
CHILDREN PER UNIT
Type Of Unit
Preschool
0_4 Years
Elementary
Grades K_5
5_10 Years
Junior High
Grades 6_8
11_13 Years
Total
Grades K_8
5_13 Years
High School
Grades 9_12
14_17 Years
Adults
18 Years +
Total Per
Dwelling Unit
Detached Single-Family
2 bedroom 0.113 0.136 0.048 0.184 0.020 1.700 2.017
3 bedroom 0.292 0.369 0.173 0.542 0.184 1.881 2.899
4 bedroom 0.418 0.530 0.298 0.828 0.360 2.158 3.764
5 bedroom 0.283 0.345 0.248 0.593 0.300 2.594 3.770
Attached Single-Family
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 260/460
1 bedroom 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 1.193 1.193
2 bedroom 0.064 0.088 0.048 0.136 0.038 1.752 1.990
3 bedroom 0.212 0.234 0.058 0.292 0.059 1.829 2.392
4 bedroom 0.323 0.322 0.154 0.476 0.173 2.173 3.145
Apartments
Efficiency 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 1.294 1.294
1 bedroom 0.000 0.002 0.001 0.003 0.001 1.754 1.758
2 bedroom 0.047 0.086 0.042 0.128 0.046 1.693 1.914
3 bedroom 0.052 0.234 0.123 0.357 0.118 2.526 3.053
Note:
There are only 3 significant categories provided in this chart. Because of the similarity of yields of all types of attached single-family dwelling units, only 1
category is provided. The same is true with apartments; thus, only 1 category. Because of the relatively short history of some newer types of detached and
attached single-family units, individual evaluations may be necessary.
Copyright 1996
Illinois School Consulting Service/
Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc.
Number 96-7 Naperville, Illinois
(Ord. 97-2843, 2-3-1997)
6-3-2-5: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND:
Where the comprehensive plan or the standards of the village call for a larger amount of park and recreational land or school sites in a particular
subdivision or planned unit development than the developer is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer's contribution shall be reserved
for subsequent purchase by the village or other public body designated by the village, provided that such acquisition is made within one year from the date
of approval of the final plat. (Ord. 674, 1-18-1977)
6-3-2-6: COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENTS:
Where the subdivision or planned unit development is less than forty (40) acres, public open space or a school site which is to be dedicated should, where
possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce usable recreation areas or school sites without hardship on a
particular developer. (Ord. 674, 1-18-1977)
6-3-2-7: TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING:
The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on sites dedicated
for park and recreational uses shall not differ greatly from surrounding land. (Ord. 674, 1-18-1977)
6-3-2-8: IMPROVED SITES:
All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electricity, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter) as
applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provision made therefor. The sidewalks and trees normally included within the definition of "improved"
sites may be deleted due to the delay time between dedication of any such school site and the construction of school facilities thereon. (Ord. 674, 1-18-
1977)
6-3-3: CONTRIBUTION FOR LIBRARY PURPOSES:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or of a final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer shall be required to
pay a cash contribution for library purposes in accordance with the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 81-987, 5-19-1981)
6-3-4: PAYMENT OF CASH CONTRIBUTIONS FOR LIBRARY PURPOSES:
(A) A planned unit development must comply with all provisions of section 6-3-3 of this chapter.
(B) The cash contributions required by this chapter shall also be required as a condition to the annexation of any land to the village and provisions therefor
shall be incorporated in any preannexation agreement governing such land. (Ord. 81-987, 5-19-1981)
6-3-5: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
The final plat shall give the following information:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 261/460
(A) The plat shall be at a scale of one hundred feet to one inch (100' to 1") or larger.
(B) Date, title, name and location of subdivision, graphic scale and true north point.
(C) All dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be tied to primary control points. Locations and descriptions of said control points
shall be given. Except where deemed clearly unreasonable or infeasible by the plan commission, these control points shall be the located section
corners of the state. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970)
(D) Name and right of way width of each street, easement, or other rights of way. Each street name shall be subject to approval or modification by the
village board of trustees. A list of suggested street names shall be in the custody of the building department and shall be made available upon request.
This list is incorporated herein as if set out in full. (Ord. 95-2632, 4-3-1995)
(E) Lot numbers, lot lines and frontage dimensions.
(F) Purpose of which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved.
(G) Minimum building setback lines.
(H) Location and description of monuments.
(I) Names and location of adjoining subdivision and streets, the location of adjoining unplatted properties, and the names and addresses of the owners of
adjoining unplatted properties.
(J) Certification on plat of title showing that the applicant is the owner and a statement by such owner dedicating streets, rights of way and any other sites
for public use.
(K) Certification on plat by surveyor or engineers as to the accuracy of survey and plat.
(L) Certification by the DuPage County health department whenindividual sewage disposal or water systems are to be installed.
(M) Certification that the subdivider has posted a duly executed completion bond with the village board, which is in an amount determined by the board,
based upon an estimate of cost prepared by the village engineer, to be sufficient to complete the improvements and installations in compliance with
these regulations, is with a surety satisfactory to the board and which specifies the time for the completion of the improvements and installations.
(N) Cross sections, profiles and grades of streets, curbs, gutters and sidewalks showing locations of in-street utilities, and drawn to standard scales and
elevations shall be attached to the final plat.
(O) Protective covenants shall either be placed directly on the final plat or attached thereto in form for recording.
(P) Certification on plat by the plan commission chairman that the plat has been approved for recording in the office of the county recorder of deeds. (Ord.
365, 11-3-1970)
(Q) A notarized statement indicating, to the best of the owner's knowledge, the school district in which each tract, parcel, lot or block lies. (Ord. 98-2954, 1-
19-1998)
6-3-6: PROCEDURE:
Any person desiring to subdivide shall comply with the requirements of this title. Application for final approval of a plat shall be made no later than one year
after preliminary approval has been granted. Further, the steps for approval of a preliminary and final plat may be combined if a petitioner wishes to
proceed directly to final plat approval. (Ord. 87-1525, 3-18-1987)
(A) The person requesting a subdivision or resubdivision shall present thirty six (36) copies of the final plat with any street profiles or plans required by the
building department. Within three (3) business days after the plat is submitted to the village for approval, the village shall notify the president of the
school board of each school district in which the proposed subdivided land is located that the plat has been submitted for approval and is available for
inspection. Said notice shall contain the date, time and place of the hearing to approve or disapprove the plat, and shall be served by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by personal delivery. (Ord. 92-2299, 8-3-1992)
(B) One copy of the final plat shall be transmitted to the village engineer who will check said plat as to computations, monuments, etc., and that all the
required improvements have been completed to the satisfaction of the village officialshaving jurisdiction, or, in the case where a security bond has been
posted, that it is sufficient to cover the cost of the required improvements. If found satisfactory, he will return the copy of the final plat to the plan
commission with his approval certified thereon within ten (10) days of receipt thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 262/460
(C) One copy shall be transmitted to the DuPage County health department when individual sewerage disposal or water supply systems are to be
installed. If the plat meets the approval of said DuPage County health department, it shall return the copy with its approval certified thereon within ten
(10) days of receipt thereof.
(D) The plan commission shall review the proposed plat and accompanying documents and shall recommend approval, denial or modification of the final
plat to the village board of trustees.
When the final plat has been approved by the plan commission, the following shall be written or stamped upon such plat and two (2) copies thereof:
PLAN COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF DU PAGE )
APPROVED THIS day of , A.D., 20 .
PLAN COMMISSION
VILLAGE OF LISLE, ILLINOIS
By:
Chairman of Plan Commission
The original and two (2) copies so endorsed shall be returned to the village board for their consideration.
(E) When all required drawings, maps, and other documents have been submitted and if all such material meets the requirements herein, the village board
of trustees shall approve or disapprove the proposed plat within sixty (60) days from the date of filing the last required document or from the date of
filing the application for final approval, whichever date is later. The sixty (60) day period may be extended by mutual consent of the parties.
(F) If the proposed plat is disapproved, the village clerk shall attach a certified copy of the resolution disapproving same to a copy of the plat. This
resolution shall state the reasons for the disapproval. A copy of the resolution shall be filed in the office of the village clerk.
(G) If the plat is approved, the village clerk shall attach a certified copy of the resolution to a copy of the plat. A copy of the resolution shall be filed in the
office of the village clerk. (Ord. 87-1525, 3-18-1987)
6-3-7: TOPOGRAPHIC AND PROFILE STUDIES:
(A) The plan commission shall not approve the final plat unless, in addition to any other requirements herein set forth, topographical and profile studies are
submitted with the final plat having on their face the certification of a registered professional engineer, and the owner of the land or his duly authorized
attorney, stating as follows:
STATE OF ILLINOIS ) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE )
To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part
thereof, or, that if such surface water drainage will be changed, adequate provision has been made for collection and diversion of such surface waters
into public areas or drains, which the subdivider has a right to use, and that such surface waters will not be deposited on the property of adjoining land
owners in such concentrations as may cause damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of the subdivision.
Dated this day of , A.D., 20 .
Engineer Owner or Attorney
(B) The topographical and profile studies required herein shall not be recorded, but shall be retained and filed by the village clerk, together with the final
plat as permanent public documents.
(C) The topographical and profile studies required herein may be prepared as a subsidiary study or studies separate from, but of the same scale and size
as, the subdivision plat and shall be prepared in such a manner as will permit the topographical study or studies to be used as overlays to the
subdivision plat. (Ord. 675, 2-15-1977)
Chapter 4
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
6-4-1: MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
No final plat of any subdivision shall be approved unless the subdivider shall comply with the following general principles and requirements. All of the
improvements required in this chapter shall be constructed only after the plans and specifications thereof have been approved by the appropriate public
official, and said requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the jurisdiction of the plan commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 263/460
In general, the final plat shall conform to the official thoroughfare plan and other parts of the adopted comprehensive plan of the village. (Ord. 365, 11-3-
1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6-4-2: THOROUGHFARE PLAN:
Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of an arterial or collector street or highway, so designated on the thoroughfare plan, such part shall
be platted by the subdivider in the location and at the width indicated on said plan. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6-4-3: PUBLIC FACILITIES PLAN:
Where a proposed park, playground or other recreational area, proposed school site or other public ground under the adopted comprehensive plan of the
village is located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision, such proposed public ground or part, if not dedicated to the village, shall be reserved
for a period of not less than five (5) years from the date of final approval of the final plat by the commission, for acquisition by purchase or otherwise. (Ord.
365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6-4-4: OPEN SPACE:
Where held appropriate by the commission, open spaces suitably located and of adequate size for parks, playgrounds, or other recreational purposes for
local or neighborhood use shall be provided for in the proposed subdivision, and, if not dedicated to the public, shall be reserved for the common use of all
property owners in the proposed subdivision by covenant in the deeds. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6-4-5: LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING:
The right is reserved to disapprove any subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding or which contains extremely poor drainage facilities. (Ord. 365, 11-
3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6-4-6: COMMUNITY ASSETS:
In all subdivisions due regard shall be shown for natural features such as trees, unusual rock formations and watercourses; for sites which have historical
significance; and for similar assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision and to the community. The plan commission
may prepare a list of all such features within its area of subdivision jurisdiction which it deems worthy of preservation. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979
Code)
6-4-7: MONUMENTS AND STAKES:
Concrete monuments, or other monuments as approved by the village engineer, shall be set at all corners of the property. Concrete monuments shall be at
least thirty six inches (36") in length and four inches (4") in diameter or four inches (4") square. The monument must have a one inch (1") iron pin at least
six inches (6") long set flush with the top of the monument.
Permanent iron pins at least twenty four inches (24") long and three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter must be set at the corner of all lots. (Ord. 365, 11-3-
1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6-4-8: STREET AND BLOCK LAYOUT:
The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the jurisdiction of the commission:
(A) The street layout shall be in general conformity with a plan for the most advantageous development of adjoining areas and the entire neighborhood.
(B) All lots within the subdivision must be served by public streets.
(C) Where appropriate to the design, streets shall be established to avoid jogs at intersections and to promote continuity of local streets and those of
higher classification.
(D) Streets shall be established to take advantage of the contour of the land so as to produce usable lots, cause a minimum of cutting and filling, and to
produce streets with reasonable grades, as defined in section 6-4-11 of this chapter.
(E) Certain proposed streets, where appropriate, shall be extended to the boundary line of the tract to provide for adequate circulation of traffic within the
vicinity.
(F) Streets shall intersect other streets as near to a ninety degree (90) angle as topography and other factors permit. Intersections of streets with arterial
or collector streets shall be limited to a minimum angle of seventy degrees (70) unless specifically approved by the commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 264/460
(G) Whenever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of a street or alley adjacent to the proposed subdivision which conforms to the thoroughfare plan,
the remainder of the street or alley shall be platted to the prescribed width within the proposed subdivision.
(H) Street and right of way widths shall conform to those indicated in the thoroughfare plan. Where such widths are not prescribed therein, the widths shall
not be less than the minimums stated in section 6-4-9 of this chapter.
(I) Alleys shall be platted: 1) in the rear of all lots to be used for business; 2) in the rear of residential lots fronting on arterial or collector streets as a means
of safe access thereto. Alleys will not be approved in other locations in residential areas, unless required by unusual topography or other exceptional
conditions.
(J) Lands abutting arterial or collector streets shall be platted with the view of making the lots, if for residential use, desirable for such use by cushioning
the impact of heavy traffic on such trafficways; and with the view also of minimizing interference with traffic on such trafficways as well as the accident
hazard. This may be accomplished in several ways:
1. By platting the lots abutting such trafficways at generous depth, with setbacks or front yards at least ten feet (10') greater or deeper than otherwise
required; and providing vehicular access to them by means of either alleys or service drives in the rear, or frontage access roads next to the
trafficway, connected therewith at infrequent intervals;
2. By a collector street platted more or less parallel with the highway or thoroughfare, six hundred (600) to one thousand feet (1,000') distant therefrom,
from which loop streets or dead end streets would extend toward the highway, the ends of which provide access to the lots abutting the highway to
their rear.
(K) Dead end streets are often desirable and will be approved if limited to six hundred sixty feet (660') long.
(L) Closed subdivisions (with 1 exit) shall be limited to one hundred (100) dwelling units.
(M) Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth, unless, in the opinion of the commission, prevented by
unusual topography or other physical conditions.
(N) The length of blocks shall be such as are appropriate, in the opinion of the commission, for the locality and type development contemplated, but shall
not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') when the average lot size does not exceed an acre in area.
(O) In any block over eight hundred feet (800') in length, the commission shall require that a crosswalk or pedestrianway, not less than ten feet (10') wide,
be provided near the center and entirely across the block. Within this ten foot (10') right of way shall be constructed a concrete sidewalk five feet (5') in
width.
(P) The number of intersecting streets along arterial and collector streets shall be held to a minimum, and where practicable, blocks along such trafficways
shall not be less than eight hundred feet (800') in length. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6-4-9: MINIMUM WIDTHS FOR STREETS AND ALLEY RIGHTS OF WAY AND UTILITY EASEMENTS:
The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the jurisdiction of the commission:
(A) Major streets and highways: As designated by the thoroughfare plan, but not less than one hundred feet (100') wide in any case.
(B) Collector streets: As designated by the thoroughfare plan, but not less than eighty feet (80') wide in any case.
(C) Local streets: Sixty six feet (66') wide.
All dead end streets shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right of way diameter of one hundred twenty feet (120').
(D) Alleys and service drives: Twenty feet (20') wide.
(E) Easements for utilities: Where required, shall be at least ten feet (10') wide, or as required by the village engineer and shall be centered on the rear or
side lot line. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6-4-10: MINIMUM PAVEMENT WIDTHS AND SURFACE TYPE:
The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the jurisdiction of the commission:
(A) Pavement widths for arterial and collector streets will be as designated in the thoroughfare plan. Where required to be provided as part of the
subdivision, the subdivider will be responsible for no less than thirty four feet (34') face to face of curb.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 265/460
(B) Local streets and dead end streets shall have minimum paved widths of twenty seven feet (27') face to face of curb. The pavement of a turning circle at
the end of a dead end street shall have a minimum outside diameter of one hundred feet (100'). The right of way shall extend a minimum of ten feet
(10') beyond the edge of pavement.
(C) Alleys shall have minimum widths of twenty feet (20').
(D) All streets and alleys shall be provided with curb and gutter and shall be designed in accordance with the standard detail sheets of streets, parking lots,
drives and alleys of the village as from time to time amended1, and the state of Illinois department of transportation "Design Manual For The Structural
Design Of Bituminous And Concrete Pavements", latest edition.
All work shall be constructed in accordance with the state of Illinois department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", latest edition. In addition all other improvements required by this chapter shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
applicable standard details of the village as from time to time amended and applicable county, state or federal regulations.
All improvements shall be constructed according to the plans and specifications that have been approved by the village engineer and village manager.
(E) Combined curb and gutter shall be required on all streets. Height of curb and type of combination concrete curb and gutter shall be of the type, height
and width as required by the village. Concrete curb and gutter shall be reinforced longitudinally and of the design as currently required by the village.
All work shall be constructed in accordance with current standard specifications for road and bridge construction, state of Illinois division of highways.
(F) Curb and combined curb and gutter shall be required on all streets. Height of curb and type of combination concrete curb and gutter shall be of the
type, height and width as required by the village. Concrete curb and gutter shall be reinforced longitudinally and of the design as currently required by
the village. All work shall be constructed in accordance with current standard specifications for road and bridge construction, state of Illinois division of
highways. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6-4-11: STREET GRADES, CURBS AND SIGHT DISTANCES:
The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the jurisdiction of the commission:
(A) The grades of any street or alley shall not be less than five-tenths percent (0.5%).
(B) Arterial, collector or secondary highways as designated by the thoroughfare plan shall be limited to a maximum grade of five percent (5%).
(C) Local streets shall be limited to a maximum grade of ten percent (10%).
(D) Alleys shall be limited to a maximum grade of ten percent (10%) where they are primarily for residential service, but shall be limited to a maximum of
eight percent (8%) when used to provide service to commercial property.
(E) Pedestrianways or crosswalks shall be limited to a maximum grade of fifteen percent (15%) unless steps of an acceptable design are to be
constructed.
(F) All changes in street grade of one percent (1%) or more shall be connected by vertical curves. The length of the vertical curve will be determined on
the basis of providing stopping sight distances for each road classification where design speed for arterial and collector streets is forty (40) miles per
hour and local streets is twenty five (25) miles per hour. In no case shall the length of the required vertical curb be less than fifteen (15) times the
algebraic difference in rate of grades for arterial and collector streets or one-half (1/2) this minimum for all other streets.
(G) The radii of curvature on the centerline of the street shall not be less than that required to produce stopping sight distance, as defined in subsection (F)
of this section. In no case, however, shall the radii of curvature for arterials, collectors and secondary streets be less than three hundred feet (300') or
for local streets, service drives and alleys be less than fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6-4-12: INTERSECTIONS:
The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the jurisdiction of the commission:
(A) At a street and an alley intersection, property line corners shall be rounded by an arc; minimum radii of which shall be ten (10) and five feet (5')
respectively. The street curb intersection shall be rounded by a radii of at least twenty five feet (25').
The above minimum radii shall be increased when the smallest angle of intersection is less than sixty degrees (60).
(B) Where, in the opinion of the commission, the centerline profiles of streets presented as part of the preliminary plat do not clearly indicate that adequate
intersection design will be accomplished, the commission may request an intersection detail at a scale not to exceed one inch equals twenty feet
(1"=20'), which detail will clearly represent the construction details for said intersection.
(C) Intersections shall be designed so as to avoid abrupt changes in longitudinal or transverse slope. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 266/460
6-4-13: LOTS:
The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the jurisdiction of the commission:
(A) The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the proposed subdivision and for the type of development contemplated.
(B) Excessive depth in relation to widths shall be avoided. A proportion of not more than three to one (3:1) normally shall be considered appropriate.
(C) Every lot shall abut on a street. Lots for residential purposes shall meet the size requirements of the zoning regulations of the village and also the
requirements relative to building setback and side yard requirements.
(D) Corner lots for residential use shall be platted at least twenty percent (20%) wider than interior lots in order to permit conformance with the setback
required by the zoning regulations on the side streets.
(E) Residential lots fronting on arterial and collector streets should have extra depths to permit deep setback for the buildings.
(F) Double frontage lots and reversed frontage lots shall not be platted except as hereinbefore permitted under subsection 6-4-8(J) of this chapter.
(G) Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to the right of way line of the street on which the lot fronts. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979
Code)
6-4-14: UTILITIES AND DRAINAGE:
The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the jurisdiction of the commission:
(A) Water Supply: All residential, commercial, industrial and community facility buildings or structures shall be served by an adequate water supply and
distribution system. The design of the system shall be in accordance with the requirements of the state of Illinois department of health, national board
of fire underwriters and in accordance with the current standard details2, regulations and specifications of the village.
(B) Sanitary Sewers: Sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the standard details3.
(C) Storm Sewers: Adequate provisions shall be made for proper drainage of stormwater. The design of the drainage system within the development shall
anticipate and provide capacity for other drainage from naturally tributary land. Such design shall provide adequate capacity for transmitting such
drainage from the other tributary areas on the basis of the ultimate development of such other tributary areas, but such drainage system need not make
provision for the retention of drainage from other tributary areas. The storm sewer system shall be designed in accordance with the current standard
details, regulations and specifications of the village. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
(D) Underground Lines Required: All utility distribution lines for broadband telecommunications, electric, and gas service in the subdivision shall be placed
underground entirely throughout a subdivided area. Subject to the foregoing requirement to place utility distribution lines underground, installation of
such facilities shall be made in compliance with the applicable orders, rules and regulations of the state commerce commission now or hereafter
effective, and the subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with rules and regulations now and hereafter effective and filed with the commission
pursuant to the state public utilities act, or any public utility whose service will be required for the subdivision with respect to the provision of such
facilities.
(E) Location Of Utility Lines: Underground broadband telecommunications, electric and gas service facilities shall be placed within easements or dedicated
public ways in a manner which will not conflict with other underground services. Further, all aboveground service facilities, as defined in title 5, "Zoning
Regulations", of this code shall be located so as to minimize the aesthetic impact on the environment and create no hazard to the public. The utility
lines shall be parallel to and not less than twelve inches (12") from the property lines. Corner markers as required in this code shall not be disturbed by
the installation of utility lines. See section 5-23-11 of this code for further regulations regarding the permitted location of aboveground utility facilities.
(Ord. 2008-4218, 8-4-2008)
6-4-15: OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the jurisdiction of the commission:
(A) Sidewalks: Sidewalks at least five feet (5') wide and constructed of concrete pavement with a minimum thickness of four inches (4") shall be
constructed on both sides of every street.
(B) Driveways: Within the village limits, the subdivider shall install paved driveway approaches from the lot line to the street for each connection to the
street with concrete pavement of minimum thickness of six inches (6"), bituminous material of minimum thickness of six inches (6") or crushed stone
base of minimum thickness of six inches (6") and two inches (2") of bituminous surface.
Driveways shall be constructed so as not to impede the surface drainage system and where curbs are not required, the subdivider shall provide one of
the following types of improvements if necessary to provide for surface drainage:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 267/460
1. A corrugated metal pipe at least twelve inches (12") in diameter and fourteen feet (14') in length to be placed for each driveway approach. Where in
the opinion of the village engineer a larger than twelve inch (12") diameter or fourteen feet (14') length pipe is required, same shall be provided as
the village engineer requires.
2. A properly dipped or swaled concrete pavement fourteen feet (14') in length, of at least six inches (6") thickness, at the entrance of each driveway is
designed so as not to create a hazard to the underparts of automobiles. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970; amd. 1979 Code)
(C) Street (Parkway) Trees: (Rep. by Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005)
(D) Screen Planting: (Rep. by Ord. 2005-3890, 1-17-2005)
(E) Street Name Signs: It shall be the duty of each and every subdivider of each and every subdivision in the village to erect street identification signs
indicating the names of streets at his own costs as indicated on the final plat within a reasonable time after the approval thereof4. The signs shall be
placed as close to the intersection of the street right of way as practicable. The corner on which the sign is to be erected shall receive the prior approval
of the village. (Ord. 78-808, 1-19-1978)
(F) Street Lighting: (Rep. by Ord. 2006-4025, 6-19-2006)
(G) Letter Of Credit: A letter of credit shall be posted with the village in compliance with section 5-18-6 of this code. (Ord. 2000-3200, 2-21-2000)
Chapter 5
MODIFICATIONS, EXCEPTIONS AND RESUBDIVISIONS
6-5-1: MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS:
The general principles of design and minimum requirements for the layout of subdivisions, as set forth in chapter 4 of this title, may be varied by the
corporate authorities in the case of a subdivision large enough to constitute a more or less self-contained neighborhood which is to be developed in
accordance with the comprehensive plan safeguarded by appropriate restrictions, and which, in the judgment of the corporate authorities makes adequate
provision for all essential community requirements; provided, however, that no modification shall be granted by the corporate authorities which would
conflict with the proposals of the official thoroughfare plan or with the other features of the comprehensive plan of the village, or with the intent and
purposes of said general principles of design and minimum requirements. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970)
6-5-2: MINOR SUBDIVISIONS:
In the case of a subdivision of small size and minor importance, situated in a locality where conditions are well defined, the corporate authorities may
exempt the subdivider from complying with some or all of the requirements stipulated in section 6-4-8 of this title, pertaining to the preparation of a
preliminary plat. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970)
6-5-3: UNUSUAL PHYSICAL CONDITIONS:
In any particular case where the subdivider can show that, by reason of exceptional topographic or other physical conditions, strict compliance with any
requirement of these regulations would cause unusual difficulty or exceptional and undue hardship, the corporate authorities may relax such requirement
to the extent deemed just and proper, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided, that such relief may be granted without detriment to the public
good and without impairing the intent and purposes of these regulations, or the desirable general development of the neighborhood and the community in
accordance with the comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance of the village. Any modification thus granted shall be entered in the minutes of the
corporate authorities setting forth the reasons which, in the opinion of said corporate authorities, justifiedthe modification. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970)
6-5-4: CONFORMANCE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
Any lot set forth within a proposed resubdivision of any subdivision within the village, shall be consistent in configuration and shape with all other lots within
said existing subdivision, except where said resubdivision is part of a planned unit development as set forth in title 5, chapter 14 of this code, or a
resubdivision of a whole subdivision. (Ord. 84-1176, 1-17-1984)
Chapter 6
ENFORCEMENT; FEES
6-6-1: SUPERVISOR OF PLATS; ENFORCEMENT:
The building commissioner is hereby designated as the supervisor of plats. The plan commission shall provide the necessary technical assistance to the
said supervisor of plats in checking and reviewing all subdivisions that are submitted for his review. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 268/460
6-6-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the office of the county recorder or shall have any validity until it has been approved by the
corporate authorities in the manner described in this title.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or the agent of the owner to transfer or sell any land by reference to or by other use of a plat or description unless the plat
has been approved by the commission and corporate authorities as required herein. (Ord. 365, 11-3-1970)
6-6-3: COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Whenever a violation of this title occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint shall state fully the causes
and basis thereof, shall be filed with the corporate authorities and the corporate authorities shall properly record such complaint and immediately
investigate and take action thereon, as provided herein.
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title, shall be
fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day that a violation is permitted
to exist. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
6-6-4: SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES:
At the time of submission of the preliminary or the final plat, the subdivider shall pay a filing fee to the village in thefollowing manner:
(A) Preliminary Plat: An amount as established by the annual fee ordinance per acre, plus reimbursement to the village for any cost or expense incurred by
the village due to application for the preliminary plat approval, including, but not limited to, professional fees for legal, planning and engineering
assistance. Further, mailing, copying and other similar expenses shall also be reimbursed to the village. Reimbursement shall be made in accordance
with section 1-14-1 of this code.
(B) Final Plat: An amount as established by the annual fee ordinance per acre, which charge shall include the cost of inspection and review. In addition, if
the village shall incur costs and expenses due to application for the final plat approval, including, but not limited to, professional fees for legal, planning
and engineering assistance to the village, mailing and copying expenses shall be reimbursed to the village. Reimbursement shall be made in
accordance with section 1-14-1 of this code. If the total of such expenses incurred exceeds the per acre fee paid pursuant to this subsection, the village
shall be reimbursed for such excess as an additional part of the fee. (Ord. 89-1799, 2-6-1989)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
EXCAVATION AND CONSTRUCTION IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
7-1-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for excavating, and for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the
Village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village
rights-of-way and the Village as a whole.
(B) Intent: In enacting this chapter, the Village intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the Village and, in particular, the use of the public
ways and property by utilities and contractors, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by small wireless facilities and utility
facilities, including, without limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of facilities;
5. Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that characterize the Village's residential neighborhoods;
8. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and
9. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to facilities locations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 269/460
(C) Applicability Of This Chapter: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the
jurisdiction of the Village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated
by the wireless provider or utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement. Further, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to excavation work under the direction of the Director of Public Works by Village
employees or contractors performing work under contract with the Village, necessitating excavation in the Village rights-of-way or property.
(D) Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The Village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license
or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village rights-of-way. Utilities
that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the Village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the
Village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
(E) Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
(F) Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict.
(G) Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter,
the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or regulations.
(H) Sound Engineering Judgment: The Village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may exercise the power
described in section 7-1-23 of this chapter to vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the Village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois Administrative Code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of any type of wireless
communications services.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
BUSINESS OFFICE MANAGER: The Village Business Office Manager or his or her designee.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The Municipal Code of the Village of Lisle.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure
or utility pole.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 270/460
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 USC 153(33), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in
47 USC 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.
DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR: The Village Development Services Director or his or her designee.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The Village Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use
of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary
or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the
parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, small wireless facilities, as defined in this chapter, and
appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the
term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the Village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as a monopole, utility pole, antenna, transformer, pump, or
meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by
the Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of
the environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any Federal or State law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated
the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i through
section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video
Competition Law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois Commerce Commission.
IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 271/460
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
MONOPOLE: A structure composed of a single spire, pole or tower designed and principally used to support antennas or related equipment and that is not
a utility pole.
MUNICIPALLY-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE: Infrastructure in the public right-of-way within the boundaries of the Village, including, but not limited to,
streetlights, traffic signals, towers, structures, or buildings owned, operated or maintained by the Village.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 7-1-4 and 7-1-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the Village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, State or Federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other
similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the Village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the Village. Right-of-way or "rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal Village property that is not specifically described in the
previous sentence and shall not include Village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
right-of-way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 7-1-11 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more
than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power
transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular
mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more
other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a
cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 272/460
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any facility that is not a small wireless facility as defined in this chapter.
UTILITY POLE: An upright pole designed and used to support electric cables, telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable service cables, which
are used to provide lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-
201(v).
VILLAGE: The Village of Lisle, DuPage County, Illinois.
VILLAGE MANAGER: The Village Manager or his or her designee.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including: a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. "Wireless facility" includes small wireless facilities. "Wireless
facility" does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial
or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structure or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is
acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless service provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory
basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. "Wireless support structure" does not include a utility pole. (Ord. 2018-
4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every wireless provider or utility that occupies right-of-way within the Village shall register on January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works,
providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on its
behalf in connection with emergencies involving the registrant's facilities in the right-of-way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in section 7-1-9 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
(A) Permit Required: No person shall make any excavation in any Village right-of-way, or construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within any Village right-of-way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right-ofway
(as defined in this chapter), or 4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the Director of Public Works and obtaining a permit from the Village therefor,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers'
premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.
No application, approval, or permit shall be required for routine maintenance, the replacement of small wireless facilities that are substantially similar,
the same size or smaller, if the wireless provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement, or the installation,
placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in
compliance with applicable Safety Codes. The Village may require a permit to work within the right-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or that
require lane closures.
The exceptions to this section are planned unit developments and subdivisions for which plans have excavations indicated and for which the Mayor
and Board of Trustees have approved same, pursuant to the provisions in title 5, chapter 14, and title 6 of this Code, respectively. Further, aforesaid
exceptions shall only apply to those subdivisions or planned unit developments for which a security has been posted for the public improvements
including the aforementioned excavations.
Should any work for which a permit is required be commenced or be done before such permit is issued and obtained, the required permit may be
issued for such and subsequent work, however, the issuance of such permit does not act to bar any other penalty as set forth in the annual fee
ordinance.
(B) Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed in such number
of duplicate copies as the Village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes
contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. The
application for a small wireless facility, along with supporting information and notices, must be submitted to the Director of Public Works.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 273/460
(C) Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the wireless provider or utility or the duly authorized representative and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
1. The applicant's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the wireless provider or utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in
the work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely
to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the wireless provider or utility or contractor has placed on file with the Village:
(a) A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic; and
(b) An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes
compliance with this subsection (C)5(b) unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
7. Evidence of insurance as required in section 7-1-9 of this chapter;
8. Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in section 7-1-11 of this chapter;
9. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 7-1-23 of this chapter);
10. The duration of any excavation. This duration shall not be for longer than one business day, unless specifically approved in writing by the Public
Works Director.
11. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the Village.
(D) Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Facilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific facility that is the subject of the permit application:
1. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution system,
evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or
that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been
satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division
of Water Pollution Control and other local or State entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
6. Applicants submitting for the installation of small wireless facilities must first enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement with the Village. Each
subsequent permit application must include the following:
(a) Drawings and site plans for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application;
(b) The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole will be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings;
(c) A site specific structural analysis and engineering drawing for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application, prepared and
stamped by a professional engineer, which demonstrates the utility pole or Municipally-owned infrastructure is safely capable of supporting the
small wireless facility in all reasonably foreseeable weather conditions without creating a risk to public health and safety. The structural analysis
will also describe the method by which the facility is designed to fail and demonstrate that any structural failure to the facility shall not cause harm
to any residential structure;
(d) The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
(e) A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application;
(f) Certification that the collocation complies with section 7-1-16 of this chapter; and
(g) Applications must include the screening and stealth concealment methods used for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the
application. (Ord. 2018-4787, 10-1-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 274/460
(E) Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the applicant in writing to the Village within thirty (30) days after
the change necessitating the amendment.
(F) Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, applications for a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount established in the annual fee ordinance. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is
paying the Municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
(G) Application Fees For Small Wireless Facilities: All applications for the collocation of a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the annual fee ordinance. All applications for the collocation of more than one small
wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the annual fee ordinance for each
small wireless facility addressed in said application. An application for the installation of a small wireless facility that will require a new utility pole must
be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
(H) Consolidated Applications For Small Wireless Facilities: Applications for small wireless facilities may be submitted on a consolidated basis provided
they involve the same type of small wireless facility and the same type of structure. The Village may, at its discretion, remove small wireless facility
collocations from the consolidated application and treat them separately for purposes of deeming the application incomplete or denied. (Ord. 2018-
4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
(A) Application Deadlines For Small Wireless Facilities: Applications are deemed complete if the Village does not notify the applicant otherwise within thirty
(30) days of receipt of the application.
If the application to collocate a small wireless facility is to be placed on an existing utility pole, the Village will notify the applicant of its approval or
denial within ninety (90) days. If the Village fails to notify the applicant within that timeframe, the application will be deemed approved. If the application
to collocate a small wireless facility requires the installation of a new utility pole, the Village will notify the applicant of its approval or denial within one
hundred twenty (120) days. If the Village fails to notify the applicant within that timeframe, the application will be deemed approved.
(B) Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Director of
Public Works on a nondiscriminatory basis. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, or
regulations that concern public safety, the Director of Public Works shall notify the applicant of the basis for a denial, including specific code provisions
upon which the denial was based. The applicant may cure the deficiencies and resubmit a revised application without paying additional application
fees.
When reviewing applications for small wireless facilities, the Village will approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it will be deemed approved. If the Director of Public Works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Director of Public Works shall issue a permit. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, that the construction proposed under
the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(C) Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
1. Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it
intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Director of Public Works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way
upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
2. In the event that the Director of Public Works fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten (10)
days after service of notice to the Village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or b)
twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 7-1-4 of this chapter the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the Village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (B) of this section.
(D) Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Complete
applications by a utility that is a holder of a State issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted
forty five (45) days after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon by the Village, provided the holder has complied with applicable Village
codes, ordinances, and regulations. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
(A) Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in
accordance with this chapter on Village rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights
of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
(B) Duration: No permit issued to a utility shall be valid for a period longer than one hundred twenty (120) days, and may be extended upon the payment of
the appropriate fee as established in the annual fee ordinance. Collocation of small wireless facilities must be completed within one hundred eighty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 275/460
(180) days after the issuance of the permit. If collocation is not complete, the permit will be void. Permits for small wireless facilities are valid for five (5)
years from the time of issuance.
(C) Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The Director of Public Works may
waive the requirement for a preconstruction meeting for work which is substantially similar to that for which a meeting has been previously held. The
preconstruction meeting, if any, shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village with such Village representatives in attendance as the
Village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary
in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to
avoid disruption of other facilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.
(D) Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the Village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(E) Display Of Permit: The permittee shall maintain a copy of the permit and approved plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and made
available for inspection by the Director of Public Works or his assignee at all times when construction work is occurring. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications
submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within thirty (30) days after the completion
of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations
approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a request for variance in
accordance with section 7-1-23 of this chapter. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the
right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-8: ANNUAL RECURRING RATES FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
The Village shall charge an annual recurring rate for the collocation of small wireless facilities on Municipally-owned infrastructure located in its right-ofway
as set forth in the annual fee ordinance per utility pole, or the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on
the Village utility pole, whichever is greater. If the Village elects to charge the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of
space on the Municipally-owned infrastructure, it shall adopt a fee schedule on an annual basis. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-9: INSURANCE:
(A) Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each wireless provider, utility or contractor
excavating or occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain liability insurance policies insuring the
wireless provider, utility or contractor as named insured and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees
as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsection (A)1 of this section, and in the annual fee ordinance:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X",
"C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits set forth in the annual fee ordinance:
(a) Bodily injury or death to each person;
(b) Property damage resulting from any one accident; and
(c) All other types of liability;
(d) Wireless providers must provide a Certificate of Coverage evidencing the Village of Lisle as an additional insured on the commercial general
liability policy;
2. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
3. Property insurance for replacement costs against all risks.
If the wireless provider, utility or contractor is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then
such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section.
(B) Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary
policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
(C) Copies Required: The wireless provider or utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the Village within ten (10) days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.
(D) Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Manager of such intent to cancel or
not to renew.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 276/460
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the wireless provider or
utility shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
(E) Self-Insurance: A wireless provider or utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (A)
of this section. A wireless provider or utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the
naming of additional insureds under subsection (A) of this section, or the requirements of subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section. A wireless
provider or utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance
coverage and limit requirements required under subsection (A) of this section, such as evidence that the wireless provider or utility is a "private selfinsurer"
under the Workers' Compensation Act.
(F) Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Wireless Provider Or Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the wireless provider or utility to the Village and
any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such
insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
(G) Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally
able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a
class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-10: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying, excavating, or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a wireless provider or utility or contractor shall be deemed to agree to defend,
indemnify and hold the Village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any
and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out
of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the contractor,
wireless provider or utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the
rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or
by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the wireless provider or utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to
any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-11: SECURITY:
(A) Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section and the annual fee ordinance. The
Security Fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the
work authorized under the permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this chapter; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee
is required by this chapter to perform that the Village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to
perform or complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law.
(B) Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in the form of cash or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
Village. Any letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the Village and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the Village of any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
(C) Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as
good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the Director of Public Works, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to
substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Director of Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the
permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the Security
Fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any
single phase.
(D) Withdrawals: The Village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 277/460
3. Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the Village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
(E) Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund,
the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in subsection (C) of this section.
(F) Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the Village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum
balance required in subsection (C) of this section.
(G) Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the
Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable
costs, loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be
refunded to the permittee.
(H) Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-12: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
(A) Village Right To Revoke Permit: The Village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2. Noncompliance with this chapter;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a
direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
(B) Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The Village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
(C) Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the
Village, the permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the
Village within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the
satisfaction of the Village providing written proof of such removal to the Village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection.
(D) Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (A) of this section.
(E) Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (C) of this section, the Village or its
designee may, at the option of the Village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the Village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-13: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
(A) Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the Village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership or control of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way. Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change of ten percent (10%) or more of the ownership or
working control of the grantee or of the ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership or working control of the grantee, shall be
considered a transfer of ownership or control. Transactions between affiliated entities are not exempt from the notice requirement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 278/460
Wireless providers are required to provide the Village with written notice of its intent to sell or transfer small wireless facilities. Such notice must include
the name and contact information of the new wireless provider.
(B) Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village's right-of-way.
(C) Insurance And Security: All required insurance coverage or security instrument must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-14: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
(A) Standards And Principles: All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and
standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
1. "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction";
2. "Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions";
3. "Highway Design Manual";
4. "Highway Standards Manual";
5. "Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items";
6. "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. Adm. Code section 545); and
7. "Flagger's Handbook".
(B) Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Director of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be
final. If requested, the Director of Public Works shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-15: PUBLIC SAFETY AND TRAFFIC CONTROL:
(A) Public Safety: The placement of any antenna, wireless facility or small wireless facilities located in the Village right-of-way may not interfere with the
frequencies used by public safety agencies for public safety communications. Unacceptable interference will be determined in accordance with industry
standards and the Federal Communications Commission's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum. If an antenna,
wireless facility or small wireless facility causes such interference, the owner must take all steps necessary to correct and eliminate the interference at
its own costs. The Village may terminate a permit for any antenna, wireless facility or small wireless facility based on such interference if the
interference is not corrected.
The Village may reserve space on its utility pole for future public safety uses (or for the Village's electric utility uses). This reservation of space may
preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility where the Village determines that the utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
(B) Minimum Requirements: The Village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this Code.
(C) Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The wireless provider or utility or contractor is responsible for providing and installing warning signs,
protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable Federal, State, and local requirements for protection of the public and the
wireless provider or utility or contractor's workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way.
(D) Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(E) Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the wireless provider, utility or contractor shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and
duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 7-1-22 of this chapter, the wireless provider,
utility or contractor shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances. It is the permittee's responsibility to notify the Lisle/Woodridge
Fire District, the Lisle Police Department and the Lisle Public Works Department if the permittee's construction work inhibits or prohibits the flow of
traffic on the roadway.
(F) Compliance: The wireless provider or utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to
its attention by the Village. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-16: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
(A) General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of facilities, all facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to
the general location requirements of this subsection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 279/460
1. No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the Director of Public Works determines that the proposed
location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the Village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance
of any of the Village's utility facilities. All utility facilities shall be located so to maintain not less than five feet (5') of clearance from the Village's utility
facilities, except where it is found to be commercially impracticable by the Director of Public Works.
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said
right-of-way.
3. No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
6. Elimination Of Aboveground Utility Poles: The Village is not required to install or maintain any specific utility pole or to continue to install or maintain
utility poles in any location if it makes a non-discriminatory decision to eliminate aboveground utility poles of a particular type. For Village utility poles
with collocated small wireless facilities in place when the Village makes a decision to eliminate aboveground utility poles, the Village will, at its
discretion, either maintain the utility pole or install and maintain an alternative utility pole for the collocation of the small wireless facility, or offer to sell
the utility pole to the wireless provider.
(B) Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
(a) Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will
permit;
(b) Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
(c) Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
(d) No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
(e) Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
(a) The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable;
(b) A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
(c) In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more
than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the rightof-
way line or as near as practicable.
(C) Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Culverts Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in culverts or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90) angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
(a) It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83 Ill.
Adm. Code 305);
(b) Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
(c) Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
(a) The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
(b) Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current Federal Regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
(D) Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights-Of-Way: The Village may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 280/460
(E) Freestanding Facilities:
1. Small Wireless Facilities:
(a) The Village may not require the placement of a small wireless facility on a specific utility pole or category of poles. However, should the
application necessitate the installation of a new utility pole, the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing
utility pole or existing support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed collocation. Should the applicant reject the proposed
relocated collocation, it must provide a written certification describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternative
location will not satisfy the wireless provider's needs. The Village may require any monopole, utility pole or other freestanding facility located within
a right-of-way to be screened from view in compliance with the appearance standards described below.
(b) If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground facilities are located on one side of the right-of-way, all new monopoles, utility poles
and other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same side of the right-of-way as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist
aboveground facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be located on the side where the aboveground facilities most closely match
the scale of the new freestanding facility.
2. Other Facilities:
(a) The Village may restrict the location and size of any monopole, utility pole or other freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. No
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way may be constructed or modified so that the height of the freestanding facility is higher by more
than ten feet (10') or more than ten percent (10%), whichever is greater, than any other existing, freestanding facility located within the right-of-way
within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed facility, measured along the center line of the respective right-of-way. Where there are no other
freestanding facilities located within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed facility, the maximum height of the freestanding facility shall be forty
five feet (45').
(b) The Village may require any monopole, utility pole or other freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.
(c) If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground facilities are located on one side of the right-of-way, all new monopoles, utility poles
and other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same side of the right-of-way as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist
aboveground facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be located on the side where the aboveground facilities most closely match
the scale of the new freestanding facility.
(F) Height Restrictions For Small Wireless Facilities: Small wireless facilities are limited to a maximum height of ten feet (10') above the utility pole or
wireless structure on which it is collocated. The height limit of a new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure on which small wireless
facilities are collocated is limited to the higher of:
1. Ten feet (10') higher than the tallest existing utility pole within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support
structure that is in the same right-of-way; or
2. Forty five feet (45') above ground level. The Village shall designate which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed
utility pole or wireless support structure shall control the height limitation.
(G) Facilities Installed Above Ground: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic
qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single
pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and Municipally-owned infrastructure shall be used
wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles or monopoles is strongly discouraged.
(H) Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the wireless provider or utility has demonstrated that all other
means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent
poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting
commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of
risk and such installations are not permitted.
2. A wireless facility or utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:
(a) The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the
event of damage to or failure of the facility;
(b) The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
(c) The alternative routings available to the wireless provider or utility and their comparative practicability;
(d) The proposed method of attachment;
(e) The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
(f) The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
(g) The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 281/460
(h) The public benefit expected from the wireless facility or utility service as compared to the risk involved. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-17: DESIGN AND APPEARANCE STANDARDS:
(A) Residential Design Standards:
1. Purpose: Ensure visually acceptable facility design and to provide discretion on required and preferred design of small wireless facilities.
2. Applicability: These design standards shall apply to each facility located in a district zoned for residential uses:
(a) Applicants must use architectural treatments and stealth techniques to reduce potential visual impacts from all small wireless facilities.
(b) All new utility poles installed for the purpose of mounting a facility must be stealth or camouflaged to blend into the surrounding environment.
Examples of stealth or camouflage designs are presented in figure 1 of this subsection (A)2.
(c) Small wireless facilities and all ancillary equipment associated with the facility must not emit sound.
(d) Cables must be routed directly from the ground through the pole and equipment enclosures must completely enclose or hide cabling. No exposed
cable is allowed.
(e) No flashing lights or unnecessary, non-essential stickers are allowed to be placed on any facility. Stickers must be designed in the same color as
the pole to which they are attached.
(f) In no case shall equipment block the sidewalk or pedestrian pathway. All installations must maintain accessibility requirements and standards.
(g) All newly installed equipment must be painted with graffiti-resistant paint to match pole color and surroundings.
(h) Colors and materials for small wireless facilities shall be chosen to minimize the visibility of the facility.
(i) Antennas attached to existing poles or Municipally-owned infrastructure shall be painted and textured to match the existing structure.
(j) Any ground-mounted facility shall be painted with non-reflective matte finish paint using color shades that are comparable or blend with
surrounding natural elements such as soil, trees, or grasslands. Any ground-mounted facility shall be screened from the yard of the property in
front of which it is located using year-round landscaping materials. The owner of the ground-mounted facility shall guarantee the landscaping
materials for a period of one year from planting.
(k) All disturbed pavement and landscaping shall be replaced and areas of bare or disturbed soils must be re-vegetated. If replacement landscape is
determined to be infeasible the Village may accept mitigation funds to use elsewhere. The owner of the ground-mounted facility shall guarantee
the restoration work or reseeding for a period of one year.
(l) No facility may display any signage or advertisements unless expressly allowed by the Village in a written approval, recommended under FCC
regulations or required by law or permit condition. Every facility shall at all times display signage that accurately identifies the facility owner and
provides the facility owner's unique site number, and also provides a local or toll-free telephone number to contact the facility owner's operations
center. All required or permitted signage must face toward the street or otherwise placed to minimize visibility from adjacent sidewalks and
structures.
FIGURE 1
SAMPLE STEALTH DESIGNS FOR SMALL CELL UTILITY POLES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 282/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 283/460
(B) Design Standards In Special Aesthetic/Economic Purpose Zones:
1. Purpose: To protect and promote the Village's unique character in a manner consistent with State and Federal laws and regulations.
2. Applicability: These design standards shall apply to: a) each area, district, neighborhood or zone expressly designated in the Village's
Comprehensive Plan as having special aesthetic or economic impacts on the welfare of the community; and b) each redevelopment area designed
under the Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act or the Business District Development and Redevelopment Act:
(a) Siting of small wireless facilities in special aesthetic/economic purpose zones must respect the existing character or design ordinance of
established zone.
(b) Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment measures in their applications.
(c) Effective camouflage so as to disguise the facility so that it appears to be something other than a facility and is at the same time compatible with
its surroundings (for example, designed to look like a tree).
(d) Small wireless facilities must be designed so that the facilities' silhouette, mass and color are masked in such a way as to be virtually
indistinguishable from their background.
(e) Examples of stealth or camouflage designs are presented in subsection (A)2, figure 1, of this section.
(C) Design Standards In Historic Districts:
1. Purpose: To promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the Village by identifying, preserving, protecting, enhancing and
encouraging the continued utilization and the rehabilitation of such areas, properties, structures, sites and objects having a special historical interest
or value to the Village and its citizens.
2. Applicability: These design standards apply in any historic district or on any historic landmark:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 284/460
(a) Districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects, significant in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture, that are listed, or
are eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places are to be avoided, to the greatest extent possible. Local landmarked buildings,
properties, sites, or historic districts that are so recognized by an ordinance that meets the requirements of the certified Local Government
Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office are also to be avoided, to the greatest extent possible.
(b) Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment measures in their applications.
(c) Applicant must implement said Village-approved design concepts, and the use of camouflage or stealth materials as necessary in order to
achieve compliance with historic preservation review.
(d) Prior to submitting an application, where the applicant submits an application to site facilities in a historic district, the applicant must meet with the
Village to discuss any potential design modifications appropriate for the installation.
(e) When siting a facility in a historic district, wireless provider must avoid removing, obscuring or altering any historic material or significant
architectural features. Rehabilitation and make-ready work must not destroy the distinguishing character of the property or its environment.
(f) Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible by means such as rust removal, calking, limited
paint removal and reapplication of paint.
(D) General Design Standards:
1. Applicability: These design standards apply to all small wireless facilities:
(a) All small wireless facilities not governed by the preceding design standards must be placed so as to minimize visibility. The small wireless facility,
including all ancillary equipment and appurtenances, must be a color that blends with the surroundings of the utility pole or Municipally-owned
infrastructure on which it is mounted and use non-reflective materials which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and
structures. Any wiring must be concealed within the freestanding facility or covered with an appropriate cover.
(b) The Village may discourage the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
(c) A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the rightof-
way user or to adjacent residents and property owners.
(d) A facility may not be installed in a manner which defeats any existing concealment elements of the utility pole or Municipally-owned infrastructure
to which it is attached.
(e) Facilities under common ownership or operated on the same radio frequency shall be separated as far as practicable. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-
2018)
7-1-18: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
(A) Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking:
(a) Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Director
of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they
shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely
support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
(b) Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
(c) Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
(d) Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
(e) Tree Preservation: Grantees shall comply with the regulations set forth in title 5, chapter 26, "Landscaping And Tree Preservation", of this Code,
all fees described therein being in addition and supplemental to the fees required by this chapter.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section
603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction".
(a) Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only one-half (1/2)
of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the Director of Public Works.
(b) Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD). Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and
the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width
does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.
(c) Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
(a) Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and
materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 285/460
(b) For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the Director of Public Works, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new
pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Director of Public Works.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation
set forth in this subsection (A)4 is permitted under section 7-1-23 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
(a) Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with controlled low strength material (CLSM), as
designated by the Director of Public Works.
(b) Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
(c) All saw cuts shall be full depth.
(d) For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen
before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
5. Encasement:
(a) Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by
one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the Village.
(b) The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
(c) In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous
or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
(d) In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
(e) In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
(f) If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt
the right-of-way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as determined by Village)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
(B) Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
(a) Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative Code part 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled
"Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines", and the National Electrical Safety Code.
(b) Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall
be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
(c) Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only
if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for
cable installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code.
(d) Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year unless otherwise permitted by the Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all
temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 286/460
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
(a) The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
(b) Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
(c) Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
(d) Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village approved
manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for
Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage
lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction
in Illinois".
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area
may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the Director of Public Works. With the
approval of the Director of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for
ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
(C) Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois
Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage On Right-Of-Way: No material shall be stored on the right-of-way or the root zone of trees and shrubs without the prior written
approval of the Director of Public Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be
distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way
maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the
Village.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
(D) Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are
such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction are those set forth in section 4-1-5 of this Code.
4. No tractor, traction engine, motor truck, tracked or lugged vehicle or other similar vehicle shall be operated across, over or along any Village street if
any such vehicle has on the periphery of any of the road wheels any block, stud, flange, cleat, ridge, lug or any projection of metal or wood which
projects radially beyond the tread or traffic surface of the tire; except this prohibition shall not apply to tractors or tractor engines equipped with what
is known as crawler type tractors when same does not contain any projections of any kind likely to injure the surface of the road, nor to tractors,
traction engines and similar vehicles which have upon their road wheels V-shaped, diagonal or other cleats arranged in such a manner as to be in
continuous contact with the road surface. In no event shall the oil mat surface of any oil treated Village street be used as an area or space for turning
any tractor or other farm or construction machinery in carrying on or performing any farm or construction operations on adjacent land. Provided,
further, this prohibition shall not apply to the use of "snow chains" on vehicles during months when substantial snowfalls can reasonably be expected
in this vicinity.
(E) Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the Village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of
existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Village will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the Village or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act.
(F) Stormwater And Floodplain Regulations: All construction activity performed by a grantee under the authority of a permit granted under this chapter
shall be subject to the additional regulations provided for in title 5, chapter 16 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-19: VEGETATION CONTROL:
(A) Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control activities in the
right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the Village
as permitted by law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 287/460
(B) Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed
pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall
require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter. All permits related to tree removal
and preservation shall comply with the regulations set forth in title 5, chapter 26, "Landscaping And Tree Preservation", of this Code, all fees described
therein being in addition and supplemental to the fees required by this chapter.
1. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers, supervised by a certified arborist, who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate
an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the
tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The Village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an
unacceptable condition.
(C) Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The Village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
(D) Chemical Use:
1. Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the
Village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
2. Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director
of Public Works that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-20: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
(A) Notice: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the Village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the Corporate Authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
Village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way.
(B) Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
(C) Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The Village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way
of the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the Municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
(D) Abandonment Of Facilities:
1. Small Wireless Facilities: As used in this chapter, a small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be
considered abandoned. The owner of an abandoned small wireless facility shall notify the Village within ninety (90) days of it being abandoned and
the owner of that small wireless facility must remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after sending such written notice to the Village.
The Village may direct the wireless provider to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Director of Public Works determines that such removal
will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice,
the Village may remove or cause the removal of the facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Village utility poles or through
whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
2. Other Utility Facilities: As used in this chapter, a facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered
abandoned. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the Village, the utility shall notify the Village within ninety (90) days. The owner
of the abandoned facility must remove the facility within ninety (90) days after sending such written notice to the Village. The Village may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Director of Public Works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public
health, safety and welfare. If the facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of the
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Village utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-21: NOTICE OF COMPLETION, CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility or contractor shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the
rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the Village. This includes
restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of pavement surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Director of Public
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 288/460
Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-ofway
to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be
extended by the Director of Public Works for good cause shown. Failure by the utility or contractor to comply with the restoration work requirements within
ten (10) days, referred to in this section, or failure to request inspection of same, shall result in the Director of Public Works withdrawing an amount from
the construction deposit, deemed sufficient by the Public Works Director to complete the restoration work. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-22: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
(A) General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory
to the Village and at the utility's expense.
(B) Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection
for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the
traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate
signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs.
If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling
public.
(C) Emergency Repairs: The utility or contractor must file in writing with the Village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within forty
eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-23: VARIANCES:
(A) Request For Variance: A utility or contractor requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the
Director of Public Works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested
and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
(B) Authority To Grant Variances: The Director of Public Works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in
the variance request on an individual basis.
(C) Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The Director of Public Works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility or contractor (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
(D) Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may require the utility or
contractor requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but
which carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(E) Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Director of
Public Works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board, or such other board or commission as it may
designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement,
decision or determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the Board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring
at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-24: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of the annual fee ordinance. There may be times when the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the wireless provider or utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the wireless provider, utility or
contractor shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the wireless provider or utility shall bear the
Village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the Village.
Sanctions may be imposed upon a wireless provider, utility or contractor that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
7-1-25: ENFORCEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 289/460
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
2018-4776, 7-23-2018)
Chapter 1A
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
7-1A-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of chapter 1 of this title shall apply to all excavation and construction within the right-of-way. This chapter provides additional requirements
and regulation of right-of-way, not limited to construction or utility regulation. (Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
7-1A-2: STREET, DRIVEWAY AND SIDEWALK OPENINGS:
(A) Removal and replacement of pavement, driveways and sidewalks shall be accomplished in accordance with the Village standard details for street
openings1.
(B) If a driveway permit is issued and included with a Village building permit which driveway construction is regulated according to the standards and
details of this Code, the building permit will, in that instance, serve as the parkway/street opening permit.
(C) In instances where driveways are constructed or modified without a Village building permit, a parkway/street opening permit will be required with permit
fees paid as outlined in section 7-1-4 of this title and the annual fee ordinance, and cash bond paid as outlined in section 7-1-11 of this title and the
annual fee ordinance. Furthermore, the construction will be regulated according to the standards and details of this Code and the requirements of
section 7-1A-3 of this chapter. Submission of appropriate grading plans is required to ensure compliance with Village Drainage Code sections.
(D) Permit requirements shall be administered pursuant to the requirements in chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
7-1A-3: INSTALLATION OF CULVERTS:
(A) The owner of any property located in the Village, on a street without curb and gutter shall, before the excavation in connection with the construction of
any building on such property, provide and install a culvert under any driveway used for access to the property from such street. Such culvert shall be
constructed of either reinforced concrete pipe, corrugated polyethylene pipe or corrugated galvanized steel no less than twelve inches (12") in
diameter. The diameter of such culvert in any case shall be not less than equal to the diameter of the nearest road culvert upstream from said property.
Pipe diameter shall be sized based on appropriate hydrologic and hydraulic calculations. All culverts shall be not less than twenty feet (20') long and
shall be bedded and covered with crushed stone or gravel, and all temporary culverts will not be less than twenty feet (20') long and shall be covered
with an adequate amount of crushed stone or gravel (not less than 8 inches) so as to provide a firm base for vehicles using same. The culvert shall be
installed per the Village's standard details2.
(B) All building permits issued for residential construction shall be issued subject to the installation of such culvert, and no person shall be permitted to
proceed with construction until such culvert has been installed. No person shall drive any vehicle from the public street onto property across any
drainage without the installation of a culvert, as provided in this section.
(C) Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day that such violation continues. (Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
7-1A-4: USE OF VILLAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR EQUIPMENT AND MATERIAL:
(A) Prohibition Of Equipment And Materials On Village Right-Of-Way:
1. No equipment or materials of any private or public corporation, association, or individual shall be placed for a period of time greater than thirty (30)
days, or constructed upon, under, over or along any Village right-of-way within the corporate limits of the Village without first obtaining the written
consent of the Village as provided in this section.
2. For purposes of this section, "equipment" or "materials" includes, but is not limited to, poles, wires, cables, pipelines, gravel, machinery, trailers and
any other items or matter which are placed or sought to be placed on the Village right-of-way.
(B) Applicability: Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, the provisions of this section shall not apply to those materials and that equipment lawfully placed
upon the Village right-of-way pursuant to:
1. Title 11, "Telecommunications", of this Code; or
2. A valid permit issued by the Village for the excavation or opening of any Village right-of-way according to the provisions of section 7-1-4 of this title;
or
3. Section 7-1A-5 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 290/460
(C) Agreements In Existence: All written and executed agreements which grant permission to place equipment or materials upon, under, over or along
Village rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the Village shall supersede the requirements of this section until the termination, revocation,
cancellation, or other cessation of the agreement.
(D) Penalty: Notwithstanding and in addition to any other remedies available to the Village, any person, association or corporation acting in violation of this
section shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for every day of such violation. (Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
7-1A-5: ENCROACHMENTS:
7-1A-5-1: PURPOSE:
In order to protect Village, County, State and Federal rights-of-way and the public, it is necessary for the Village to adopt regulations governing
encroachments on the rights-of-way. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
7-1A-5-2: ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, any "encroachment" as defined in this section 7-1A-5
except those set forth as permissible encroachments, within the limits of the Village, County, State and Federal rights-of-way. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-
2018)
7-1A-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
ENCROACHMENT: Any building, fence, sign, table, chair or any other structure or object, including vegetation, of any kind which is placed, located, or
maintained in, on, under or over any portion of the right-of-way. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
7-1A-5-4: PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENTS:
(A) Overhanging Structures: Any existing awning, marquee, advertising sign or similar overhanging structure supported from a building immediately
adjacent to the limits of the platted street where there is a sidewalk extending to the building line and which does not impair the free and safe flow of
traffic on the highway; the permissive retention of overhanging signs is not to be construed as being applicable to those signs supported from poles
constructed outside of the right-of-way and not confined by adjacent buildings.
(B) Other Encroachments: Roadways, sidewalks, utilities, and road signs.
(C) Irrigation System: Lawn irrigation system pipes and sprinkler heads when authorized by a license indemnification and hold harmless agreement signed
by the Village Manager or his designee.
(D) Vegetation: Any tree or tree limb, shrub or other vegetation which is located in or overhangs any right-of-way that does not impede or interfere with
vehicular, pedestrian, or bicyclist travel, including safe line of sight, or otherwise negatively impact health and life safety as may be determined by the
Village.
(E) Mailboxes On Public Right-Of-Way: When required by Federal rules and regulations, a single mailbox per residential or commercial address may be
installed upon the public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the Village, provided that such mailbox is installed in compliance with the following
requirements:
1. The mailbox shall be installed so that the bottom of the mailbox is between forty one inches (41") and forty five inches (45") above the roadway. The
front face of the mailbox shall be between six inches (6") and eight inches (8") behind the back of the curb on curb and gutter streets, or between six
inches (6") and eight inches (8") behind the back edge of the shoulder of any roadway without curbs and shall be consistent with all applicable State
and Federal regulations.
2. The mailbox shall be mounted on one of the following support structures:
(a) Four inch (4") by four inch (4") wooden post;
(b) Light gauge hollow cast iron, galvanized steel or painted steel pipe not more than two inches (2") in diameter;
(c) Hollow brick veneer column constructed of finishing brick provided that the support structure shall have dimensions of no more than twenty inches
(20") by twenty four inches (24") and shall be no more than sixty four inches (64") in height.
Other structures, including, but not limited to, masonry, brick, stone or rock columns with or without rebar reinforcement which are cement filled,
standard railroad rails and any cement filled containers such as milk cans, tanks or barrels are prohibited.
The support structure shall be secured firmly in the ground. With the exception of brick veneer columns, no such structures shall be secured to a
foundation.
3. Any existing mailbox/support structure encroaching on a curb or on the shoulder in the case of a roadway without curbs, shall be corrected to meet
the setback specifications of this chapter within a reasonable period of time.
4. Any mailbox/support structure not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter damaged by a Village vehicle shall be brought into compliance
with the provisions of this chapter at the time of repair/replacement at the owner's sole expense.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 291/460
5. Any mailbox or support structure located and constructed in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, if damaged by the Village through the act
of omission of one acting as an agent or employee of the Village, shall be repaired or replaced by the owner; however, the Village shall reimburse
such damage not to exceed an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance. No reimbursement shall be made by the Village for damage to a
mailbox or support structure which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Damage caused by flying snow shall not be reimbursed by
the Village.
(F) Restaurant Outdoor Dining On Public Right-Of-Way: A restaurant outdoor dining area on public rights-of-way shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Prior to commencing an outdoor dining use on the public right-of-way, a revocable permit shall be obtained from the Village.
(a) The revocable permit shall be valid from April 1st through October 31st.
(b) The revocable permit shall be renewed with the Village on an annual basis.
(c) The Village Manager, Development Services Director, Public Works Director or Chief of Police shall have the authority to suspend or revoke
outdoor dining permits and privileges.
2. For all licensed premises, certificates of insurance naming the Village of Lisle as an additional insured and an indemnification agreement is required.
Insurance amounts shall be in accordance with the annual fee ordinance.
3. Design plans shall be provided indicating the location of the outdoor dining use. Plans shall depict compliance with the following design
requirements:
(a) All items placed on the public right-of-way for the operation of the outdoor dining area shall be located so that a clear path of at least six (6)
contiguous feet parallel to the street is provided for passage of pedestrians.
(b) All items placed on the public right-of-way for the operation of the outdoor dining area adjacent to on-street parking shall be located at least two
feet (2') from the back of curb.
(c) All items placed on the public right-of-way for the operation of the outdoor dining area shall be located so that a clear path of at least three (3)
contiguous feet is provided from the main building entrance.
(d) All items placed in the public right-of-way for the operation of the outdoor dining area shall not be located in pedestrian crosswalk access aisles.
(e) The outdoor dining area must be located directly in front of the use it serves and shall not extend beyond the building width.
(f) Tables, chairs, and umbrellas placed on the public right-of-way for the operation of the outdoor dining area shall be of consistent design and color.
(1) Tables and chairs shall be wood or metal, or shall resemble wood or metal. Plastic furnishings are prohibited.
(2) Umbrellas must be secured to a base or anchor.
(g) The outdoor dining area shall comply with the Illinois Accessibility Code.
(h) The outdoor dining area shall be delineated and enclosed by a functional pedestrian barrier.
4. The outdoor dining area shall be under the direct supervision and control of the principal restaurant and shall be operated only during the same
hours as the principal restaurant. Fencing or a barrier delineating the area may be required.
5. Items placed on the public right-of-way for the operation of the outdoor dining area shall not be permanently attached or anchored.
6. Alcoholic beverages shall not be served or consumed outside of the outdoor dining area.
7. The outdoor dining area shall be promptly bussed and maintained. The adjacent sidewalk area shall be maintained free of trash, litter, debris and
obstructions. Outdoor dining areas without waitstaff shall provide at least one trash receptacle within the outdoor dining area.
8. Tables, chairs, umbrellas, and the functional pedestrian barrier are permitted to remain on the public right-of-way overnight during the active permit
period. Umbrellas shall be closed. No items shall be secured to public property overnight.
9. The amplification of sound is prohibited.
10. Smoking within the outdoor dining area is prohibited.
11. Decorative outdoor lighting in, above, or adjacent to the outdoor dining area is prohibited.
(G) Outdoor Retail Display On Public Right-Of-Way: Outdoor retail display on public rights-of-way shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Prior to commencing outdoor retail display on the public right-of-way, a revocable permit shall be obtained from the Village.
(a) The revocable permit is only available to retail businesses that operate on Main Street.
(b) The revocable permit shall be valid from April 1st through October 31st.
(c) The revocable permit shall be renewed with the Village on an annual basis.
(d) The Village Manager, Development Services Director, Public Works Director or Chief of Police shall have the authority to suspend or revoke
outdoor retail display permits and privileges.
2. For all licensed premises, certificates of insurance naming the Village of Lisle as an additional insured and an indemnification agreement is required.
Insurance amounts shall be in accordance with the annual fee ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 292/460
3. Design plans shall be provided indicating the location of the outdoor retail display area. Plans shall depict compliance with the following design
requirements:
(a) All items placed on the public right-of-way for the purpose of outdoor retail display shall be located so that a clear path of at least six (6)
contiguous feet parallel to the street is provided for passage of pedestrians.
(b) All items placed on the public right-of-way for the purpose of outdoor retail display shall not extend more than three feet (3') from the building
facade.
(c) All items placed in the public right-of-way for the purpose of outdoor retail display shall not be located in pedestrian crosswalk access aisles.
(d) Outdoor retail displays shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
(e) All items placed on the public right-of-way for the purpose of outdoor retail display shall be located so that a clear path of at least three (3)
contiguous feet is provided from the main building entrance.
(f) The outdoor retail display area shall be located directly in front of the use it serves and shall not extend beyond the building width.
(g) The outdoor retail display area shall comply with the Illinois Accessibility Code.
4. The outdoor retail display area shall be under the direct supervision and control of the principal retail business and shall be operated only during the
same hours as the principal retail business.
5. Merchandise shall originate from the principal retail business.
6. Items placed on the public right-of-way for retail display shall not be permanently attached or anchored.
7. The outdoor retail display shall not be stored outside overnight.
8. The amplification of sound is prohibited.
9. Decorative outdoor lighting in, above, or adjacent to the outdoor retail display area is prohibited.
(H) Vestibules On Public Right-Of-Way: Vestibules on public rights-of-way shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Permit Required: Prior to erecting or installing a vestibule on the public right-of-way, a temporary building permit shall be obtained from the Village.
(a) The temporary building permit shall be valid from November 1st through March 31st.
2. Insurance And Indemnification: For all licensed premises, certificates of insurance naming the Village of Lisle as an additional insured and an
indemnification agreement is required. Insurance amounts shall be in accordance with the annual fee ordinance.
3. Design: Plans shall be provided indicating the location of the vestibule and design specifications. Vestibules shall comply with title 4 of this Code and
shall comply with the following location requirements:
(a) The vestibule shall be located so that a clear path of at least six (6) contiguous feet parallel to the street is provided for passage of pedestrians.
(b) The vestibule shall be located directly in front of the use it serves and shall not extend beyond the building width. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
7-1A-5-5: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this section 7-1A-5 shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day during which a violation continues or is permitted to exist. (Ord. 2018-4784, 9-10-2018; amd.
Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
7-1A-6: PARKWAY TREES:
Trees complying with the provisions of title 5, chapter 26 of this Code are permitted on public rights-of-way. These trees are owned and maintained by the
Village, and only the Village shall plant, trim, remove or address insect or disease problems on the parkway trees, unless otherwise approved in writing by
the Public Works Director. (Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
Chapter 2
GRADING REQUIREMENTS
7-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure for the grading, filling, excavating or altering of the natural terrain or other aspects of the
topography on property (not limited to, but including, the final grading of property) in the village. Furthermore, this chapter is established to prevent
unnecessary flooding and in doing so eliminate damage to real and/or personal property and to protect the public health, welfare and safety. The method
of eliminating uncontrolled flooding shall be adherence to a grading plan for a subdivision as specified in the subdivision control ordinance, title 6 of this
code; shall be adherence to a grading plan for a planned unit development as specified in the zoning ordinance, title 5 of this code; shall be adherence to
a grading plan for all other parcels not included within a subdivision or planned unit development that may cause the same problems or result in damage to
real or personal property and may adversely affect the public health, welfare and safety.
Specifically, this chapter is enacted to coordinate the grading, filling, excavating or altering final grading of individual parcels of land as the grading affects
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 293/460
the subject parcel as wellas all that property directly or indirectly affected by said parcel, both public and private. The review of final grading plans as
specified in this chapter will be the review of individual parcels as the individual parcel relates to and affects or is affected by the balance of the
subdivision, PUD, adjoining or adjacent property. (Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
7-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING SPOT SURVEY: A topographical elevation survey showing in detail the top of the foundation wall, the elevation of all openings in the
foundation wall, and the building location relative to the lot lines, and shall show the direction of the drainage flow. The aforementioned survey shall be
conducted immediately after the foundation has been poured and backfilled and certified by a registered land surveyor. This "building spot survey" shall be
provided by the permittee to the village at the permittee's expense. The survey shall be submitted to a scale no smaller than one inch equals thirty feet
(1" = 30').
ELEVATION: The elevation of structures, the earth or other items with respect to established bench marks in terms of USGS datum.
FINAL GRADING: The vertical location of the pavement or landscaped material surfaces after all grading work is completed in accordance with the
grading plans. "Fine grading" will be defined as the process of grading a parcel to the finished grades proposed on the grading plan.
FLOODING: A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff from surface waters from any source.
FOUNDATION OPENING ELEVATION: The lowest unprotected opening in a structure.
GRADING: The excavation of, the filling of, or any combination thereof of any parcel and shall include the operations and conditions resulting from and
necessary because of any excavation or filling of any parcel.
GRADING PLAN: The depiction of any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate. It shall also be held to mean the depiction of any
manmade change, including, but not limited to, the damming, obstructing, changing or altering of any natural drainage course or natural drainageway.
GROUND COVER: Any manmade or natural landscaping material, functional or ornamental, including, but not limited to, such material as stone, grass or
shrubbery used to protect topsoil or soil from eroding.
OCCUPANCY SURVEY: A topographical survey prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor or registered professional engineerindicating
elevation contours on a given parcel. The elevation contours shall be a minimum of 1.0 feet and in sufficient detail to adequately determine the proper final
grading of a parcel as determined by the village engineer. This "occupancy survey" shall be provided by the permittee to the village at the permittee's
expense.
PARCEL: A lot, a portion of a lot, land site, or any portion of real estate not publicly owned.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a grading permit is issued.
ROUGH GRADING: The excavation on, the filling of, or any combination thereof with respect to a parcel to a two inch plus or minus (2".) variance from
the final grading requirement less an appropriate allowance for topsoil as specified in the approved plans and specifications.
STORM WATER FACILITIES: Includes, but is not limited to, such items as paved gutters, surface inlets to subsurface storm drains, formed drainage
swales, riprap lined channels, catch basins or manholes that connect into a subsurface drainage system, storm sewer and storm water detention or
retention facilities with all to be located within a dedicated easement for storm water drainage or within publicly owned property.
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials used to form a construction that is safe and stable including, but not limited to, buildings, stadiums, reviewing
stands, platforms, stagings, radio towers, bridges, trestles, sheds, shelters, fences and display signs; the term structure shall be constructed as if followed
by the words "or part thereof".
WATERCOURSE OR WATERWAYS: A natural path in a lower area of the land that carries natural storm water runoff from areas of higher elevation. (Ord.
79-900, 12-18-1979; amd. Ord. 85-1289, 4-15-1985)
7-2-3: PLANS:
No structure shall be erected, moved or substantially improved or parcel of land filled or excavated within the village, without first obtaining a grading
permit. (Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
7-2-3-1: PERMIT:
A grading permit will be required (and shall necessitate) the submission of grading plans. The grading plans must be approved by the village and a grading
permit issued by the village before the following activities can commence:
(A) Construction of a new structure in a subdivision or planned unit development where an overall grading plan has been approved by the corporate
authorities or a parcel is subject to saidoverall grading plan.
(B) Construction of a new structure in an established subdivision or planned unit development that does not have an approved overall grading plan.
(C) Structure being moved where a parcel is affected by a structure being moved, including the parcels from which the structure is moved, and the parcel
to which it is being moved.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 294/460
(D) Parcel filled or excavated, all parcels affected by fill or excavation or grading that will have an affect on other parcels.
(E) The damming, altering, obstructing or the changing of natural terrain or a waterway or watercourse carrying natural drainage from upstream property.
(F) Any change to an existing structure, an addition or alteration to an existing structure that could affect storm water drainage to the parcel being
improved or to the adjoining property. (Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
7-2-3-2: PERMIT EXCEPTIONS:
At the discretion of the building and zoning commissioner, a grading permit may not be required for changes, minor additions or alterations to existing
structures, or for the construction of ancillary structures where such changes, additions, alterations or construction do not affect storm water drainage to
the parcel in question or to adjoining properties. (Ord. 85-1289, 4-15-1985)
7-2-3-3: CONTENTS OF GRADING PLANS:
Any grading plan submitted pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall contain the following information:
(A) Foundation elevation, including the top of foundation and any openings below top of the foundation on all new or existing structures or portions thereof.
(B) Site drainage showing the existing and proposed grades for a particular parcel and for adjoining properties (affected) with a minimum of one foot (1')
contour intervals in sufficient detail to clearly indicate drainage flows.
(C) The parcel drainage shall be designed to flow away from the top of foundations. Storm water being directed to the side yard of the parcel shall be
directed into a formed drainage swale, having a minimum slope of two percent (2%) and a maximum slope of five percent (5%). In the event that
conditions dictate that some parts of the lot be higher than the structure foundation, the grading must show specific drainage configurations for the
parcel specifying that all drainage is to be directed to flow away from the foundation.
(D) Construction and work such as walkways, driveways, landscaping or any structure shall be installed so that the construction of same will not interfere
with drainage. All sidewalks, driveways, patios and other flat work shall be at an elevation relative to the foundation wall so that water will drain away
from the structure on all sides and off the lot in a manner which will provide reasonable freedom from erosion and permanently pocketed surface water.
(E) The flow from off site tributary areas that are tributary to an intermittent stream or overflow route that must pass through the parcel must be identified
on the grading plan and must be designed in such a way to adequately handle the flow of all water to accommodate a 100-year storm frequency.
(F) All overflow routes for the 100-year storm and for accumulated storm water runoff from several lots or from off site catchment areas must be clearly
designated on the grading plan with the total width of the flow route contained within an easement for drainage purposes. (Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
(G) A sediment and erosion control plan shall be submitted that provides the following:
1. The smallest practical area of land that is to be exposed at any given time.
2. The areas to be exposed shall be scheduled for grading in such a way that the area exposed shall be exposed for as short a period of time as is
reasonable and practical.
3. Sedimentation basins, debris, basins, desilting basins and/or soil traps are to be included so as to remove sediment and debris from runoff waters
from the land undergoing grading and/or development.
4. Provisions to effectively reduce and/or accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil surface conditions during and after grading and/or
development.
5. An erosion control plan that relates to the topography and soil on the parcel so that the lowest potential for erosion is created. (Ord. 81-984, 2-14-
1981)
(H) The location of, and direction of, any sump pump discharge onto the site from the subject property and from adjoining properties. (Ord. 85-1266, 1-21-
1985)
7-2-4: PROCEDURES:
All storm water management facilities within any development must be construed in accordance with the plans provided by the permittee's design engineer
and approved by the village engineer. The design drawings must be certified by a registered professional engineer, and provided on standard twenty four
inchby thirty six inch (24"x 36") sheets. Smaller individual parcels may be submitted on a smaller appropriate size. (Ord. 85-1289, 4-15-1985)
7-2-4-1: SUBDIVISIONS, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS AND INDIVIDUAL LOTS:
In a subdivision or a planned unit development, all rough grading within a given block (or area) must be completed prior to the issuance of any building
permits. The developer, through its project engineer, shall certify in writing that all rough grading is complete within a given block, watershed or other area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 295/460
in strict conformity with the grading plan as prepared and approved by the village. The village engineer shall verify grading is complete as required and so
notify the village before building can proceed. All proposed drainageways, swales, detention facilities, lot and block grading shall be complete to ensure
minimum effect and disturbance upon properties adjoining said development or other portions within the development.
(A) Survey: All parcels shall have a "building spot survey" performed immediately after the foundation has been poured and backfilled to ensure
compliance with building setback requirements and to ensure that elevations of any openings in the foundation are in conformance with the approved
grading plan requirements of high water restrictions as they relate to the grading plan or storm water management plan. At the same time, the
developers will ensure that the drainage pattern on a particular parcel has not been altered during the course of the foundation construction and
backfilling so as to adversely affect the overall drainage plan. Any improper grading deemed by the building and zoning commissioner and/or village
engineer to be a potential hazard to any property shall be corrected immediately upon his direction or shall be cause for suspension of work on the
parcel.
After the structure on a parcel is substantially completed and final grading is completed, the developer shall furnish an occupancy survey to certify
that the final ground elevations are in strict compliance with the elevations indicated on the approved grading plan. The developer shall be responsible
for the grading of each lot or parcel through all stages of construction to ensure that drainage from tributary areas is not blocked or hindered and that
servient property is protected from damage by providing proper grading to a storm drainage facility in accordance with the approved grading plan.
(B) Exceptions: In those cases where conditions, in the opinion of the village engineer, do not permit compliance with the approved grading plan, a revised
grading plan must be submitted to the village in the same detail as the original submission requires. In the case of those parcels that need additional
detail, the same shall be provided as required by the village engineer. (Ord. 85-1289, 4-15-1985)
7-2-4-2: INDIVIDUAL LOTS OR PARCELS OTHER THAN IN PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 85-1289, 4-15-1985)
7-2-4-3: ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permit shall be issued without a concurrent application for the issuance of a grading permit. In the case of an internal building change, that a
change occurring completely within a building, or as provided in section 7-2-3-2 of this chapter, a grading permit will not be required. The issuance of a
building permit and the grading permit shall be concurrent. (Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
7-2-4-4: ISSUANCE AND ADMINISTRATION OF GRADING PERMITS:
The building commissioner will be responsible for issuance of all grading permits, and shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter. Every
grading permit shall expire by limitation and shall become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not begun within ninety (90) days from
the date of issuance therefor. In the case of such expiration and cancellation, the building commissioner shall provide written notice thereof to the
permittee.
If the work described in the grading permit has not been substantially completed within one year of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall be
expired and be canceled by the commissioner and written notice thereof shall be given to the permittee together with a notice that further work is
prohibited; and, no work shall proceed on the canceled permit until a special grading permit has been issued by the village.
At the discretion of the building commissioner, such special grading permit may be issued based on the original application and permit, or the building
commissioner may require submission of a new application. The special grading permit may include limitations on time allowed for substantial completion
of the work. All special grading permits shall be accompanied by a reasonable performance bond in an amount and form satisfactory to the village. Said
performance bond shall provide surety for the completion of the improvements covered by the permit within the time limit set by the building commissioner.
(Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
7-2-4-5: OCCUPANCY SURVEY:
Immediately after the final parcel grading has been accomplished, but before final seeding, sodding or landscaping takes place, the permittee shall
conduct an occupancy survey to determine if the grading has been done in conformity with the approved gradingplan. Said occupancy survey must be
submitted and approved by the village prior to the issuance of a final occupancy permit. (Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
7-2-5: EASEMENTS:
Whenever a natural watercourse, waterway, drainage swale or the like draining five (5) tributary acres or more, crosses through a parcel or any part of a
parcel, a drainage easement will be required before a grading permit or a building permit will be issued. The village engineer will verify the total tributary
area draining through the subject parcel or part thereof, and the expected runoff to determine the required capacity of the natural watercourse and make
recommendations on size of permanent easements. (Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
7-2-6: PROTECTIVE GROUND COVER; SPECIFICATIONS:
Immediately after final grading has been accomplished and approved by the village on all parcels, protective ground cover shall be installed on the parcel
including the parkway for which the permit was issued. All permittees shall be required to install protective ground cover on all parcels for which a grading
permit has been issued. The protective ground cover shall be installed within the growing season in which the occupancy permit is to be issued. If weather
does not permit the installation of protective ground cover, a cash bond in an amount sufficient to guarantee the completion of the installation of the
protective ground cover shall be furnished; however, in no case shall the completion of the installation of protective ground cover be more than the current
growing season, or June 15 of the next growing season. Alternative protective ground cover other than grass or sod must secure the approval of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 296/460
building commissioner at the time the grading plan is reviewed or prior to the time an occupancy permit is requested if the permittee desires to change
same. Suggested seeding mixtures, application rates, seeding periods and areas of application for establishing permanent protective ground cover are set
forth in table I, on file with the village. (Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
7-2-6-1: SEEDED AREAS:
All portions of the parcel not having pavement, sidewalks or other similar type materials placed thereon are to be provided with protective ground cover. If
the protective ground cover is seeded, the following suggestions are made in preparing the area for seed:
(A) Place topsoil on area to be graded an average depth of four inches (4") and grade as required to finished grades established on the grading plan.
(B) Prepare a firm seed bed free of clods or stones.
(C) Apply fertilizer in sufficient rates of application to establish satisfactory growth in the seeded area.
(D) Select a suitable seeding mixture that will produce a permanent ground cover within a reasonable time.
(E) Broadcast the seed uniformly over the parcel.
(F) Apply a mulch on all sites where slopes exceed ten feet (10') in length and where slopes are steeper than four feet (4') horizontal to one foot (1')
vertical.
(G) On grassed waterways, where sod is not used, a fibrous or synthetic erosion control netting shall be applied. The fibrous or synthetic erosion control
netting shall be secured with six inch (6") long metal staples or no. 8 wire along all edges at twelve inches (12") on center. All joints are to overlap in the
netting a minimum of four inches (4") and be secured with staples a minimum of four inches (4") apart. (Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
7-2-6-2: SODDED AREAS:
Where protective ground cover is to consist of sod, it is suggested the permanent lawn areas to be sodded be prepared in the following manner:
(A) All areas shall be provided with adequate topsoil having an average thickness of four inches (4") and graded as required to finished grades established
on the grading plan. Topsoil shall be scarified as required.
(B) A dense cultivated sod of bluegrass, bromegrass or fescue shall be installed. Only moist, fresh sod shall be used.
(C) Sod should be installed in spring or fall or as moisture requirements are met and when the ground is not frozen.
(D) Sufficient irrigation shall be provided to ensure the growth for the newly installed sod. The obligation to furnish irrigation when sprinklering restrictions
are in effect remain the responsibility of the permittee. (Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
7-2-6-3: APPROVAL OF GROUND COVER:
The building commissioner may approve a ground cover of a substance other than grass, as long as the ground cover maintains the proposed storm water
runoff capabilities of the area to be so landscaped in substantial conformity with the degree of ground cover that would be accomplished if grass were
installed and as long as the substance other than grass is not injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the surrounding residents. (Ord. 79-900, 12-18-
1979)
7-2-7: CONDITIONAL OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
If a parcel cannot be final graded because of adverse weather conditions or other conditions beyond the control of the permittee, the building
commissioner may issue a conditional occupancy permit. The conditional occupancy permit shall be effective for only the reasonable number of days
sufficient to sustain the adverse weather conditions or the other conditions that were beyond the permittee's control. In those instances where a conditional
occupancy is to be issued, the permittee shall furnish a cash bond in an amount sufficient to guarantee the installation and successful growth of the
protective ground cover. In no case shall the cash bond be in excess of the total cost to the village to have the work done by an outside contractor.
At the time of the issuance of a conditional occupancy permit, the permittee, builder or owner shall sign a document informing them of the provisions
necessary to obtain a final occupancy permit. The document referred to herein shall be signed by the permittee, builder and owner prior to the time the
conditional occupancy permit is issued. At the time of application for a conditional occupancy permit, the building commissioner shall determine the
reasonable number of days for permittee's compliance with the requirements of a final occupancy permit based upon the weather conditions or other
conditions that made the issuance of a final occupancy unreasonable because of said conditions. (Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
7-2-8: NONCONFORMITY WITH APPROVED GRADING PLANS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 297/460
Any deviation from the approved grading plans as attached to the grading permit shall require the following: The resubmission of a grading plan indicating
what changes are necessary as a result of the noncompliance with the approved grading plans. The revised grading plan application shall include the
same information as required in the case of application for the original grading permit. All work on the parcel shall terminate until such time as new grading
plans are submitted by the permittee and approved by the village. All persons aggrieved by a decision or decisions of the building commissioner shall have
the right of appeal to the village board of trustees by serving seven (7) days' written notice on the board of trustees. A public hearing on the appeal shall be
conducted with notice given to adjoining property owners in all cases involving appeals that may have a substantial adverse effect on adjoining property.
(Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
7-2-9: FINAL OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
Upon completion of final grading and the installation of protective ground cover in substantial conformity with the approved plans, a final occupancy permit
shall be issued to the holder of the grading permit; however, in those cases where nonconformity with the village codes do not permit the issuanceof a final
occupancy permit, said permit shall not be issued. Determination of conformity with the approved grading plans shall be made by the village building
commissioner. (Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
7-2-10: PERMIT FEES:
(A) Single-Family Parcels:
1. The fee for a grading permit for single-family parcels shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance plus any cost of the village consultants'
services, all costs for providing grading plans, grading surveys or any other material required to be furnished by this chapter shall be underwritten by
the permittee at the permittee's sole expense. (Ord. 85-1289, 4-15-1985)
2. The fee for a grading permit for "critical parcels" shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance, for those critical parcels that require the
services of village consultants, the cost of the village consultants' services, all costs for providing grading plans, grading surveys or any other
material required to be furnished by this chapter shall be underwritten by the permittee at the permittee's sole expense.
(B) Other Than Single-Family Parcels: For all parcels other than single-family parcels, the fee for a grading permit shall be as established by the annual
fee ordinance plus the costs for all services rendered by the village's consultants pertaining to the parcel for which an application for a grading permit
and the issuance of a grading permit is being considered. The costs for consultant's services shall include, but not be limited to, the costs for the
providing of services by the village engineer, village drainage engineer, village planner or other consultants for the review of the material required by
this chapter as well as on site construction observation as well as any other services deemed necessary by the village. All costs incurred by the village
resulting from the rendering of services by village consultants in relationship to this chapter shall be paid for by permittee. (Ord. 79-900, 12-18-1979)
7-2-11: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any portion of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. Each
day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense subjecting any offender to a separate and additional fine. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
7-2-12: LETTER OF CREDIT:
Prior to commencement of any work hereunder or issuance of anypermit a letter of credit shall be posted with the village in compliance with section 5-18-6
of this code. (Ord. 2000-3200, 2-21-2000)
Chapter 3
NONDEDICATED ROAD CRITERIA
7-3-1: DEFINITION:
"Roadway" shall mean any traffic thoroughfare, other than a publicly dedicated street, publicly dedicated alley or private parking lot. (Ord. 504, 2-19-1974)
7-3-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
All manners of traffic thoroughfares other than those for which requirements for design and construction are established in and by the village's subdivision
and off street parking and loading regulations, shall meet the requirements of this chapter as set forth herein1.
(A) Roadway Grading, Construction: All roadways shall be graded full width and constructed of either reinforced concrete pavement, class I bituminous
surface and crushed stone base, or class I bituminous surface and bituminous aggregate mixture base of minimum Marshall stability of 1700. All
roadways shall be of the minimum thickness as set forth in the standard detail sheets of the village, as from time to time amended2.
(B) Curbs And Gutters: All roadways shall be constructed with reinforced concrete combination curb and gutter of the height, width and type required by
the village as shown on the standard detail sheets.
Concrete curb and gutter shall be reinforced longitudinally for the full length of the curb and gutter and as shown on the standard detail sheets of the
village. All work shall be constructed in accordance with said standard detail sheets of the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 298/460
(C) Width Of Roadways: All roadways shall be a minimum width of twenty seven feet (27'), face to face of curb, and constructed as indicated herein.
If the village engineer determines a necessary roadway width wider than twenty seven feet (27'), the roadway shall bewidened to the width required
by the engineer. The width wider than the minimum shall be based on the anticipated traffic volume and type of traffic to be generated and shall be
based on a sound engineering and planning standard.
(D) Grades: The grades of any roadway shall not be less than five-tenths percent (0.5%). (Ord. 504, 2-19-1974)
7-3-3: STORM SEWERS:
Adequate provisions shall be made for proper drainage of storm water and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the storm water
regulations of the village and the village standard detail sheets. The design of the drainage system within the development shall anticipate and provide
capacity for other drainage from naturally tributary land. Such design shall provide adequate capacity for transmitting such drainage from the other
tributary areas on the basis of the ultimate development of such other tributary areas and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the storm
sewer regulations and the standard detail sheets of the village, as from time to time amended. (Ord. 504, 2-19-1974)
7-3-4: VARIATIONS:
Appeals for variation from the terms of this chapter or from the regulations, interpretations or determinations of fact pursuant to this chapter made by any
officer, employee, department, consultant, board or bureau of the village, may be made by the owner or applicant affected thereby in the same manner
provided for under the board of zoning appeals regulations, and subsequent applicable sections of the zoning regulations of the village, being title 5 of this
code, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 504, 2-19-1974)
Chapter 4
SPECIAL EVENTS
7-4-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person or organization shall conduct, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, open air public meeting,
sporting event, organized walk or run, or procession of any kind or any similar display, with more than twelve (12) total intended participants and
attendees, in or upon any street, park, or other public place in the village unless a special event permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police
not less than sixty (60) days prior to the event, except that this time requirement may be shortened by the village for good cause shown.
Exceptions: This chapter shall not apply to:
(A) Funeral processions;
(B) Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and
supervision of the proper school authorities, and provided such conduct does not require traffic control;
(C) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions, including, but not limited to, functions sponsored and operated totally within the
property of such governmental agency which do not impact the general policy requirements for such event by the village; or
(D) Any event to be held at the village of Lisle/Benedictine University Sports Complex that has been included in the most current facilities schedule, as
required under section 4.3 of the facilities use agreement, by and between the village and Benedictine University, dated February 12, 2004, and on file
with the village clerk. (Ord. 2005-3963, 11-7-2005)
7-4-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEES:
A person seeking issuance of a special event permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by the police department. The fee
for a special event permit shall be as established in the annual fee ordinance and must be submitted with the application for a special event permit. (Ord.
2005-3963, 11-7-2005)
7-4-3: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
The chief of police shall review a special event permit application and provide an assessment to the village board to confirm that:
(A) The application for a special event has been properly completed with all required information and has been filed at least sixty (60) days prior to the
special event, except this time requirement may be shortened by the village for good cause shown.
(B) The special event will not be held on the same day as another special event that would require the diversion of so great a number of police officers so
as to negatively affect other police department administrative or public safety responsibilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 299/460
(C) The event is not to be held for any unlawful purpose.
(D) The conduct of the event will not unreasonably interfere with the public use of the public ways of the village.
(E) The conduct of the event will not reduce normal police protection of the village.
(F) The event will not be a breach of the peace.
(G) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the special event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas, nor interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to
a fire elsewhere in the village.
(H) The conduct of the event will not endanger the safety of the participants or spectators of the special event. (Ord. 2010-4330, 6-21-2010)
7-4-4: APPLICATION APPROVAL, REJECTION:
The police chief shall complete a review of the application within five (5) business days and forward an assessment to the village board. The village board
shall consider and rule on the application at its next regularly scheduled board meeting or at a special meeting held for such purpose. (Ord. 2010-4330, 6-
21-2010)
7-4-5: NOTICE TO VILLAGE AND OTHER OFFICIALS:
Immediately upon the issuance of a special event permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the village manager, the street superintendent,
and the chief of the Lisle/Woodridge fire protection district. (Ord. 2005-3963, 11-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2010-4330, 6-21-2010)
7-4-6: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The special event chairman or
other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the special event permit upon his/her person at all times during the conduct of the event. (Ord.
2005-3963, 11-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2010-4330, 6-21-2010)
7-4-7: INSURANCE, INDEMNIFICATION AND HOLD HARMLESS REQUIRED:
The village will not accept any liability for injury or damage to any person or property resulting from any activities related to a special event.
(A) Insurance: Any person, organization, or group requesting a special event permit shall provide a certificate of insurance and additional insured
endorsements, issued by a company acceptable to the village and authorized to do business in the state of Illinois. In order to meet its obligations
under this section, an applicant shall submit with its application for a special event permit, evidence of commercial liability insurance in an amount
reasonably acceptable to the village, as determined by the village manager, naming the village, its elected and appointed officials, attorneys,
employees, contractors, and volunteers as additional insured on a primary and noncontributory basis, with limits of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate covering any such claims, unless such requirement is reduced or
waived by the village manager for good cause shown. Events occurring over multiple days or higher risk events which pose a greater likelihood of
resulting bodily injury may require higher liability insurance limits.
(B) Indemnification And Hold Harmless Agreement: The permit application shall be accompanied by an indemnification agreement in which the applicant
and/or sponsor of the special event agrees to the fullest extent permitted by law, to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the village, its officials, agents,
employees and volunteers against all injuries, deaths, loss, damages, claims, suits, liabilities, judgments, cost and expenses (including attorney fees),
which may in any way accrue against the village, its officials, agents, employees and volunteers arising in whole or in part or in consequence of the
applicant's use of the public property, public right of way, public equipment or public personnel or volunteers at, during, or in conjunction with the
special event described in the permit. The duty to indemnify and hold harmless under this section shall not apply to injuries, death, loss, damages,
claims, suits, liabilities, judgments, and costs arising out of the sole legal cause of the village, its officials, agents or employees. (Ord. 2017-4697, 1-9-
2017)
7-4-8: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING SPECIAL EVENTS:
(A) Interference: No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any special event covered by this chapter, or with any person,
vehicle, or animal participating or used in such special event.
(B) Driving Through Parades: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are
part of a parade.
(C) Special Event Traffic And Parking: The chief of police shall have the authority to direct, control and regulate traffic in and around a special event
through the temporary designation of signs, personnel or other traffic control devices, and to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 300/460
or part thereof constituting a part of the special event area. The chief of police shall cause to be posted signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. Any sign or device posted per order of the chief of police shall be deemed an
official village sign, and shall be valid for as long as public safety requires. (Ord. 2005-3963, 11-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2010-4330, 6-21-2010)
7-4-9: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a special event permit issued under this chapter upon a finding that the permittee has violated any of
the standards set forth in section 7-4-3 of this chapter. Any revocation will be reviewed by the village board unless time does not permit. In no event will a
permit be revoked without prior notification to the village board. (Ord. 2010-4330, 6-21-2010)
7-4-10: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, pay a fine as established in the annual fee ordinance and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day that such violation exists. (Ord. 2005-3963, 11-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2010-4330, 6-21-2010)
7-4-11: EMERGENCY TERMINATION OF SPECIAL EVENT:
The chief of police has the authority to immediately shut down a special event in the case of a disaster or severe weather or in order to preserve the safety
and welfare of participants of the special event. (Ord. 2005-3963, 11-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2010-4330, 6-21-2010)
Chapter 5
VILLAGE WATERWORKS SYSTEM
7-5-1: ASSIGNMENT OF RESPONSIBILITY:
Wherever the terms public works director, village manager, community development director or business office manager appears, it includes his or her
designee. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-5-2: SERVICE TO INDIVIDUALS:
No water from the village water supply shall be turned on for service into any premises by any person but the public works director. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-
1995)
7-5-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
(A) No person shall make any connection to the water system of the village without having first obtained a permit from the community development
director.
(B) The supply of water from the village to any and all customers or users is governed by the rates, regulations, and other terms set forth in this code, as
from time to time amended, including the right to file liens for nonpayment as set forth in section 7-5-7 of this chapter. A copy of this chapter properly
certified by the village clerk and filed in the recorder's office of DuPage County, Illinois, shall be deemed notice that the supply of water by the village is
governed by said code.
(C) For new construction, the owner of the premises must execute an application to have water turned on, which application shall contain terms consented
to by the owner (hereinafter "application/agreement"). Such application/agreement shall provide that the terms set forth therein shall run with the land
and inure to the benefit of, and be binding upon, all successors in title of the subject premises. Upon review of said application/agreement, the public
works director shall make a determination as to whether a water connection permit shall be issued and, if appropriate, shall issue such a permit.
(D) Whenever the user of the village water services intends to cease using such services, due to moving or other reasons, said user must notify the village
of the day he intends to cease using water services. Notification may be made to the village billing department by telephone or in writing, which
department shall record such notification in the ordinary course of business. The village will then perform a final reading of the meter and bill the user
accordingly. To transfer billing of water services to a new user when no transfer of ownership is anticipated, the new user must notify the billing
department. Regardless of any such notification, however, the owner of the premises will remain liable for any water services used prior to his
conveyance of the title to the property.
(E) Whenever the owner of the premises serviced by the village water intends to sell or otherwise convey the property, he must notify the billing
department of the date scheduled for closing. On that date, the village will conduct a final reading and bill the owner accordingly. The proposed buyer
must also notify the village of the date he intends to begin using the village water. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-5-4: INSPECTION FEES:
An inspection fee, as established by the annual fee ordinance, for each connection or for each dwelling unit in a multi-family structure served by the
connection, whichever is greater, shall be paid to the village at the time application for a permit is made. (Ord. 95-2702, 11-6-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 301/460
7-5-5: CONNECTION FEES:
(A) A fee shall be paid as established by the annual fee ordinance for each connection.
(B) The established fees do not include the cost of the meter and outside reading device which must be secured from the village and paid for by the user.
(C) For connections to multiple-family residence and/or commercial units, the connection and inspection fee shall be as stated in subsection (A) of this
section, plus an additional fee as established by the annual fee ordinance for each unit more than one serviced by said connection. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-
1995)
(D) All connections of village water mains, which mains were constructed by or for the village, excepting those mains constructed pursuant to the
subdivision regulations as on site improvements, shall, in addition to all other connection fees and charges be subject to a fee as established by the
annual fee ordinance per foot of lot frontage. (Ord. 2002-3395, 4-15-2002)
(E) The established connection fees as set forth in subsections (A) and (C) of this section shall be increased as established by the annual fee ordinance
for consumers located outside the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2004-3840, 6-7-2004)
(F) There shall be an additional connection fee for sprinkler systems which fee shall be based upon the size of the water line necessary to connect the
sprinkler system to the village water system. The fee schedule shall be at the rate established by the annual fee ordinance per inch of water line size.
Further, there shall be an annual service charge for all sprinkler systems at the rate established by the annual fee ordinance per sprinkler system. All
sprinkler systems shall include a leak detector meter to be installed at the owner's expense, said leak detector to be acceptable to the village engineer.
(G) The provisions of this chapter may be amended from time to time upon the approval of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
(H) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, lots in the Woodridge Estates subdivisions shall not pay the front footage fee set out in subsection
(D) of this section. In lieu of that front footage fee, lots in the Woodridge Estates subdivisions shall pay a pro rata share of the village's cost of
construction of the water supply line and the individual services from the main to the property line, which is established by the annual fee ordinance per
lot. (Ord. 2004-3826, 4-19-2004)
7-5-6: WATER RATES:
(A) Water Rates: All property upon which any building has been or may hereafter be erected, having a connection with any mains or pipes which may be
hereafter constructed and used in connection with the village water system, shall pay the rate as established by the annual fee ordinance per one
thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction thereof. Single-family users shall be billed bimonthly; all other users shall be billed monthly. The minimum
bimonthly rate to each consumer shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance. The minimum monthly rate of each consumer shall be as
established by the annual fee ordinance per unit. Each residential living unit contained in any multi-family structure shall be considered a separate unit
for minimum billing purposes. The rates specified herein shall be applicable to water consumed on and after June 1, 2005. (Ord. 2005-3932, 6-20-
2005)
(B) Users Outside Corporate Limits: The rates applicable to users of the village water system located outside the corporate limits of the village shall be as
established by the annual fee ordinance.
(C) Temporary Building Construction Water; Fire Hydrant Usage Permit:
1. During the construction of a building, before a water meter has been installed, the contractor so constructing such building may be permitted to
temporarily use the village water supply by making application therefor, and by paying the appropriate security deposit as established by the annual
fee ordinance. After having received a permit for such temporary use, the contractor may use the village water supply until a water meter has been
installed, which meter shall be installed as soon as the building is enclosed and in no case later than three (3) days prior to the date of final
inspection for occupancy purposes.
2. Prior to actual construction, the permitted contractor shall notify the village two (2) business days prior to the actual need of the temporary water use.
The village personnel will then select the nearest available fire hydrant and connect a village fire hydrant meter, backflow prevention device,
antitamper device and valve, and activate the fire hydrant. The permitted contractor shall be responsible for plumbing connection adaptations beyond
the hydrant meter assembly.
3. The permitted contractor shall pay two (2) times the village water rate for those temporary water uses recorded on the meter.
4. No person or persons other than village personnel shall operate the fire hydrant for the purpose of this section.
5. After the water meter is installed within the building, the temporary hydrant usage permit shall be deemed void. The contractor shall notify village
personnel to turn off the fire hydrant, inspect the hydrant and meter assembly for damages, and record water consumption.
6. In the event that the charges for water consumption are less than the security deposit of the contractor, the village shall retain a portion of the
security deposit equal to the charges and refund to the contractor the difference between the security deposit and the charges incurred.
7. In the event that the charges for water consumption are more than the security deposit of the contractor, the village shall retain the entire security
deposit and shall bill the contractor the difference between the charges incurred and the amount of the security deposit. Said bill shall be due and
payable by the contractor immediately upon receipt.
8. The provisions of this subsection (C) shall apply to and permit the use of water for building construction only. The use of water from a fire hydrant for
any other purpose including, but not limited to, landscaping or road construction is prohibited except to the extent and pursuant to subsection (D) of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 302/460
this section.
(D) Temporary Construction Water; Fire Hydrant Usage Permit:
1. Permit Approval Requirements: Upon an application for a permit for temporary use of the village water supply for purposes other than construction of
a building, the public works director shall determine whether or not the application should be approved or rejected based on criteria including, but not
limited to, the following: a) availability of water to the village; b) amount of water required; and c) availability of water to the contractor from other
sources; d) likelihood of payment by the applicant; e) previous illegal use of village water by the applicant; f) effect of the water usage on public
health, safety, and general welfare.
2. Hydrants To Be Approved: If the application is approved, the public works director shall determine from which hydrants the water shall be drawn. If,
in the public works director's determination, it is more appropriate, the water shall be delivered to a tank truck of the permittee from a hydrant on the
grounds of the village public works department. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
3. Contractors' Charges For Water:
(a) Contractors acquiring water from the public works yard hydrant shall account for all water used from that hydrant. Water shall not be taken unless
a village water meter with a backflow preventer is installed on the hydrant.
The contractor shall submit, on a form provided by the village, the necessary information to bill the contractor, including the amount of water used.
Said bill shall be due and payable by the contractor immediately upon receipt.
The water rate shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance.
(b) Contractors taking water from hydrants other than at the public works yard shall obtain a water meter from the public works department. Prior to
receiving the meter, and upon approval of an application, a security deposit shall be required. The security deposit shall be as established by the
annual fee ordinance.
There shall also be a nonrefundable permit fee as established by the annual fee ordinance required upon approval of the application. In addition, a
meter rental charge per week as established by the annual fee ordinance shall be paid.
The water rate shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance.
In the event that the charges for water consumption are less than the security deposit of the contractor, the village shall retain a portion of the
security deposit equal to the charges and refund to the contractor the difference between the security deposit and the charges incurred.
In the event that the charges for water consumption are more than the security deposit of the contractor, the village shall retain the entire security
deposit and shall bill the contractor the difference between the charges incurred and the amount of the security deposit. Said bill shall be due and
payable by the contractor immediately upon receipt. (Ord. 99-3096, 3-15-1999)
4. Security Deposit Waivers: The village reserves the right to waive security deposits and water costs for the village's own temporary construction water
uses, operational, or maintenance uses as well as temporary water uses of other governmental taxing bodies, including, but not limited to, the
Lisle/Woodridge fire district and Lisle park district. Notwithstanding any such waiver, the water shall be drawn from approved metered sources only.
(Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
(E) Water Rate Revision: The water rates shall be reviewed annually. The rates will be included in the supplementary information to the village's audited
comprehensive annual financial report. The water rates shall be revised periodically, as determined by the village board, to reflect a change in local
capital costs or operating, maintenance, and replacement costs.
(F) User Disagreement With Rates; Village Expenses: The method for determining rates established for user charges in this section shall be made
available to a user within fourteen (14) working days of receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the village's rate determination
thereof shall be reviewed by the board of trustees within thirty (30) calendar days after notification of such asserted disagreement.
Any expense incurred by the village in ascertaining whether a revision in the water rate should be made including, but not limited to, staff time, legal
fees, professional services fees, etc., shall be paid by the applicant for the requested change within thirty (30) days after the completion of the thirty
(30) day period cited above. These expenses shall be considered as part of the applicant's regular water bill and shall be subject to the same sanctions
for nonpayment. (Ord. 2004-3840, 6-7-2004)
7-5-7: RENDITION OF BILLS:
(A) Payment Due; Liability: All bills for water used shall be rendered bimonthly for single-family residences, and monthly for all other users, as of the first
day of the month succeeding the period for which the service is billed or as soon thereafter as possible, except as otherwise provided under subsection
7-5-6(A) of this chapter, and shall be payable not later than the close of business on the fifteenth day after the date the bills are rendered. If payment of
the full amount of the bill is not made within said period, then a penalty as established by the annual fee ordinance of the total outstanding and unpaid
amount of the bill shall be added thereto and a late payment notice will be issued. If the bill or any portion thereof remains unpaid as of the due date
stated on the late payment notice, then in addition to the penalty, an additional fee as established by the annual fee ordinance will be added to the bill.
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the services shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of service to any
premises. In the event charges for services are not paid within thirty (30) days after rendition of a bill for such service, such charges shall be and are
hereby declared delinquent, and thereafter such delinquency shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such services are supplied. The
village finance director is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the recorder of deeds of
DuPage County, Illinois, and the filing of such statement shall be deemed notice of and constitute perfection of a lien for such services. (Ord. 98-2983,
5-4-1998)
(B) Nonpayment:
1. The water supply may be disconnected from any premises owned or occupied by any person liable for the payment of the water bill if the bill remains
unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days after the bill is rendered and mailed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 303/460
2. When such water supply is disconnected, reconnection shall not occur until all past due water bills, including penalties thereon are paid, together
with the payment of the fee as established by the annual fee ordinance for such reconnection. Payment of past due bills resulting in disconnection
may be made by tendering same to the village business office during the regular business hours of said office or by depositing same in the village
hall drop box or the village police department after the regular business hours of said office. In no event and under no circumstances may any such
payment be tendered in any form to any village employee, including, but not limited to, public works department employees, except those persons
authorized to accept such payment.
3. As soon as practicable after the payment of past due water bills according to the procedures set forth above, the village public works department
shall, during the regular operating hours of the department, take all steps necessary to reconnect the water supply to the subject premises.
4. Provided, however, the foregoing notwithstanding, if any occupant, user or owner of the premises receiving service has a bona fide dispute over the
statement, charge or penalty determined or issued by the village and challenges same as hereafter provided, then services shall not be disconnected
until the occupant, user or owner raising said dispute shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard by the assistant village manager, an employee
of the village hereby designated to conduct a pretermination review of the disputed statement, charge or penalty subsequent to notice to the
occupant, user or owner indicating to him the amount due the village, the nature of said statement, charge or penalty and notice that his water
service will be terminated in the event that said statement, charge or penalty is not paid or adjusted after having said dispute considered by said
assistant village manager.
5. In any final notice or notice of disconnection to occupant, user or owner prior to termination of service, the occupant, user or owner shall be notified
that if he, she or it has a bona fide dispute, said person shall have ten (10) days within which to request, in writing to the village clerk, a hearing by
the assistant village manager. If no request is made, the statement shall become final and service may be thereafter terminated by the village.
6. In the event that an informal hearing is held and the assistant village manager determines that the objection to the statement, charge or penalty is
not proper and that the statement, charge or penalty is correct, and in the event that the occupant, user or owner wishes to have reviewed any
decision of the assistant village manager with respect to statement, charge or penalty, the amount due or any reduction or increase in the amount
due, then he shall have the right to appeal to the village board of trustees for their determination and review of the decision of the assistant village
manager. Any decision of the assistant village manager not appealed from within the time hereinafter set forth shall be final.
7. Any request for review of the assistant village manager's decision must be made in writing, addressed to the village president and board of trustees
and must be made within ten (10) days after any adverse decision of the assistant village manager and by filing same with the village clerk, who shall
place the matter on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the corporate authorities, whereat said matter shall be considered. At said
hearing, the assistant village manager shall present his reasons for his decision. The occupant, user or owner shall also be heard as to his objection
to any statement, charge or penalty and the president and board of trustees shall then make their decision and the village clerk shall cause it to be
delivered to the occupant, user or owner within five (5) days, by personal service or certified mail. In the event that decision upholds any
disconnection, said disconnection shall take place not less than ten (10) days thereafter unless said termination is stayed by order of a court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-5-8: METERS REQUIRED; FEES:
(A) All premises and structures using the village water supply must be equipped with an adequate water meter and outside reading device furnished by the
village but paid for by the applicant, customer, owner or contractor. The minimum size for water meters shall be three-fourths inch (3/4"). All meters two
inches (2") in size or larger shall be compound meters with a bypass with a lockable valve as required by the public works director. The meter shall be
and remain the property of the village and the charge therefor shall constitute a rental of the meter.
(B) All meters larger than one inch (1") in size shall be installed by the applicant, customer, owner or contractor. All meters one inch (1") and smaller in size
shall be installed by the village, and a charge as established by the annual fee ordinance for said installation shall be made by the village and paid for
by the applicant, customer, owner or contractor at the time of the application for a water tap-on permit. The installation charge shall be in addition to all
other fees or charges to be paid by the applicant, customer, owner or contractor pursuant to village ordinances. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-5-9: LOCATION AND PROTECTION OF METERS:
(A) Meters shall be located in any easily accessible place approved by the public works director and protected from frost. When meters are injured by frost
or otherwise, the public works director must be notified at once. The cost of repairing meters injured by frost shall be paid for by the persons owning the
premises.
(B) Where building space to house a meter is not available, an outside meter vault may be installed when approved by the public works director. Such
meter vault shall be constructed of the size, type and kind of materials as required and approved by the public works director and shall include shutoff
valves on each side of the meter with provision for easy removal of the meter. In addition, a remote meter reader shall be installed in locations as
directed by the public works director and shall be of the type as approved by said public works director. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-5-10: TESTING AND REPAIRING METERS:
(A) All meters one inch (1") or less in size shall be tested for accuracy as necessary by the village public works department. The village shall also test at
the request of an owner or consumer.
If the test is requested by the owner or the consumer, the village shall pay for the testing, repair or replacement if: The meter is found to be over
registering the amount of water flowing through the meter, or the repair or replacement is required due to the negligence of the village.
If the test is requested by the owner or the consumer, the owner and consumer shall be responsible for the cost of testing, repair or replacement if: The
meter is found to be accurate or under registering the amount of water flowing through the meter, or the repair or replacement is required due to the
negligence of the owner or consumer.
If the test is performed without the request of the owner or consumer the village shall pay the cost of testing, repair or replacement. However, the owner
and consumer shall be responsible for the cost of such repair or replacement if it is due to the negligence of the owner or consumer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 304/460
(B) The cost of repairing and testing for accuracy on all meters larger than one inch (1") in size shall be paid for by the owner, and shall include all costs of
the village to remove, replace, test and repair said meter. The public works director shall inspect and determine when a meter should be removed for
testing and repair. All meters larger than one inch (1") in size that must be replaced shall be furnished by the village and paid for by the owner and shall
include the cost of removing and replacing the meter. (Ord. 96-2766, 4-15-1996)
7-5-11: TEMPORARY DISCONNECTION AND FINAL BILLING:
After proper notification to the village, the village will make a final reading of the meter and shut off the water supply at the buffalo box and submit a final
bill to the consumer. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-5-12: COMPLIANCE TO PLUMBING REGULATIONS:
(A) Plumbing Rules: No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the plumbing does not comply with the ordinances of the village1
provided that water may be turned on for construction work in unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Abandon Wells: No water from the village water supply shall be turned on for service into any premises which has tapped onto the village water mains,
unless and until any and all existing wells located on the premises being served shall have been abandoned and properly sealed according to
requirements propounded by the state and the county of DuPage health department. The public works director may approve the turn on of village water
for up to thirty (30) days while an existing well is being sealed, as long as there is no cross connection with the village water system. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-
5-1995)
7-5-13: RESALE OF WATER:
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the village supply to any premises other than that for which application has been made
and the meter installed, except in the case of emergency and when approved by the village manager. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-5-14: LIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
All connections and water applied for hereunder, and all the water used hereunder, shall be upon the express condition that the village shall not be liable,
nor shall any claim be made against it, for damages or injury caused by reason of the breaking of any main, branches, service pipes, apparatus or
appurtenances connected with said waterworks system or any part or portion of said plant, or for any interruption of the supply by reason of the breakage
of machinery, or by reason of stoppage, alterations, extensions or renewals. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-5-15: RIGHT OF ACCESS:
The village and its employees shall have ready access, to the extent allowed by law, to the premises, places or buildings where meters or water shutoff
valves are located for the purpose of reading, examining, testing, shutting off or turning on water, and repairing the same, and examining and testing the
consumption, use and flow of water. Every consumer of said water shall take the same upon the conditions prescribed in this section. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-
1995)
7-5-16: CONNECTION SPECIFICATIONS:
All water mains and services shall meet the following specifications. Where there is no specification, the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer
Main Construction In Illinois" shall be used. The village's standard details2 shall govern construction.
(A) Requirements:
1. The buffalo or shutoff box, connection valves and service pipe shall be furnished, and installed by and at the expense of the applicant, owner or
contractor, as shall all labor for trenching, pushing or backfilling. The roundway and the corporation stop shall be Mueller or Ford brass (flared). The
buffalo or shutoff box shall be a five foot six inches by one and one-fourth inches (5'6" x 11/4") Minneapolis screw on type. The buffalo or shutoff box
shall be located seven feet (7') to the street side of lot line. All service pipe shall be either: a) soft temper type K copper water tube (single length) of
one inch (1") internal diameter or larger size or, b) ductile iron water main of four inches (4") or larger and shall extend into and within the building to
be served with a gate type shutoff valve on both sides of a village water meter or meter bar.
2. The said village water meter shall be located within the building in such a manner as will protect it from frost and in a location that will permit free
access thereto. There shall also be an outside reading device furnished by the village but be paid for by the consumer. A one-half inch (1/2") conduit
shall be installed by the applicant, owner or contractor from the water meter through the outside front wall terminating at a point four feet (4')
aboveground within six feet (6') of the front driveway corner of the house, except in the cases of attached garage type houses when the conduit shall
terminate within six feet (6') of the dwelling side of the garage door opening. Said conduit shall not be located underground and must be installed
within the building housing the meter up to the point where the outside remote reader shall be located. The outside reading device shall be installed
four feet (4') aboveground on the front of the building housing the meter. All service connections to ductile iron water mains, cast iron water mains,
PVC water main and transit water mains shall be accomplished by installing a bronze double strap saddle (Smith Blair 323), or a twelve inch (12")
long stainless steel full circle single band saddle (Smith Blair 264), or approved equal as shown on the village water main standard details.
3. Separate domestic water service lines and fire flow lines shall be constructed for all buildings needing a fire sprinkler system. They may be installed
in the same trench, but separated a minimum of twenty four inches (24"). Each line shall be separately tapped onto the water main.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 305/460
4. Where water services are required as part of constructing water mains for a subdivision, the developer's water main contractor shall provide the tap
and corporation cock as part of his work and there shall be no charge made by the village for the taps made by the developer's contractor.
5. Water and sewer services from the mains up to and entering the building shall be separated a minimum of ten feet (10') horizontally, wherever
possible, or eighteen inches (18") vertically, where the horizontal separation is not possible.
(B) Repairs Or Replacement: All repairs for or replacement of service pipes from the right of way line to the building shall be made by and at the expense
of the owners of the premises serviced. The village may, in case of emergency, repair any service pipes and, if this is done, the cost of such repair work
shall be repaid to the village by the owner of the premises served.
(C) Valve Manholes Or Vaults: Where service lines are installed that are four inches (4") and larger in size, the shutoff valve shall be installed in a valve
manhole or valve vault unless otherwise approved by the village engineer. Valve manholes or vaults shall be constructed in accordance with current
standards of the village and/or as directed by the village engineer. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-5-17: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The village manager and/or community development director are hereby authorized and empowered to revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
when it has been determined that the permittee has violated the conditions of such permit or of this chapter. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-5-18: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
(A) Violation Declared Nuisance: Any violation of any terms and provisions of this chapter is hereby declared, by the corporate authorities, to be a public
nuisance. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
(B) Fines And Penalties: Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
on conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day that such violation or failure to comply with these provisions exists. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
7-5-19: WATER USE RESTRICTED:
(A) Use Restrictions: During the period between May 15 and September 15, inclusive, the outside use of running water from a hose or sprinkling system,
for the purpose of watering/sprinkling of lawns and gardens, shall be limited in the following manner:
1. "Outside use of water", as defined hereinabove, for buildings with the last digit in the street address being an odd number is permitted only on the
days of the month having an odd number and is restricted to the period of time between five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and
between five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.;
2. "Outside use of water", as defined hereinabove, for buildings with the last digit in the street address being an even number is permitted only on the
days of the month having an even number and is restricted to the period of time between five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M., and
between five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Ord. 2006-4003, 4-3-2006)
(B) Emergency Situations: In the event of a water supply emergency if it is determined that the above referenced provisions are inadequate and
diminishing reserves of the village water supply are experienced and if the village manager determines that the situation is likely to become dangerous
to the health and safety of the public, the village manager is hereby authorized to issue a proclamation in the form of a public notice containing
additional, more restrictive regulations regarding the use of water. Said proclamation shall remain in effect until the next regular village board meeting,
at which time the village board shall take action to extend or terminate the proclamation.
(C) Exemptions: The following shall be exempt from the restriction set forth above:
1. All local government agencies;
2. Those permittees that obtain special hydrant usage permits from the village;
3. The use of water obtained from a source other than the village waterworks system;
4. The use of water from attended, handheld garden hoses; and
5. Watering of newly sodded or seeded lawns if located on parcels of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or less if:
(a) Watering is restricted to the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. but may be performed on any day;
(b) An application for a permit under this section is filed with the village seven (7) days prior to the sodding or seeding and a permit has been issued
by the public works director;
(c) No sodding or seeding shall be installed prior to permit issuance; and
(d) All permits under subsection (C)5(b) of this section shall expire fourteen (14) days after issuance and may be revoked in emergency.
Note: The village president and board of trustees are hereby authorized to revoke the aforementioned exemptions in times of emergency. (Ord. 95-
2684, 9-5-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 306/460
(D) Penalties: Any persons violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance for the first offense,
and a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance for the second or succeeding offenses. (Ord. 99-3126, 6-21-1999)
7-5-20: DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE:
Upon receipt by the village of written notice and verification from the department of environmental concerns of the county of DuPage (department) that:
(A) A rate or charge for the sewerage service has become delinquent, and
(B) The department has afforded the delinquent party notice that the party's water service will be shut off if the delinquency is not cured, and
(C) 1. The department has afforded the delinquent party an opportunity to be heard regarding all objections the delinquent party may have to the rates or
charges for said water service;
2. And further, upon determination that the delinquent party is provided water services by the village, the public works director shall cause the water
services to the premises of the delinquent party to be discontinued. Upon written notice from the department that the delinquency has been cured,
the public works director shall restore water services to the subject premises.
3. The village clerk shall charge the department with the reasonable costs for any such discontinuance and resumption of water services.
4. The current payment by the department for such costs shall be a condition precedent to termination of any other municipal water services requested
by the department. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-5-21: CROSS CONNECTIONS:
(A) Cross Connections Prohibited:
1. Connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited unless approved cross connection control devices or methods are installed, tested, and maintained to ensure proper operation
on a continuing basis.
2. No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the Illinois environmental protection agency. An "approved cross connection
control device" shall be one which is approved by the regulations promulgated from time to time by the Illinois environmental protection agency and
the Illinois pollution control board and as approved by the public works director or his designee (hereinafter the "director").
(B) Cross Connection Control Required:
1. The director shall determine if an approved cross connection control device is necessary for any establishment that has a connection to the village
waterworks system. The director shall give notice to the property owner or customer that an approved cross connection control device is to be
installed on the service line from the village waterworks supply to the premises being served by said supply. The type of device and installation
method shall be as approved by the director.
2. All cross connection devices and appurtenances are to be purchased, installed, and maintained at the sole expense of the property owner or
customer.
3. The following establishments shall be exempt from the requirements of this section:
(a) Single-family and multi-family residential dwellings, not used for business purposes, whose water supply plumbing is plumbed in accordance with
a plumbing code at least as stringent as the Illinois state plumbing code as from time to time amended.
(C) Location Of Cross Connection Control Devices:
1. Cross connection devices shall be installed in a location as approved by the director.
2. The devices shall be located in a manner that readily facilitates maintenance, testing, and repair and that does not create a cross connection. Cross
connection devices shall be protected from frost. Cross connection devices shall include an isolation valve with test cocks on each side of the cross
connection control device.
(D) Surveys And Investigations:
1. The director shall cause surveys and investigations of properties serviced by the village waterworks system to be performed every two (2) years to
determine whether potential or actual cross connections exist. The purpose of this survey is to compile and update an inventory of devices. It must
consist of a pencil and paper collection of information, conducted by telephone, mail or personal visit to the manager or owner of a specific property.
It is not intended to include an actual visual inspection of piping or plumbing systems.
2. The director, or authorized agent shall have access as permitted by section 7-5-15 of this chapter as amended from time to time.
(E) Testing And Repair:
1. Cross connection control devices shall be tested immediately upon installation and tested annually thereafter by a certified cross connection control
device inspector (CCCDI). The results of each test shall be immediately reported to the director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 307/460
2. Faulty devices shall be repaired or replaced within one day for an air gap device, and within five (5) days for double check valves or reduced
pressure backflow preventers by the property owner or customer. However, if the director finds that an unprotected connection poses an immediate
hazard to the public water supply, the director may require repair or installation in less than the one or five (5) days specified herein, or may order
disconnection of the hazard until an approved device is properly installed and tested.
3. All costs to test, repair and/or replace cross connection control devices, as well as the hiring of a CCCDI, shall be at the sole expense and
responsibility of the property owner or customer. Record of inspection, testing, and/or repairs shall be submitted to the director. Each device shall
have a record of maintenance available on site. Said record shall have dates of tests, inspector's name and CCCDI license number, type repairs, and
test results. Maintenance of devices shall be as recommended by the device manufacturer. The manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be
available on site.
(F) Disconnection Of Service:
1. The director shall be authorized to discontinue water service to any property wherein a cross connection violation exists as herein provided.
2. However, water service may be discontinued only five (5) calendar days after notice is given to the property owner or customer via regular first class
mail. Notice shall be deemed given on the day it is deposited in any main or branch United States post office.
3. The director shall be authorized to discontinue service without notice to the property owner or customer to prevent actual or anticipated
contamination or pollution of the village waterworks supply if the actual or anticipated contamination or pollution poses an immediate hazard to the
public water supply.
4. The village shall not be held liable for any injury, damages, or lost revenues which result from discontinuation of property owners' or customers'
water service in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(G) Reconnection Of Service: Water service shall not be restored until all of the conditions that warranted disconnection are eliminated or corrected to the
satisfaction of the public works director, in compliance with the provisions of this section.
(H) Contamination And/Or Pollution Of Water Supply: In the event that contamination and/or pollution does occur to the village waterworks supply, the
property owner and/or the customer responsible for allowing the contaminants and/or pollutants into the village waterworks system through an illegal
cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, shall bear all costs and expenses of
decontamination of the village waterworks system. (Ord. 95-2700, 11-6-1995)
7-5-22: RECORD KEEPING:
(A) Revenues: All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the water system shall be deposited in the water account of the water fund. All such
revenues and monies shall be held by the village of Lisle finance director separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all
other funds of the village of Lisle not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be
directed by the president and board of trustees. The village of Lisle finance director shall receive all such revenues from the water system and all other
funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the account of the fund
designated as the "water fund of the village of Lisle". Said finance director shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute
of the "revised cities and villages act", effective January 1942.
(B) Accounts: The village of Lisle finance director shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which
complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water system. Annually the village of Lisle finance director shall cause an
audit to be conducted of the general purpose financial statements of the village. The required supplementary information to the village's audited
financial statements shall include the customary operating statements of the water revenue fund including revenues and expenses. The supplemental
information shall also include the following:
1. Flow data showing total gallons received at the water plant for the current fiscal year.
2. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
3. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
4. Number of users connected to the system.
5. Number of nonmetered users.
(C) Access To Records: The Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA) or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents,
papers and records of the village of Lisle which are applicable to the village of Lisle system of user charges for the purpose of making audit,
examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any state grant. (Ord.
2004-3840, 6-7-2004)
7-5-23: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, certain terms or words used herein are hereby defined and the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation of the
provisions of this title. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; the singular number shall include the plural, the plural the singular;
the word "person" shall include a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation; the words "used or occupied" include the
words "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied"; the word "shall" or "will" is mandatory; and the word "may" is permissive. Any other words
used and not defined herein shall be construed as having the commonly accepted meaning as defined in a standard dictionary.
AIR GAP: Prevents backflow by physically disconnecting the water supply and any source of contamination.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 308/460
BACKFLOW PREVENTER: Device used to prevent water from within a structure or temporary connection to flow backward through the meter into the
public water supply main; protects the system from contamination.
BUFFALO BOX: A vertical sleeve which provides access to a buried roundway. Also called a "shutoff box".
CORPORATION COCK OR STOP: A device which includes a valve, one end of which is screwed into the tapping sleeve and to the opposite end is
attached the water service line for an individual property.
CROSS CONNECTION: A connection between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one containing potable water and the other water or another
liquid which may be contaminated.
CURB COCK OR STOP: See definition of Roundway.
ISOLATION VALVES: Two (2) valves installed on either side of a device such as the water meter or cross connection devices, to allow the water service to
be shut off while the device in the middle is installed, tested, or repaired.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual, firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association, society, institution,
enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
POTABLE WATER: Water which is free of objectionable contamination or minerals, and is considered suitable for human consumption.
ROUNDWAY: A valve located outside between the water main and the structure, usually near the property line, used to start or stop flow to the building.
The valve is operated by means of a long key which is inserted through the buffalo box to the roundway.
SADDLE: A split fitting designed to fit over an existing water main to allow a connection to be made under a tapping machine, while the main is under
pressure. The device is usually made of bronze or stainless steel, and serves to secure the corporation stop to the main.
SHUTOFF BOX: See definition of Buffalo Box.
TAP ON: Connection of a service line to a water main.
TEST COCK: A small cock, faucet, or valve set in a water pipe, pump, backflow device or water jacket used to drain water, test pressure, or to chlorinate
the main. (Ord. 2004-3840, 6-7-2004)
7-5-24: USE OF GROUND WATER PROHIBITED:
Effective December 17, 2008, the use of, or attempted use of, ground water from within the boundaries of the property described below, as a potable water
supply (which shall mean any water used for human or domestic consumption including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes or preparing foods), by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method, is hereby prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes
the village of Lisle.
The general area covered by this restriction is the property south of Ogden Avenue, west of I-355, north of Maple Avenue, and east of Kingston Avenue;
and in addition the following addresses: 4587 to 4593 Hatch Lane; even numbered addresses only between 4558 and 4576 Basswood Lane; 5505 to 5540
Maple Court; and odd addresses only between 535 to 569 Maple Avenue. The area is within the corporate limits of the village of Lisle. The exact area of
the restriction is fully depicted on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein.
Any person (which shall mean any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns) violating the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine as provided for in section 7-5-18 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-4234, 11-17-2008)
Chapter 6
VILLAGE SEWER SYSTEM
7-6-1: ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER:
All permits provided for herein shall be issued by the community development director. The community development director shall inspect all connections
to the public sewer lines and see that all provisions of this chapter are properly administered and enforced. Said community development director shall
cause to be kept a record of measurements of all sewer connections in relation to property lines, and he shall collect all tap-on fees and inspection fees
required herein and pay the same to the village finance director. Wherever the term public works director, village manager, community development
director or business office manager appears, it includes his or her designee. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-6-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED:
Every building within the village located on property to which there is a public sewer, or which is otherwise so located as to have a public sewer
conveniently available, having plumbing fixtures installed and maintained for human use, shall make connection to the public sewer system. (Ord. 95-
2684, 9-5-1995)
7-6-3: PRIVIES, CESSPOOLS:
(A) Prohibited: Use of cesspools, septic or other sewage tanks and privies is hereby prohibited, and no cesspool, septic tank or other sewage tank or privy
shall be constructed on property accessible to a public sewer. The use of cesspools, septic or other sewage tanks and privies already constructed on
property to which a public sewer is or becomes accessible shall bediscontinued within two (2) months after the public sewer becomes accessible; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 309/460
such cesspools, septic or other sewage tanks and privy vaults shall be cleaned out to within no less than twenty four inches (24") of the ground
surface, and refilled with earth, cinders, ashes or similar material.
(B) Public Nuisance: Any cesspool, septic or sewage tank or privy constructed or maintained on any property in violation of the provisions of this section is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall, upon five (5) days' written notice to the owner of said premises, be abated. If the owner fails or
refuses to abate said nuisance within five (5) days after receiving written notice thereof from the village, then the village shall abate said nuisance and
the owners of the premises shall be liable to the village for the costs and expenses of abating the same. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-6-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
(A) No person shall make any connections to the sewer mains of the village without first obtaining a permit from the community development director.
(B) All sewer services provided by the village to any and all customers or users is governed by the rates, regulations, and other terms set forth in this code,
as from time to time amended, including the right to file liens for nonpayment as set forth in section 7-6-8 of this chapter.
(C) For new construction, the owner of the premises must execute an application to connect to the village sewer system, which application shall contain
terms consented to by the owner (application/agreement). Such application/agreement shall provide that the terms set forth therein shall run with the
land and inure to the benefit of, and be binding upon, all successors in title of the subject premises. Upon review of said application/agreement, the
community development director shall make a determination as to whether a sanitary sewer connection permit shall be issued and, if appropriate, shall
issue such a permit.
(D) Whenever the user of the village sanitary sewer services intends to cease using such services, due to moving or other reasons, said user must notify
the village of the day he intends to cease using said sanitary sewer services. Notification may be made to the village billing department by telephone or
in writing, which department shall record such notification in the ordinary course of business and shall bill the user accordingly. To transfer billing of
sanitary sewer services to a new user when no transfer of ownership is anticipated, the new user must notify the billing department. Regardless of any
such notification, however, the owner of the premises will remain liable for any sanitary sewer services used prior to his conveyance of the title to the
property.
(E) Whenever the owner of the premises serviced by the village sanitary sewer intends to sell or otherwise convey the property, he must notify the billing
department of the date scheduled for closing and the village will bill the owner accordingly. The proposed buyer must also notify the village of the date
he intends to begin using the village sanitary sewer. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-6-5: INSPECTION FEES:
An inspection fee, as established by the annual fee ordinance, for each connection or for each dwelling unit in a multi-family structure served by the
connection, whichever is greater, shall be paid to the village at the time that application for a permit is made. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-6-6: CONNECTION FEES:
(A) Definitions:
BASE COUNTY CONNECTION FEE: That fee as determined by the department of environmental concerns of the county of DuPage for connection
to the county sanitary sewer system pursuant to the water/wastewater use ordinance, article XI, wastewater connection and permits and fees.
DOMESTIC STRENGTH SEWAGE: Sewage having a concentration of no more than two hundred twenty milligrams per liter (220 mg/l) of five (5)
day biochemical oxygen demand and two hundred sixty milligrams per liter (260 mg/l) of suspended solids.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT: A commercial, institutional, industrial or, multi-family housing unit which has an estimated average discharge of three
hundred fifty (350) gallons of domestic strength sewage per day or a single-family residential dwelling unit.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT: A single-family residence for each apartment unit or each condominium unit in a multiple-unit building. (Ord. 95-
2684, 9-5-1995)
(B) Connection Fees: The fees for connection of the sanitary sewer drain of a single-family dwelling unit or a residential equivalent located inside the
corporate limits of the village to the sewer mains of the village shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance.
The fees for connection of the sanitary sewer drain of a single-family residential dwelling unit or a residential equivalent located outside of the
corporate limits of the village to the sewer mains of the village shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance.
(C) Calculation Of Residential Equivalents For NonresidentialDwelling Units: The connection fees for all users located inside the village making connection
to the sewer mains of the village, other than single-family residential dwelling units, shall be the sum determined by multiplying the estimated average
daily flow of the intended use as set forth in the projected sewage generation by type of use as is set forth below, by the connection fee in effect, and
dividing the resulting product by three hundred fifty (350). The above shall be the basis of an interim connection fee and shall be payable at the time of
the issuance of the building permit. The connection fee for a commercial, industrial, or institutional building allowed to discharge liquid waste other than
domestic strength sewage shall be determined by the director of DuPage County public works on a residential equivalent basis as established by the
annual fee ordinance per residential equivalent flow, plus costs determined by the annual fee ordinance per residential equivalent flow. (Ord. 2005-
3933, 6-20-2005)
SEWAGE FLOW GUIDE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 310/460
Project TypeEstimated Sewage Flow In Gallons Per Day
Apartments/
condominiums
150 GPD for 1 bedroom
300 GPD for 2 bedrooms
350 GPD for 3 bedrooms
Assembly halls 2 GPD per seat
Bar/tavern 25 GPD per employee
15 GPD per customer
Bowling alley 75 GPD per bowling lane
100 GPD per bowling lane with food service
Churches 3 GPD per seat (under 100 seats)
5 GPD per seat (over 100 seats)
Country clubs 50 GPD per member
Factories 25 GPD per employee (no shower)
35 GPD per employee (with shower)
Food service
operations
35 GPD per seat (not 24 hour restaurant)
50 GPD per seat (24 hour restaurant)
70 GPD per seat (24 hour along freeway)
50 GPD per car (curb service drive-in)
50 GPD per seat (vending machine restaurants)
Hospitals 250 GPD per bed
Housing 350 GPD per single-family dwelling unit
Institutions 125 GPD per resident
Laundries 400 GPD per machine (coin operated)
Motels and hotels 60 GPD per room
100 GPD per suite
Nursing homes/ 125 GPD per person
rest homes
Office buildings 25 GPD per employee (minimum)
10 gallons per square foot (usable space)
Plaza 350 GPD per unit within the plaza (minimum)
0.05 gallons per square foot per open mall space
Schools 15 GPD per student (elementary and childcare)
25 GPD per student (junior high and high)
25 GPD per staff (in addition to students)
Service stations 1,000 GPD for first service bay
500 GPD for each additional bay
3 GPD per car user (self-service)
Shopping centers 0.05 gallons per square foot (without food service or laundries)
0.15 gallons per square foot (with food service or laundries)
Swimming pools 5 GPD per user (average)
10 GPD per user (with hot water shower)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 311/460
Theaters 5 GPD per car (drive-in)
5 GPD per seat (movie house)
Vacation cottages 100 GPD per cottage
Warehouses 0.05 gallons per square foot per day
Youth and recreation camps 50 GPD per user
The actual, final connection fee shall be computed by multiplying the actual average daily flow, based on three hundred sixty (360) days per year in the
first year during which the use is at an occupancy rate of eighty five percent (85%) (base year) by the connection fee in effect at the end of the base year,
for single-family residential dwelling units, and dividing the resulting product by three hundred fifty (350). If the actual fee is more than the estimated fee
previously advanced, the user and/or owner of the building shall immediately pay the difference to the village.
If the estimated connection fee is greater than the actualfee, the village shall return the overpayment to the user and/or owner upon return of the
overpayment from the county. The village shall not be held liable for payment to the user and/or owner until and unless the village receives payment from
the county. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
(D) Additional Fees: All connections of village sewer lines, which lines were constructed by or for the village, excepting those sewer lines constructed
pursuant to the subdivision regulations of the village as on site improvements, shall, in addition to all other connection fees and charges, be subject to a
fee as established by the annual fee ordinance per foot of lot frontage. (Ord. 2002-3395, 4-15-2002)
(E) Additions To Previous Connections: Any and all additions, remodelings, or change of use to buildings, previously connected to the village sanitary
sewer mains shall be treated as new connections for purposes of this section, and connection fees paid in accordance with the provisions of this
section, less any previously paid fees.
(F) Building Permits: The connection fees shall be paid at the time of issuance of applicable building permits and no permit shall be issued without said
fees having been paid. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
(G) Maximum Connection Fee: The maximum current connection fee charged by the county of DuPage, per agreement with the village, is as established
by the annual fee ordinance per residential equivalent. In the event the county shall raise its charges, all such additional charges shall be paid by the
users making connection into the sewer system and not by the village. In case of notice from the county to the village of an increase in county charges,
the user shall, prior to acceptance by the village of said increase, deposit a sum equal to said increase in county charges or deposit with the village an
irrevocable binding letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village and from a financial institution acceptable to the village attorney in said amount.
Said sum or letter of credit shall be released when, if, and to the extent that the county agrees to reduce its increase in charges. (Ord. 2005-3933, 6-20-
2005)
7-6-7: SEWERAGE SYSTEM RATES:
The rates and charges as established by the annual fee ordinance may be from time to time amended, upon approval of the corporate authorities.
The rates or charges are hereby established by the annual fee ordinance for the following use and for the service supplied by the sewerage system of the
village:
Single-family residence.
Multiple-family buildings.
Rooming houses.
All other users.
Users of the village sewerage system located outside the corporate limits of the village shall pay an increased amount as established by the annual fee
ordinance. (Ord. 98-2964, 3-2-1998)
7-6-8: BILLING PROCEDURES:
(A) All Single-Family Users:
1. Charges for service shall be made bimonthly for all single-family users of the village sanitary sewer system. The charges provided for shall be
payable bimonthly on the first day of the month immediately following the end of the bimonthly period for which service has been supplied. The
owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such premises.
2. All bills for service shall be rendered as of the first day of the month following the bimonthly period for which the service is billed, or as soon
thereafter as possible, and shall be payable not later than the close of business on the fifteenth day after the date the bills are rendered. If payment
in full of the bill is not made within said period, then a penalty as established by the annual fee ordinance in relation to the amount of the total
outstanding and unpaid bill shall be added thereto.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 312/460
3. If the charges for services are not paid within thirty (30) days after rendition of the bill for such service, such charges shall be deemed and are
hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquency shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such service is supplied, and
the village treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the county recorder of
deeds and the filing of such statements shall be deemed notice of the lien of such charges for such service.
4. All sewerage services may be discontinued from any premises owned or occupied by any person liable for the payment of the sewer service bill
without further notice if the rates or charges are not paid within thirty (30) days after rendition of the bill thereof. The service shall not be reinstated
until all past due bills, including the penalties thereon, are paid in full, plus an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance to cover the cost of
disconnection of service and reconnection of the same.
5. It is hereby made the duty of the village to render bills for service for all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect all monies due
thereon. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
(B) All Users Other Than Single-Family:
1. Charges for service shall be made each month of the calendaryear for all users of the village sanitary sewer system other than single-family users.
Charges shall be payable monthly on the first day of the month immediately following the month for which service has been supplied. The owner of
the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such premises. (Ord. 98-
2962, 2-16-1998)
2. All bills for service shall be rendered as of the first day of the month following the month for which service is billed, or as soon thereafter as possible,
and shall be payable not later than the close of business on the fifteenth day after the date the bills are rendered. If payment in full of the bill is not
made within said period, then a penalty as established by the annual fee ordinance in relation to the amount of the total outstanding and unpaid bill
shall be added thereto.
3. If the charges for services are not paid within thirty (30) days after rendition of the bill for such service, such charges shall be deemed and are
hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquency shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such service is supplied, and
the village treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the county recorder of
deeds and the filing of such statements shall be deemed notice of the lien of such charges for such service.
4. All water and/or all sewerage services may be disconnected from any premises owned or occupied by any person liable for the payment of the
sewer service bill, including any premises owned or occupied by the person liable other than the premises against which the delinquency currently
exists, without further notice if the rates or charges are not paid within thirty (30) days after rendition of the bill therefor. The service shall not be
reinstated until all past due bills, including the penalties thereon, are paid in full, plus the amount required by this subsection (B)4 for the cost of
disconnection and reconnection of service. For purposes of this subsection (B)4, the disconnection/reconnection fee for water services shall be as
established by the annual fee ordinance, and the disconnection/reconnection fee for sewerage service shall be as established by the annual fee
ordinance. As soon as practicable after the payment of all past due water and/or sewer bills and charges, the village public works department shall,
during the regular operating hours of the department, take all steps necessary to reconnect the water supply to the subject premises.
5. It is hereby made the duty of the village to render bills for service for all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect all monies due
thereon.
(C) Disputes:
1. Provided, however, the foregoing notwithstanding, if any occupant, user or owner of the premises receiving service has a bona fide dispute over the
statement, charge or penaltydetermined or issued by the village, and challenges same as hereinafter provided, then services shall not be
disconnected until the occupant, user or owner raising said dispute shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard by the assistant village manager,
an employee of the village hereby designated to conduct a predetermination review of the disputed statement, charge or penalty subsequent to
notice to the occupant, user or owner indicating to him the amount due the village, the nature of said statement, charge or penalty and notice that his
water service will be terminated in the event that said statement, charge or penalty is not paid or adjusted after having said dispute considered by
said assistant village manager.
2. In any final notice or notice of disconnection to occupant, user or owner prior to termination of service, the occupant, user or owner shall be notified
that if he, she or it has a bona fide dispute, said person shall have ten (10) days within which to request, in writing to the village clerk, a hearing by
the assistant village manager. If no request is made, the statement shall become final and service may be thereafter terminated by the village.
3. In the event that an informal hearing is held and the assistant village manager determines that the objection to the statement, charge or penalty is
not proper and that the statement, charge or penalty is correct, and in the event that the occupant, user or owner wishes to have reviewed any
decision of the assistant village manager with respect to statement, charge or penalty, the amount due or any reduction or increase in the amount
due, then he shall have the right to appeal to the village board of trustees for their determination and review of the decision of the assistant village
manager. Any decision of the assistant village manager not appealed from within the time hereinafter set forth shall be final.
4. Any request for review of the assistant village manager's decision must be made in writing, addressed to the village president and board of trustees
and must be made within ten (10) days after any adverse decision of the assistant village manager and by filing same with the village clerk, who shall
place the matter on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the corporate authorities, whereat said matter shall be considered. At said
hearing the assistant village manager shall present his reasons for his decision. The occupant, user or owner shall also be heard as to his objection
to any statement, charge or penalty and the president and board of trustees shall then make its decision and the village clerk shall cause it to be
delivered to the occupant, user or owner within five (5) days, by personal service or certified mail. In the event that decision upholds any
disconnection, said disconnection shall take place not less than ten (10) days thereafter unless said termination is stayed by order of a court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-6-9: CONTROL MANHOLE, BUILDING DRAIN, AND COST TO INSTALL:
(A) Control Manhole:
1. The owner of any nonresidential building in any zoning classification discharging other than normal residential domestic sanitary sewer waste shall
be required to construct, install and maintain a control manhole as set forth below. As used herein, the term "new nonresidential building" shall mean
a structure, or addition to a structure which requires a building permit prior to construction for any building thereon.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 313/460
2. Said control manhole shall be used for the purpose of inspecting and sampling of sanitary sewer wastes and for the measurement of the sanitary
sewage flow. Continuous sampling and recording flow measurement and equipment shall be provided when required by the village.
3. The control manhole shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with plans approved by the village engineer.
4. The control manhole shall meet the village's standard detail1 and shall be precast reinforced concrete with an inside diameter of four feet (4') for
service lines ten inches (10") and smaller and five feet (5') in inside diameter for service lines twelve inches (12") and above unless a larger diameter
or larger size is deemed necessary by the village engineer in order to facilitate access to and installation of flow measurement sampling and
recording equipment.
(B) Cost Of Installation: All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection, and operation of the building drain to the sewer main, including
manholes, control manholes, and necessary sampling and flow measurement and recording equipment when required, shall be borne by the owner of
the property. The owner shall indemnify the village for any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
(C) Location Of Control Manhole: The control manhole shall be located on public property or if approved by the village manager and village engineer on
private property for which an easement has been provided so as to allow the village and its employees and authorized representatives ready access at
all reasonable times to the premises, places or buildings where sanitary sewer service is supplied for the purpose of examining and testing the
operation of building drain and sewage flow, including all manholes, control manholes and necessary equipment and appurtenances thereof. It shall be
unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent of obstruct said village or its duly authorized employees or representatives in performing their duties
hereunder. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-6-10: INSPECTION:
The plumbing inspector shall be notified by the person making the connection to the public sewer line when the work is begun and when it is ready for
inspection. All such work shall be left uncovered and convenient for examination until inspected and approved. The plumbing inspector shall examine the
work within one day after receipt of notice that the work is ready for inspection. All defective materials and work must be replaced and corrected. Upon
satisfactory completion of the work, the plumbing inspector shall issue a letter of certificate of approval. The plumbing inspector shall be notified twenty
four (24) hours in advance by the person making the connection. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-6-11: RIGHTS OF ACCESS:
(A) The village and its employees shall have ready access, to the extent allowed by law, to the premises, places or buildings where sewer service is
supplied for the purpose of examining and testing the operation of the sewerage system, or any part thereof, and for the purpose of determining if any
violation of the provisions of this chapter exists. Every user of said sewer shall take the same upon the conditions prescribed in this section.
(B) The failure to allow such access shall be grounds for the termination of water and sewer service, after notice and opportunity to be heard. In the event
of a notice of termination to occupant, user or owner, prior to termination of service, the occupant, user or owner shall have ten (10) days within which
to request, in writing to the village clerk, a hearing by the village manager or his designee. If no such request is made, water and sewer service may be
immediately terminated by the village.
(C) In the event that the occupant, user or owner wishes to have reviewed any decision of the village manager or his designee with respect to termination
of service, then he shall have the right to appeal to the village board of trustees for its determination and review of the decision of the village manager
or his designee. Any decision not appealed from within the time hereinafter set forth shall be final.
(D) Any request for review of an adverse decision must be made in writing, addressed to the village president and board of trustees and must be made
within ten (10) days after the decision and by filing same with the village clerk, who shall place the matter on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the corporate authorities, whereas said matter shall be considered. At said hearing the village manager or his designee shall present his
reasons for his decision. The occupant, user or owner shall also be heard. The president and board of trustees shall then make its decision and the
village clerk shall cause it to be delivered to the occupant, user or owner within five (5) days, by personal service or certified mail. In the event that the
decision upholds any termination, said termination shall takeplace not less than ten (10) days thereafter. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-6-12: SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONNECTIONS:
All building drains to serve structures to be connected to the sewer system of the village shall be constructed in accordance with the village standard
details2 and the following specifications. Where there is no specification, the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois",
shall be used.
(A) Materials:
1. All sanitary sewer collector mains to be owned and maintained by the village shall be SDR-21 PVC pipe meeting ASTM D-2241, or class 52 cement
lined ductile iron pipe with polywrap. Sanitary sewer service pipe from the village main to the property line shall be SDR-21 PVC pipe meeting ASTM
D-2241.
2. All building drain sewer lines from five feet (5') outside the building to the property line shall be constructed of either class 52 ductile iron pipe ASA
specification A21.51 with push on joints AWWA C-111, with polywrap or SDR26 PVC pipe meeting ASTM D-2241. No house sewer shall be less than
four inches (4") in diameter, unless otherwise authorized in writing by the village engineer and/or the community development director.
3. All building drain sewer lines from five feet (5') outside the building into the building shall be constructed of a minimum six inch (6") diameter service
weight cast iron pipe when the service enters the building below the foundation and footing. When the sewer service pipe enters the building above
the footing and through the foundation, a minimum six inch (6") diameter schedule 40 PVC pipe may be used.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 314/460
4. No building sewer for a commercial building shall be less than six inches (6") in diameter. Whenever a building sewer is within fifty feet (50') of an
existing well, the SDR 18 PVC pipe meeting ASTM D-2241, or class 52 ductile iron pipe must be used for the building sewers. Joints and
connections shall be gastight and watertight and shall be installed as follows:
(B) Laying Pipe: Unless otherwise authorized, all building sewers shall have a grade of not less than one-eighth inch (1/8") per foot. A grade of one-fourth
inch (1/4") per foot shall be used wherever practical. Pipe laying will be permitted only in dry trenches with stable bottoms.
(C) Excavations And Backfilling: All excavations shall be open trench work unless otherwise authorized or required by the community development
director. Backfilling shall not be doneuntil final inspection is made by the community development director.
1. The foundation in the trench shall be formed to prevent any subsequent settlement of the pipeline.
2. If the materials encountered at the trench bottom are unsuitable for pipe bedding, such materials shall be removed and this trench bottom brought
back to four inches (4") below grade with selected crushed stone material, or a concrete cradle, placed as necessary to provide adequate bedding
for the pipe.
3. The trench shall be excavated to four inches (4") below grade and brought back to the proper grade with crushed stone compacted so as to provide
a firm foundation and uniform support for the house sewer line. The crushed stone bedding shall be carried up to the centerline of the pipe for the full
width of the trench and thoroughly compacted in place. For PVC pipe, crushed stone shall be placed around the entire pipe, and four inches (4") over
the pipe.
4. Backfilling from the centerline of the pipe to the ground surface shall be placed in layers and solidly tamped or packed up to the original surface of
the ground, except that crushed stone fill shall be used under all sidewalks, driveways and paved streets.
5. All excavation shall be adequately guarded per village requirements or the FHWA "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" standards with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village prior to the release of any cash bonds or other guarantees.
(D) Connections: The connection of the building sewer to the sewer main shall be made at the connection designated for that property, and if no properly
located connection point is available, the owner shall install a connection in the sewer main at his expense, and of a location, type and method as
specified by the village engineer or community development director.
(E) Rainwater Leads: Roof leaders, surface drains and ground water drains shall not be connected to the sanitary sewers. The possible presence of such
connections shall constitute grounds for inspection of premises, places or buildings where sewer service is supplied, as provided in section 7-6-10 of
this chapter.
(F) Service Station Drains: Automobile service station floor drains shall be equipped with interceptors which shall prevent the discharge into the drainage
system of mud, sand, gasoline, oil and other materials likely to clog the drainage system. Such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at his
own expense, in continuously efficient operation.
(G) Various Tests For Sanitary Sewers: All sanitary sewers hereafter constructed within the village in any subdivision excepting single-family residential
service connection, shall be subject to infiltration or exfiltration tests and televising at the owner's expense to meet the requirements of the village
engineer or community development director. The owners shall also pay the expense of a representative of the village witnessing said tests. (Ord. 95-
2684, 9-5-1995)
7-6-13: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
(A) All repairs and maintenance of building drains, from the building to the village right of way, including manholes, control manholes and flow and
sampling equipment, shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the property served. The village may, in case of emergency, repair any
building drain including said appurtenances noted, and, if this is done, the cost of such repair work shall be repaid to the village by the owners of the
property served.
(B) If the charges incurred in performing such repair work are not paid within thirty (30) days after rendition of the bill for such service, such charges shall
be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent and thereafter such delinquency shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such service
is supplied, and the village finance director is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the
recorder of deeds of DuPage County, Illinois, and the filing of such statements shall be deemed notice of the lien of such charges for such service.
(Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-6-14: GREASE TRAP/TRIPLE BASIN MAINTENANCE:
All grease, oil and sand traps required by this code shall be regularly cleaned and maintained by and at the expense of the owners of the property served.
Such grease, oil and sand traps shall be cleaned whenever they are full to more than three-fourths (3/4) of their capacity. Additionally, special cleaning may
be ordered by the public works director in the event that inadequate maintenance of grease traps is causing problems to the village sanitary sewer system.
Failure to maintain a grease, oil, or sand trap in accordance with this code shall be considered a nuisance and a violation of this code subject to the
special repair provisions of section 7-6-13 of this chapter and subject to the violations and penalties set forth in section 7-6-15 of this chapter. (Ord. 95-
2684, 9-5-1995)
7-6-15: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 315/460
(A) Any person who shall not obtain the permit required by this chapter prior to the commencement of any work requiring such permit shall be fined, upon
conviction thereof, as established inthe annual fee ordinance for each offense.
(B) Any person who shall refuse or neglect to obey any order to correct or remove a nuisance existing by reason of connections made to the sewer main
and sewer lines laid in violation of this chapter shall be fined, upon conviction of such offense, as established by the annual fee ordinance for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day that such nuisance shall continue to exist after the expiration of the time fixed
for the removal or correction thereof.
(C) Each person who shall violate any other provisions of this chapter shall be fined, upon conviction thereof, as established by the annual fee ordinance
for each time that he shall so violate such provision. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
Chapter 7
STORM AND SANITARY SEWERS; WATER MAIN CONSTRUCTION; VILLAGE
STANDARD DETAILS
7-7-0: ASSIGNMENT OF RESPONSIBILITY:
Wherever the term public works director, village manager, community development director or business office manager appears, it includes his or her
designee. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-1: STORM SEWERS AND DRAINS:
7-7-1-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
(A) Whenever a subdivision, lot or parcel of land is to be improved or developed, the owner shall provide storm water sewers to serve adequately the area
being platted or developed and shall secure a permit from the village's community development director for the work.
(B) Before any work is commenced or a permit is obtained for said work, the owner shall submit to the village three (3) sets of plans and specifications
prepared by a registered engineer for approval. When said plans are approved and before a permit is issued, the owner shall provide the village with
six (6) additional sets of plans and specifications with revisions required, if any. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
(C) Prior to commencement of any work hereunder or issuance of any permit a letter of credit shall be posted with the village in compliance with section 5-
18-6 of this code. (Ord. 2000-3200, 2-21-2000)
7-7-1-2: FEES:
(A) Permit Fee: For each application for permit for construction of storm sewers, drainage ditches or channels, and culverts or bridges, the fee shall be as
established by the annual fee ordinance.
(B) Inspection Fee; Reimbursement Of Village Expenses:
1. The community development director shall make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this section 7-7-1. Such inspections shall include, but not be limited to, on site inspections by the community development director at all
times during the construction, installation or testing of said improvements. The village shall be reimbursed for expenses, as established by the annual
fee ordinance, resulting from such inspections, observation or other services rendered by the community development director during the
construction, installation or testing of said improvements.
2. The owner or developer shall reimburse the village for engineering fees and testing and inspection expenses, as established by the annual fee
ordinance, incurred by the village relating to the improvements covered by this section within thirty (30) days of receipt of an invoice for same.
Further, owner shall reimburse the village for costs, as established by the annual fee ordinance, of maintenance, replacement and repair (except
cleaning) of storm sewers and related improvements, including the removal of landscaping, paving or other obstacles and returning the area to its
condition prior to excavation.Connection may be refused or service discontinued if timely reimbursement is not made pursuant to this section1. (Ord.
95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-1-3: GUARANTEE; CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE:
(A) Guarantee: Before a permit is issued, the owner shall provide the village with a certified check or cashier's check, negotiable securities, letter of credit,
or a surety bond, payable to the village treasurer in an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance, in relation to the cost of improvements as
estimated by the owner and approved by the village engineer, to assure the satisfactory installation of said improvements as outlined and contained in
the approved plans and specifications. If the owner posts a surety bond, it shall have good and sufficient surety thereon, and be approved by the village
attorney. Until official acceptance of the work, the owner shall be responsible for all maintenance of all required improvements.
(B) Certificate Of Insurance: Any person performing work under this section shall take out and maintain during the construction of the project such
commercial general liability insurance in an amount established by the annual fee ordinance combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury,
personal injury, and property damage and an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance aggregate as shall protect him, the village and the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 316/460
village's representatives from claims from liability and property damage which may arise from construction of this project. The village shall be furnished
certificates of insurance issued by the companies carrying the risk, which said certificates shall be in form and substance satisfactory to and approved
by the village. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-1-4: REQUIREMENTS:
The design of the drainage system shall anticipate and provide capacity for other drainage from naturally tributary areas on the basis of the ultimate
development of such other tributary area. The drainage system shall comply with, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(A) The recommendation of the division of waterways, state of Illinois, as per, but not limited to, house bill 532-G.
(B) The design of the drainage system shall consider and show:
1. The entire storm drainage area of which the subdivision lot, or parcel of land is a part.
2. Storm sewer capacities shall be determined with the use of the rational formula Q = CIA as set forth in drainage manual of theIllinois department of
transportation as may be amended from time to time, and shall be designed for a 10-year storm frequency. A minimum "c" coefficient of 0.35 shall be
used for all undeveloped land in the drainage area. Where land has a zoning area greater than residential, "c" coefficient suitable for such anticipated
development shall be used. The village engineer shall be furnished with design calculations of storm drainage required.
3. A system of sewers or pipelines sufficient in size to eliminate flooding or ponding of water.
4. All existing watercourses, storm sewers and culverts.
(C) All storm sewers are required to meet the following minimum requirements:
1. The sewers shall not be less than twelve inches (12") inside diameter, unless approved in writing by the village engineer. The storm sewers shall be
reinforced concrete pipe or PVC pipe (SDR21) meeting ASTM D-2241 and meeting the most recent Illinois department of transportation
specifications.
2. The sewers shall be designed in such a way as to ensure a minimum velocity flow of two feet (2') per second, and a maximum velocity flow of eight
feet (8') per second.
3. Manholes shall be provided at all changes in direction of pipe and pipe size. Catch basins shall be located not more than three hundred feet (300')
apart unless otherwise approved by the village engineer. All manholes, catch basins and pipe shall be of the type and material and constructed in
accordance with the village's standard details and requirements, as amended from time to time2.
(D) In any subdivision lot or parcel of land where it is determined by the village engineer that the main outlet sewer would be larger than ninety six inches
(96"), then a ditch or drainage channel meeting the following standards may be used if the village board so approves:
1. With grades to four percent (4%), ditch may have earth bottoms and sod banks.
2. With grades greater than four percent (4%), ditches must be paved.
3. All ditches shall have side slopes of not less than three to one (3:1).
4. Easements for all ditches shall be dedicated to the village, and there shall be provided, in addition to the necessary width required for the ditch, a
strip of land on each side of the ditch of a width of fifteen feet (15'), said distance to be measuredperpendicular to trees, poles, structures and other
obstructions. The slope of these side areas to the ditch shall not exceed five percent (5%). There shall be no trees, bushes, or obstructions of any
kind placed in this area.
5. Culverts or bridges shall be provided at all street crossings and shall be sized to eliminate flooding or ponding of water and shall have a minimum
cover of twelve inches (12"). Culverts or bridges shall be reinforced concrete or precast reinforced concrete pipes with necessary headwalls. Culverts
or bridges shall extend a minimum of five feet (5') past each right of way line of the street and shall extend far enough to provide a minimum slope of
three to one (3:1) from the right of way line down to the invert of the pipe.
6. All ditches, bridges and culverts shall be located and designed in accordance with the village's standards as amended from time to time and
requirements of the village engineer.
7. All culverts or bridges shall be provided with suitable railings and/or guardrails as required and approved by the village. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-1-5: OVERSIZE DESIGN:
The owner of the subdivision lot or parcel of land shall provide storm water sewers of adequate size to not only drain the property in question, but shall
provide storm sewers, bridges or culverts of sufficient size to adequately drain the entire drainage area draining to and through the property. There shall be
no compensation to the owner by the village for the increased pipe sizes required, if any. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-1-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Storm drainage systems or structures shall be installed to comply with this chapter, and the rules, regulations, specifications and standard details of the
village, as amended from time to time. All plans submitted for approval shall comply with all of the above. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-1-7: TRENCHING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 317/460
All trenching done under existing streets, alleys, walks or drives shall be backfilled and the surface repaired in accordance with the village's standard
details and requirements, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-1-8: RAINWATER DRAINS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or permit the maintenance of any rainwater drain which discharges onto any sidewalk and itshall be unlawful to construct or
permit the maintenance of any such drain which discharges onto any public street or alley. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-1-9: CONNECTION OF SANITARY WASTES TO STORM SEWERS OR WATERCOURSES:
It shall be unlawful to discharge any sanitary sewage into the storm sewer drainage system of the village or into any tributary storm sewer drainage system
connecting to the village system or into any river or any watercourse within the jurisdiction of the village3. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-1-10: APPROVAL REQUIRED:
(A) All work required to be done under this chapter by an applicant, be he the owner, subdivider or contractor, shall be done only in the presence of the
community development director.
(B) The community development director shall inspect all work to see that the same has been completed in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-1-11: EXISTING DRAINAGE NUISANCES:
Any surface, storm water sump pump or roof drainage which creates a structural, safety or health hazard, or any other nuisance to the owners or
occupants of adjacent premises or to the public by reason of discharge into, onto or across any adjacent building, premises or public thoroughfare shall be
abated by the owners of the improperly drained area; and the community development director shall require the drainage to be disposed of in an
appropriate manner. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-1-12: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The appointed official of the village or the enforcement officer, under his direction, are hereby authorized and empowered to revoke a permit issued
pursuant to this section 7-7-1 when it has been determined that the permittee has violated the conditions or provisions of such permit or of this section 7-7-
1. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-1-13: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
(A) Violation Declared Public Nuisance: Any violation of any terms and provisions of this section 7-7-1 is hereby declared by the president and board of
trustees to be a public nuisance.(Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
(B) Fines And Penalties:
1. Any person violating or failing to comply with any terms or provisions of this section 7-7-1 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof
shall be subject to a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance for the first offense; and for each subsequent offense shall be subject to a fine
as established by the annual fee ordinance to be recovered in any court of competent jurisdiction. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for
each and every day that any person shall violate or fail to comply with any of the terms and provisions of this section 7-7-1.
2. The prosecuting attorney for the village is hereby authorized and empowered to institute and prosecute any and all proceedings, suits and actions
necessary to collect any and all fines and penalties herein provided for and is also hereby authorized and empowered to institute and prosecute any
and all suits at law or in equity as may be appropriate or necessary to prevent unlawful connections to the village system or systems tributary thereto
in violation of the provisions of this section 7-7-1. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
7-7-2: SANITARY SEWER MAIN CONSTRUCTION:
7-7-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
(A) It shall be unlawful to connect to and extend any main or lateral sanitary sewer line of the village sanitary sewer system or construct a separate
sanitary sewer system and treatment plant without having first secured a permit or approval therefor from the community development director.
(B) All persons desiring to extend the sewage systems of the village or construct a sewage system in the village must make application or request for such
service. Such applications or requests shall be accompanied by three (3) sets of plans and specifications prepared by a registered engineer for
approval. When said plans are approved and before a permit or approval is issued, the applicant shall provide the village with six (6) additional sets of
plans and specifications with revisions required, if any. Before construction is commenced on the project, the applicant shall furnish to the village a
copy of the permit obtained from the state environmental protection agency for the work.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 318/460
(C) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a statement as to the purpose, the type of premises and number of people to be served. (Ord. 95-
2684, 9-5-1995)
(D) Prior to commencement of any work hereunder or issuance of any permit a letter of credit shall be posted with the village incompliance with section 5-
18-6 of this code. (Ord. 2000-3200, 2-21-2000)
7-7-2-2: FEES; REIMBURSEMENT OF VILLAGE EXPENSES:
(A) For each application for permit for construction of sanitary sewers, the fee shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance. The community
development director shall make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section.
Such inspections shall include, but not be limited to, on site inspections by the community development director at all times during the construction,
installation or testing of said sewers.
(B) The owner or developer shall reimburse the village of engineering fees and testing and inspection expenses, as established by the annual fee
ordinance, incurred by the village relating to the improvements covered by this section within thirty (30) days of receipt of an invoice for same. Further,
owner shall reimburse the village of all costs of maintenance, replacement and repair (except cleaning) of sanitary sewers and related improvements,
including the removal of landscaping, paving or other obstacles and returning the area to its condition prior to excavation. Connection may be refused
or service discontinued if timely reimbursement is not made pursuant to this section. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-2-3: GUARANTEE; CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE:
(A) Guarantee: The owner shall provide the village with a certified check or cashier's check, negotiable securities, letter of credit or a surety bond, payable
to the treasurer of the village in an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance, in relation to the cost of the improvement as established by the
owner and approved by the village engineer to assure the satisfactory installation of said improvements as outlined and contained in the approved
plans and specifications. Until official acceptance of the work, the owner shall be responsible for all maintenance of all required improvements.
(B) Certificate Of Insurance: Any person performing work under this section shall take out and maintain during the construction of the property, commercial
general liability insurance in an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal
injury, and property damage, an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance aggregate which shall name him, the village and the village's
representative as additional insured and insure them against liability and property damages which may arise from construction of this project. The
village shall be furnished certificates of insurance issued by the companies carrying the risk, which said certificates shall be in form and substance
satisfactory to and approved by the village. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-2-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Sanitary sewers shall be installed in compliance with the rules and regulations, specifications and standard details of the village as amended from time to
time, and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the county of DuPage department of environmental concerns, state of Illinois environmental
protection agency and the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". All plans submitted for approval shall comply with
all of the above. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-2-5: REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Trenching: All trenching done under existing streets, alleys, walks and drives shall be backfilled with an approved aggregate trench backfill and the
surface repaired in accordance with the village's standard details and requirements, as amended from time to time.
(B) Watertightness And Imperfections Of Work:
1. Sanitary sewer lines, including branch connections and riser pipe, shall be constructed as nearly watertight as practicable, and after completed with
backfilling in place, infiltration of ground water into any section of the sewer system shall not exceed two hundred (200) gallons per day per mile of
sewer per inch of diameter. Upon completion of installation of sewers, the owner, subdivider or contractor shall perform infiltration, exfiltration or air
tests, as may be required by the community development director, and under the supervision of said community development director to demonstrate
the acceptability of the infiltration in said sewer. Upon completion, there shall be no visible leakage into the sewer at any place.
2. Manholes, chambers and sewer structures shall be watertight upon completion of the work as shall all connections thereto.
3. Inverted siphons and other pressure pipelines shall show no leakage when filled with water under a pressure of not less than ten (10) times the
maximum working pressure to which the line will be subjected during normal use, but not to exceed one hundred twenty five (125) pounds per
square inch.
4. Upon completion of the sewer and in addition to the community development director inspection from and between connected manholes and
structures, the owner, subdivider or contractor shall provide adequate inspection by closed circuit television as may be required by the village
engineer4.
5. The owner, subdivider or contractor shall furnish and provideat his expense, all necessary tools, equipment, ventilation, apparatus, closed circuit
television, measuring devices, testing machines, personnel and labor required by the village engineer for the purpose of testing and inspecting sewer
lines and structures.
6. Sewers that have been televised that show excessive infiltration, settlement, faulty grade or alignment breakage or other unacceptable construction
shall, after being repaired or corrected of said defects, be retelevised at the owner's expense in order that the village engineer may determine that
defects have been properly corrected.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 319/460
7. Exfiltration or air tests when required shall not exceed the maximum infiltration rates provided for elsewhere in this section.
8. Should a test show excessive leakage, the owner, subdivider or contractor shall make necessary corrections in the section tested, and shall take all
steps to ensure completed sewer lines with infiltration rates within the maximum allowable as specified and as outlined under this section. (Ord. 95-
2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-2-6: CONSTRUCTION BY VILLAGE OR BY OWNER:
(A) Sewers Constructed By Owner Or Subdivider: Any main or lateral sewer which is laid at the expense of an owner or subdivider shall extend from the
main sewer for the entire width of the lot to be served.
(B) Sewers Constructed By The Village: Any main or lateral sewer which is laid at the expense of the village shall extend from the main sewer for the
entire width of the lot to be serviced and prior to any connection thereto, the village is to be reimbursed for the cost of the sewer at a front footage fee
as stipulated by village ordinances. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-2-7: OVERSIZE DESIGN:
Where required by the village to conform with overall planning of future connections any sewer is required larger than necessary to serve the immediate
property adequately, the owner shall construct such oversized sewers. No pipe less than eight inches (8") in diameter shall be laid by the owner or
subdivider. No bids shall be taken or work commenced until such agreement is arrived at in writing with the village. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-2-8: STORM WATER PROHIBITED:
No customer or owner or occupant of premises receiving sewer service shall discharge, cause to be discharged, allow to be discharged or permit to be
discharged any storm water, surface water, roof runoff, surface drainage, ground water drainage,footing drainage, window well drainage, driveway
drainage, garage floor drainage, patio drainage, downspout drainage, crawl space drainage, nonsanitary basement floor drainage, nonsanitary sump
pump drainage, cooling water, unapproved industrial process water, or any other nonsanitary sewage drainage into the sanitary sewer or into the building
sewer service connection so as to reach said sanitary sewer; no customer or owner or occupant of premises receiving sewer service shall connect, cause
to be connected, allow to be connected or remain connected or permit to be connected or remain connected, and no premises receiving sewer service
shall have connected, any sump pump or other pumping device for draining window wells, footings, patios, garages, driveways, downspouts, crawl spaces
or other nonsanitary drainage areas, or any footing, window well, driveway, patio, garage, downspout or other nonsanitary sewage drain to the sanitary
sewer or to any building sanitary sewer service line which connects to said sanitary sewer. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-2-9: SEWER SYSTEM AVAILABLE:
A sanitary sewer system shall be deemed available to premises used for human occupancy, if such premises are within two hundred feet (200') of a public
sewer. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-2-10: APPROVAL REQUIRED:
(A) All work required to be done under this section 7-7-2 by an applicant, be he the owner, subdivider or contractor, shall be done only in the presence of
the community development director.
(B) The community development director shall inspect all work to see that same has been completed in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications. Such inspection shall include witnessing an infiltration test, exfiltration test or television inspection as required by this section 7-7-2. The
owner, subdivider or contractor shall conduct and pay for said tests and sewers shall meet all test requirements before being approved. (Ord. 95-2684,
9-5-1995)
7-7-2-11: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The village manager, or the community development director under his direction, is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke a permit issued pursuant
to this section 7-7-2 when it has been determined that the permittee has violated the conditions or provisions of such permit or of this section. (Ord. 95-
2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-2-12: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
(A) Violation Declared Public Nuisance: Any violation of any provisions of this section 7-7-2 is hereby declared by thepresident and board of trustees to be
a public nuisance. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
(B) Fines And Penalties:
1. Any person violating or failing to comply with any terms or provisions of this section 7-7-2 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance for the first offense; and for each subsequent offense shall be subject to
a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance, to be recovered in any court of competent jurisdiction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 320/460
2. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day that any person shall violate or fail to comply with any of the terms or
provisions of this section 7-7-2. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
3. The prosecuting attorney for the village is hereby authorized and empowered to institute and prosecute any and all proceedings, suits and actions
necessary to collect any and all fines and penalties herein provided for, and is also hereby authorized and empowered to institute and prosecute any
and all suits at law or in equity as may be appropriate or necessary to prevent unlawful connections to the village's system or systems tributary
thereto in violation of the provisions of this section 7-7-2. (Ord. 97-2850, 3-3-1997)
7-7-3: WATER MAIN CONSTRUCTION:
7-7-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
(A) It shall be unlawful to connect to and extend any water main of the village water supply system or construct a separate water supply system without
having first secured a permit and approval therefor from the corporate authorities as well as the Illinois environmental protection agency.
(B) All persons desiring to extend the water supply system of the village or construct a separate water supply system in the village must make application
or request for such service. Such applications or requests shall be accompanied by three (3) sets of plans and specifications prepared by a registered
engineer for approval. When said plans are approved and before a permit or approval is issued, the applicant shall provide the village with six (6)
additional sets of plans and specifications with revisions required, if any. Before construction is commenced on the project, the applicant shall furnish to
the village a copy of the permits obtained from the state. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
(C) Prior to commencement of any work hereunder or issuance of any permit a letter of credit shall be posted with the village in compliance with section 5-
18-6 of this code. (Ord. 2000-3200, 2-21-2000)
7-7-3-2: FEES; REIMBURSEMENT OF VILLAGE EXPENSES:
(A) For each application for construction of any water mains, the fee shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance. The community development
director shall make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. Such
inspections shall include, but not be limited to, on site inspections by the community development director at all times during construction, installation or
testing of said water mains.
(B) The owner or developer shall reimburse the village for all engineering fees and testing and inspection expenses, as established by the annual fee
ordinance, incurred by the village relating to the improvements covered by this section within thirty (30) days of receipt of an invoice for same. Further,
owner shall reimburse the village for costs, as established by the annual fee ordinance, of maintenance, replacement and repair (except cleaning) of
water mains and related improvements, including the removal of landscaping, paving or other obstacles and returning the area to its condition prior to
excavation. Connection may be refused or service discontinued if timely reimbursement is not made pursuant to this section. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-3-3: CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE AND GUARANTEE:
(A) Insurance: Any person performing work under this section shall take out and maintain, during the construction of the improvement, commercial general
liability insurance in an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and
property damage, an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance aggregate, which shall name him, the village and the village's representatives
as additional insured and insure them against liability for bodily injury and property damages which may arise from construction of this project. The
village shall be furnished certificates of insurance issued by the companies carrying the risk, which said certificates shall be in form and substance
satisfactory to and approved by the village.
(B) Guarantee: The owner shall provide the village with a certified check or cashier's check, negotiable securities, letter of credit, or a surety bond, payable
to the village treasurer, in an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance in relation to the cost of the improvement as estimated by the owner
and approved by the village engineer, to assure the satisfactory installation of said improvements as outlined and contained in the approved plans and
specifications. Until official acceptance of the work, the owner shall be responsible for all maintenance of all improvements. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-3-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Water supply systems shall be installed to comply with the rules and regulations, specifications and standard details of the village, as amended from time
to time, and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state of Illinois current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois", and shall also be in compliance with the following:
(A) Trenching: All trenching done under and in existing streets, alleys, walks and drives shall be backfilled with an aggregate trench backfill and the
surface repaired in accordance with the village's standard details and requirements currently in effect and as amended from time to time.
(B) Construction Of Water Mains:
1. Water Mains Constructed By Owner Or Subdivider: Any water main which is constructed at the expense of an owner or subdivider shall extend from
the existing main across the entire width of the lot or lots to be served and shall be provided with necessary valves, fittings and hydrants as set forth
in national board of fire underwriters current handbook "Standard Grading Schedule_Water Supply" and as required by the village engineer. No
water main of less than six inches (6") in size shall be constructed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 321/460
2. Water Mains Constructed By Village: Any water main which is constructed at the expense of the village shall extend from existing main across the
entire width of the lot or lots to be served and prior to any connection thereto, the village shall be reimbursed for the cost of the laying of the main at
the rate as established by the annual fee ordinance per front foot of property. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-3-5: OVERSIZE DESIGN:
In the event that the village determines it is necessary due to overall planning for future connections that any water main be constructed larger than
necessary to serve the immediate property adequately, the owner or subdivider shall construct such oversized main at his expense. No pipe less than six
inches (6") shall be laid by an owner or subdivider. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-3-6: APPROVAL REQUIRED:
All work required to be done under this section by an applicant, be he the owner, subdivider or contractor, shall be inspected by the community
development director from time to time as required, and as the work progresses. Before final approval can be obtained, the community development
director shall inspect all work and see that same has been completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. Such inspection shall
include, but not be limited to, pressure testing and sterilization of mains all as set forth in "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction
Of The State Of Illinois" and as requiredby the village engineer. The owner, subdivider or contractor shall conduct and pay for said tests and shall meet all
test requirements before being approved. The owner, subdivider or contractor shall furnish to the village Mylar and three (3) full sets of as built drawings
for the improvements constructed. Said drawings shall be furnished before final acceptance. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-3-7: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The village manager or the community development director is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke a permit issued pursuant to this section 7-7-3
when it has been determined that the permittee has violated the conditions of such permit or of this section 7-7-3. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-3-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
(A) Violation Declared Nuisance: Any violation of any terms and provisions of this section 7-7-3 is hereby declared by the president and board of trustees
to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
(B) Fines And Penalties:
1. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this section 7-7-3 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction
thereof shall be subject to a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense, to be recovered in any court of competent jurisdiction.
2. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day that any person violates or fails to comply with any of the terms or provisions
of this section 7-7-3.
3. The village attorney is hereby authorized and empowered to institute and prosecute any and all proceedings, suits and actions necessary to collect
any and all fines and penalties herein provided for, and is also hereby authorized and empowered to institute and prosecute any and all suits at law
or in equity as may be appropriate or necessary to prevent unlawful connections to the village water system in violation of the provisions of this
section 7-7-3. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
7-7-4: AS BUILT DRAWINGS:
The owner of any developed property shall provide the village with three (3) sets of as built plans of all site improvements, plus one set of as built Mylars.
These shall be provided prior to acceptance of any improvements. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995)
7-7-5: SCHEDULE OF STANDARD DETAILS:
The standards and details referred to in this chapter, and elsewhere in this code, covering the plans and specifications for construction, improvement
and/or repair or replacement of various public properties and ways, specifically: sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers, streets, streets and curbing
and street openings are as hereinafter set out in full. (Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995) PAVEMENT STANDARDS - DETAIL NO. 1
(REVISED)
CLASSIFICATION
MINIMUM
STRUCTURAL
NO. Dt(2)
MINIMUM
PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION(1)
RESIDENTIAL - SINGLE FAMILY
Driveways Per Zoning
Code
Section 5-13-1-
5-C
4" Portland Cement Concrete; 4" CA-6 Stone Base and 2" Class I Bituminous Surface Course. 8" CA-6 Stone
Base, 11/2" Sand Base and Pavers.
Cul-De-Sacs &
Local Streets
3.00 12" CA - 6 Cr. Stone & 2" Cl. I Bituminous Binder Course, 2" of Cl. I Bituminous Surface Course with Area
Reflective Crack Control Treatment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 322/460
Collector Street 4.00 7" B.A.M. (M.S. 1500) 2" of Cl. I Bituminous Binder Course, 2" of Cl. I Bituminous Surface Course, & 4" of CA-6
Cr. Stone Sub-Base with Area Reflective Crack Control Treatment.
Arterial Streets 4.30 8" B.A.M. (M.S. 1500), 2" Cl. I Bituminous Binder Course, 2" of Cl. I Bituminous Surface Course, & 4" of CA-6
Cr. Stone Sub-Base with area Reflective Crack Control Treatment.
RESIDENTIAL - MULTI FAMILY
Parking & Drives 2.24 8" CA-6 Cr. Stone & 3" of Cl. I Bituminous Surface Course.
CLASSIFICATION
MINIMUM
STRUCTURAL
NO. Dt(2)
MINIMUM
PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION(1)
Cul-De-Sac & Local Streets
Main Access
Drives
3.00 12" CA-6 CR. Stone & 2" Cl. I Bituminous Binder Course, 2" Cl. I Bituminous Surface Course with Area
Reflective Crack Control Treatment.
Collector Streets 4.00 7" B.A.M. (M.S. 1500) 2" of Cl. I Bituminous Binder Course, 2" of Cl. I Bituminous Surface Course & 4" of CA-6
Cr. Stone Sub-Base with Area Reflective Crack Control Treatment.
Arterial Streets 4.30 8" B.A.M. (M.S. 1500), 2" Cl. I Bituminous Binder Course, 2" Cl. I Bituminous Surface Course, & 4" of CA-6 Cr.
Stone Sub-Base with Area Reflective Crack Control Treatment.
COMMERCIAL, OFFICE & OFFICE RESEARCH
Parking & Drive 2.50 10" CA-6 Cr. Stone & 3" of Cl. I Bituminous Surface.
Cul-De-Sacs &
Local Streets
4.00 7" B.A.M. (M.S. 1500), 2" Cl. I Bituminous Binder Course, 2" of Cl. I Bituminous Surface Course & 4" of CA-6 Cr.
Stone Sub-Base with Area Reflective Crack Control Treatment.
Truck Loading areas
Trash pick up
areas
3.52 8" B.A.M. (M.S. 1500), 1.5" of Cl. I and Bituminous Surface Course & 4" of CA-6 Cr. Stone Sub-Base.
Collector Streets 4.00 7" B.A.M. (M.S. 1500), of 2" Cl. I Bituminous Binder, and 2" of Cl. I Bituminous Surface Course, 4" of CA-6 Cr.
Stone Sub-Base with Area Reflective Crack Control Treatment.
CLASSIFICATION
MINIMUM
STRUCTURAL
NO. Dt(2)
MINIMUM
PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION(1)
INDUSTRIAL
Parking & Drive 2.50 10" CA-6 Cr. Stone & 3" of Cl. I Bituminous Surface.
Truck Loading areas
Trash pick up
areas
3.52 8" B.A.M. (M.S. 1500), 1.5" of Cl. I and Bituminous Surface Course & 4" of CA-6 Cr. Stone Sub-Base.
Cul-De-Sacs &
Local Streets
4.00 7" B.A.M. (M.S. 1500), 2" Cl. I Bituminous Binder Course & 2" of Cl. I Bituminous Surface Course & 4" of CA-6
Cr. Stone Sub-Base with Area Reflective Crack Control Treatment.
Collector Streets 4.00 7" B.A.M. (M.S. 1500), 2" Cl. I Bit. Binder, 1.5 2" Cl. I Bit. Surface, & 4" of CA-6 Cr. Stone Sub-Base with Area
Reflective Crack Control Treatment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 323/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 324/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 325/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 326/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 327/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 328/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 329/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 330/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 331/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 332/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 333/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 334/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 335/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 336/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 337/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 338/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 339/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 340/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 341/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 342/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 343/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 344/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 345/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 346/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 347/460
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 348/460
(Ord. 95-2684, 9-5-1995; amd. Ord. 98-3002, 6-15-1998)
Chapter 8
LISLE COMMUTER RAIL STATION CONCESSION LICENSE
7-8-1: LICENSES REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association to sell or offer to sell, or otherwise peddle any food, beverage,
convenience item, merchandise, good or service of any kind or nature whatsoever from any cart, table, vending machine unit, vehicle, including motor and
nonmotorized vehicles, or otherwise on, about, or within the property encompassing the Lisle Commuter Rail Station and surrounding commuter parking
lots, which property is leased by the Village pursuant to and in accordance with that certain "Lisle, Illinois Station Contract", as amended and on file with
the office of the Village Clerk, without any such person, organization, or business entity having first obtained a license provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-
4709, 3-6-2017)
7-8-2: LICENSES ISSUED, TERM, FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 349/460
(A) There shall be one (1) license for a nonmotorized mobile vendor cart serving coffee, food, newspapers, and other convenience items inside the Lisle
Commuter Rail Station.
(B) The Village Manager is authorized to solicit requests for proposals or qualifications, and negotiate and enter into agreements for the license provided in
subsection (A) of this section, subject to the approval of the Village Board. (Ord. 2017-4709, 3-6-2017)
7-8-3: OPERATIONS OF CONCESSIONS; GENERAL:
(A) The licensee must comply with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(B) 1. Prior to commencing business, the licensee shall provide:
(a) Proof of insurance required under the Workers' Compensation Act, or proof of exemption under 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes 305/3(20); and
(b) Proof of insurance for commercial general liability as established by the annual fee ordinance combined single limit per occurrence for bodily
injury, personal injury, and property damage; excessive liability in umbrella form may be provided to meet a portion of the required insurance.
2. For insurance required under this subsection:
(a) Name the Village, its President, Trustees, officers, employees, attorneys, agents, and volunteers, and the Burlington Northern Railroad, its
officers, agents, and employees, as additional insureds; and
(b) It may not be canceled, permitted to expire, or be changed without thirty (30) days' advance notice to the Village Manager.
(C) Hours of operation of concessions within the Lisle Commuter Rail Station shall be limited to the hours established for the station's waiting room. The
licensee may store a cart, table, or vending unit in the station when the cart, table, or vending unit is not in use, and at their sole and absolute risk;
provided, however, that no such cart, table, or vending unit may be stored unless and until the licensee executes an agreement in a form provided by
the Village in which the licensee agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Village, its President, Trustees, officers, employees, attorneys, agents, and
volunteers from and against any and all loss, cost, damage, or expense, including, without limitation, court costs and attorney fees, which any of them
may suffer, incur, or sustain, or for which any of them may become liable by virtue of the injury to or the death of any person, or the damage to or loss,
theft, or destruction of any property arising out of, or in connection with, the storage cart, table, or vending unit.
(D) Concession locations shall be determined and designated by the Village. Any concession area within the Lisle Commuter Rail Station shall occupy a
space that does not exceed six feet by eight feet (6' x 8').
(E) The license is nonassignable and nontransferable without prior approval of the Village Board.
(F) The license shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place on the mobile vendor cart of the licensee.
(G) Proof of insurance shall be carried with the mobile vendor cart at all times.
(H) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, no license shall be entered into by the Village for any concession operation within the Lisle
Commuter Rail Station unless and until such license is authorized in writing by the Northern and Santa Fe Railway Company. (Ord. 2017-4709, 3-6-
2017)
7-8-4: OPERATIONS OF CONCESSIONS; HEALTH AND SANITATION:
(A) The licensee must be certified and in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the DuPage County Department of Health.
(B) It shall be unlawful to permit stale foods, decaying matter, or other waste material or product to accumulate in, on, about, or around concessions while
they are so used, or to fail to maintain all such concessions in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 2017-4709, 3-6-2017)
7-8-5: DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
(A) The Board of Trustees may refuse issuance of a license if, in its sole and absolute discretion, it appears that such issuance would not further the public
health, safety, comfort, morals, or welfare or would not otherwise be in the best interests of the Village.
(B) The Mayor shall have the authority to revoke any license issued under this chapter for the following reasons:
1. The licensee, or those under the licensee's control, has violated any Federal, State, or local laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations;
2. The licensee, or those under the licensee's control, has acted in a manner that does not promote or is otherwise detrimental to the public health,
safety, comfort, morals, or welfare of the Village; or
3. The licensee, or those under the licensee's control, has otherwise acted in a manner that is not in the best interests of the community.
Before revoking such license, the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, shall provide the licensee with at least three (3) days' written notice of such
pending revocation, the reasons therefor, and the date and location of a hearing in front of the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, upon the matter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 350/460
(C) Notwithstanding anything in this section, the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, shall have the authority when the Mayor, in the Mayor's sole and absolute
discretion, deems a situation sufficiently serious and likely to result in imminent harm to the public or certain members thereof, or which otherwise
threatens the public health, safety, comfort, morals, or welfare, to invoke emergency powers to revoke licenses issued under this chapter without prior
notice and hearing. The licensee so affected shall be entitled to a post revocation hearing to be conducted by the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee.
(D) Any license revoked under this section shall result in the immediate cessation of business by the licensee on, about, or within the property
encompassing the Lisle Commuter Rail Station and surrounding commuter parking lots. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, or association
whose license has been revoked and fails to cease business operations and vacate the Lisle Commuter Rail Station premises or surrounding parking
lots shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance, and each day such a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate and distinct offense, and shall be grounds for the Village Attorney to commence appropriate action in law or in equity in the
Circuit Court of DuPage County to force cessation of business and the removal from the Lisle Commuter Rail Station and surrounding commuter
parking lots. (Ord. 2017-4709, 3-6-2017)
7-8-6: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association that violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee
ordinance for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 2017-4709, 3-6-2017)
Chapter 9
RESERVED
Chapter 10
VENDING DEVICES
7-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
A "vending device" as used in this chapter means a mechanical device or mechanical container constructed of metal or other material of substantially
equivalent strength and durability whose primary purpose is the sale of food, candy, gum, beverages and other similar items. Containers used for the
dispensing of newspapers, flyers, handbills, or other similar printed materials either at a cost or free of charge are explicitly excluded from the definition of
"vending device" as used in this chapter. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
7-10-2: LOCATION AND LICENSE:
(A) No vending device shall be placed within a public right of way, along streets, thoroughfares, parkways, sidewalks or on any other village of Lisle
property whether owned or leased by the village within the village of Lisle.
(B) No vending device shall be placed at the Lisle train station.
(C) No vending device shall be placed in or upon any premises within the village without first having obtained a license for such device in accordance with
title 3, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
7-10-3: CONDITIONS AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued for the placement of a vending device in or upon any premises in the village shall be subject to the conditions as set forth in title 3,
chapter 1 of this code and may be suspended or revoked pursuant to the procedures set forth in title 3, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
7-10-4: REMOVAL OF VENDING DEVICES:
(A) In the event any vending device is placed or remainswithin any public right of way, street, thoroughfare, parkway, sidewalk or other village property or
remains in or upon any premises in the village after the expiration or revocation of a previously issued license, or is in violation of any other provision of
this chapter, the village shall send, by certified mail, with return receipt requested, a written notice to the address of the owner or user of the vending
device. The notice shall state the address and telephone number of the village, a description of why the vending device is in violation of the
requirements of this chapter; that the owner or user is ordered to cause immediate removal of the vending device; and that the vending device will be
removed by the village after a date designated in the notice. The date shall be no less than ten (10) days after the date the notice is mailed or first
posted as the case may be; unless the owner or user requests a hearing before the village board by filing a written appeal with the business office
manager on or before the designated removal date.
(B) When any appeal is filed pursuant to this provision, the village board shall set the hearing on the appeal at its next regularly scheduled village board
meeting and notice of such time and place shall be given in the manner as specified herein. In making its determination, the village board shall only
consider the standards set forth in this chapter. Its decision shall be rendered on the same day as the hearing. The decision of the village board shall
be final.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 351/460
(C) If any vending device is still on public property or otherwise in violation of this chapter after the ten (10) day period described above, or if an appeal is
made and denied after hearing before the village board the vending device shall be removed.
(D) The owner of any vending device removed in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall be responsible for all the expenses of the removal and the
storage of such vending device. Should the vending device fail to be claimed or should the owner fail to pay any money due the village within thirty (30)
days of invoice by the village, such vending device shall be deemed to be unclaimed property and may be disposed of pursuant to law. (Ord. 2003-
3465, 6-2-2003)
7-10-5: EMERGENCY PROVISIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, however, the village may remove any vending device from a location in the village which, because of
its location or condition, poses an immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public or a member thereof. In this event, a hearing shall be
held, upon owner request, within three (3) days following the removal, for the purpose of determining whether there is a continued need for the removal.
The business office manager shall issue a ruling immediately at the time the hearing is concluded. The decision of the business office manager may
beappealed to the village board provided that a written notice of appeal, including a statement of the grounds of appeal, is filed with the business office
manager within ten (10) days after the hearing. The village board shall set hearing on the appeal at its next regularly scheduled village board meeting and
notice of such time and place shall be given in the same manner as specified in section 7-10-4 of this chapter. The village board shall have the power to
reverse, affirm, or modify the original decision. Its decision shall be rendered the same day as the hearing. The decision of the village board shall be final.
(Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
7-10-6: PENALTIES:
Any person or entity who shall be guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to a fine as established by the annual fee
ordinance. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for every day a violation continues. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
Chapter 11
NEWSPAPER DISPENSING DEVICES
7-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
"Newspaper dispensing device" means a container, constructed of metal or other material of substantial equivalent strength and durability which is used
for the dispensing of newspapers, flyers, handbills or other similar printed materials either at a cost or free of charge. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
7-11-2: PUBLIC PROPERTY LOCATION, APPLICATION, PERMIT AND FEE; PRIVATELY OWNED:
(A) No private newspaper dispensing device shall be placed or located within the B-3 district as defined in section 5-10-1 of this code, or within any area
bounded by the B-3 district, including the Lisle train station. For purposes of this chapter, the "Lisle train station" shall be defined as that area of Lisle
generally lying south of the centerline of Burlington Avenue, north of the centerline of Front Street east of the centerline of Main Street and west of
easterly property line of the Lisle village hall, 925 Burlington Avenue, north of the railroad tracks, and west of the easterly property line of the south
tunnel shelter 990 Front Street south of the railroad tracks. The definition of the "Lisle train station" shall include, but not be limited to, any and all
sidewalks and walkways, parking areas, bus and cab stations, commuter platforms and waiting areas.
(B) No private newspaper dispensing device shall be placed or located within a public right of way, along the streets, thoroughfares, parkways, sidewalks
or on any other village of Lisle property outside of the B-3 district, whether owned or leased by the village, unless a permit has been issued therefor by
the village in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(C) Applications for such permit shall be made on forms approved by the village for permits allowing for the installation andplacement of private newspaper
dispensing devices within the public right of way, along the streets, thoroughfares, parkways, sidewalks or on any other village property within the
village and outside the B-3 district. The applications shall be provided by the village business office manager upon request. The application must
include a site plan and state the exact location outside the B-3 district where the applicant wishes to install a newspaper dispensing device. The
application must also include a description of and the size and color specifications for the intended newspaper dispensing device. Misrepresentation of
information, false statements or any other fraudulent information supplied on or with the application shall be grounds for revocation of a permit in
compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2007-4147, 10-15-2007)
(D) Within five (5) business days of receipt of a completed application for a permit and payment of applicable fee, the village shall issue a permit, provided
that the applicant meets conditions contained in section 7-11-3 of this chapter. In the event that the terms and conditions of section 7-11-3 of this
chapter, where applicable, are not met, the village shall, within five (5) business days of receipt of an application for a permit, deny the application, state
the reasons in writing for such denial and notify the applicant, in writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the reasons for the denial. Any
such denial may be appealed pursuant to the procedure set forth in this chapter.
(E) The applicant shall pay an annual administrative processing fee as established by the annual fee ordinance for each location where a newspaper
dispensing device is installed. Newspaper dispensing devices established or located after July 1 of the year shall pay an amount as established by the
annual fee ordinance for each location where a newspaper dispensing device is installed. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
(F) Permits shall be for a term of one year and shall not be assignable. Permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. Applications and fees for
renewal of permits shall be filed with the village business office manager no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon December 15 of each year. Fees
paid after twelve o'clock (12:00) noon December 15 shall include a late fee as established by the annual fee ordinance. In the event the renewal fees
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 352/460
are not paid on or before January 16 of the applicable license year, the village shall issue a citation of an ordinance violation and an additional late fee,
as established by the annual fee ordinance, shall be charged, and the location where the device is placed shall be considered forfeited. If the permittee
desires to retain the location for placement of a device by payment of the required permit fees, said fees shall include an additional late fee as
established by the annual fee ordinance if paid after January 16 of the permit year. (Ord. 2005-3909, 3-21-2005)
(G) A permit shall allow the installation of a newspaper dispensing device only at the location described in theapplication for the permit. The permit shall
contain a description of the authorized location and permits shall not be transferable from one location to another nor from one person to another.
(H) As an express condition of the acceptance of a permit hereunder, the permittee thereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the village, its trustees,
officers and employees against any loss or liability or damage, including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury and for property damage
sustained by any person as the result of the installation, use or maintenance of a device within the village. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
7-11-3: PERMIT CONDITIONS; PRIVATELY OWNED:
(A) A permit issued for a privately owned newspaper dispensing device shall be subject to and granted upon the following conditions, restrictions and
requirements:
1. Privately owned newspaper dispensing devices shall not be placed at the "Lisle train station" as defined in section 7-11-2 of this chapter, nor placed
within any other area located in or bounded by the B-3 district.
2. Newspaper dispensing devices shall be placed adjacent and parallel to building walls not more than six inches (6") distant therefrom, or near and
parallel to the curb not less than eighteen inches (18") and not more than twenty four inches (24") distant from the curb.
3. No newspaper dispensing device shall be placed, installed, located or maintained:
(a) Within ten feet (10') of any fire hydrant or other emergency facility;
(b) Within fifteen feet (15') of any intersecting driveway, alley or street;
(c) Within five feet (5') of any bus stop, bench, street sign, stoplight, parking meter, streetlight, utility pole, display window, handicap access ramp, or
marked crosswalk;
(d) Within five hundred feet (500') of another newspaper dispensing device containing the same newspaper or news periodical;
(e) So as to be chained, or otherwise secured, to any tree, utility pole, light pole, parking meter, traffic control post, street signpost, bench, refuse
receptacle or other public property;
(f) On or within any median within any public right of way;
(g) Within a rectangular area stretching from the entire width of any building entranceway to the curb;
(h) At any location where the width of paved clear space in any direction for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet (5');
(i) Adjacent to parallel or angle parking spaces;
(j) Within three feet (3') of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, planters, or trees. (Ord. 2007-4147, 10-15-2007)
4. No publication may be displayed, offered for sale, or offered free to the public on any public right of way by means of a newspaper dispensing device
in such manner as to expose to the public view any photograph, drawing or depiction of any kind contained within such publication displaying any of
the following:
(a) The genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft perineum, anal region or pubic hair region on any person;
(b) Any portion of the breast, at or below the areola, of any female person.
5. The permittee shall maintain the newspaper dispensing device in good working order, in a safe and clean condition, in such a manner so that:
(a) It is reasonably free of dirt and grease;
(b) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof;
(c) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereon;
(d) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks,
dents, blemishes and discoloration;
(e) The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading;
(f) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshaped and the device is level on the ground and not leaning or placed on uneven
portions of ground.
6. A legible telephone number shall be displayed on the newspaper dispensing device for a user to call to obtain a refund in case of malfunction of the
newspaper dispensing device.
7. Newspaper dispensing devices may have the name of the newspaper or the applicable publication displayed on the side, front and back of the
device provided that the lettering is no larger than two inches (2") in height.
8. The newspaper dispensing device shall not be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than the purposes dealing with the display, sale
or purchase of the newspaper sold or distributed free therein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 353/460
9. Upon removal of the newspaper dispensing device, the permittee shall restore the property of the village to the same condition as when the
newspaper dispensing device was initially installed, ordinary wear and tear excepted. If those repairs are not made within thirty (30) days, the village
shall undertake that repair work and collect from the owner or permittee the costs thereof, including reasonable attorney fees and related costs of
collection. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
7-11-4: REMOVAL; PRIVATELY OWNED:
(A) In the event any newspaper dispensing device is placed or remains within any public right of way, street, thoroughfare, parkway, sidewalk or other
village property without a permit being issued for the newspaper dispensing device, or after the expiration or revocation of a previously issued permit,
or in violation of any other provision of this chapter, the village shall send, by certified mail, with return receipt requested, a written notice to the address
of the owner or user of the newspaper dispensing device. The notice shall state the address and telephone number of the village, a description of why
the newspaper dispensing device is in violation of the requirements of this chapter; that the owner or user is ordered to cause immediate removal of the
newspaper dispensing device from public property; and that the newspaper dispensing device will be removed by the village after a date designated in
the notice. The date shall be no less than ten (10) calendar days after the date the notice is mailed; unless the owner or user requests a hearing before
the village board by filing a written appeal with the business office manager pursuant to subsection 7-11-6(B) of this chapter on or before the
designated removal date.
(B) If any newspaper dispensing device is still on public property after the ten (10) calendar day period described above, or if an appeal is filed and denied
after hearing before the village board, the newspaper dispensing device shall be removed by the village.
(C) The owner of any newspaper dispensing device removed in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall be responsible for all the expenses of the
removal and storage of such newspaper dispensing device. Should the newspaper dispensing device fail to be claimed or should the owners fail to pay
any money due the village, after six (6) months, such newspaper dispensing device shall be disposed of according to law.
(D) If a newspaper dispensing device is unused for a period of more than thirty (30) days in that no newspapers, flyers, handbills or other similar printed
materials are placed within the device and offered for sale or for distribution at no cost,the newspaper dispensing device shall be considered
abandoned by the owner or permittee. The procedures of this section shall then be followed. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
7-11-5: LOCATION, PERMITS; VILLAGE OWNED:
(A) Village owned newspaper dispensing devices shall be located within the B-3 district at the "Lisle train station", as defined in section 7-11-2 of this
chapter, at such locations as determined by the village. (Ord. 2007-4147, 10-15-2007)
(B) Permits for spaces within village owned newspaper dispensing devices shall be issued subject to the following conditions:
1. Persons or entities wishing to place newspapers, flyers, handbills or other printed materials in the village owned newspaper dispensing devices must
file a completed application for a permit on the forms that shall be provided by the village business office manager upon request. The permittee shall
make those agreements and be in compliance with those conditions set forth in the application. Said agreements and conditions will include, but not
be limited to, the following:
(a) Complete name, address and signature of applicant, address for giving notices as may be required under this chapter, and statement that
applicant has capacity and authority to enter into said agreement.
(b) Statement that the permittee understands the concept of freedom of the press as it relates to permittee's publication, and agrees to waive any
and all objections to the use of the village owned newspaper vending devices on such grounds.
(c) Statement that the permittee understands and agrees that the village shall not be responsible for loss of money or contents from the space, and
that the village shall not be responsible for loss of revenue in the event of damages due to fire, flood or other events beyond the village's control.
The applicant shall provide such other information as may be requested on the application form, as amended from time to time.
2. Permits shall be issued on a first come, first served basis. In the event that the village has issued permits equal to the number of available spaces in
the newspaper dispensing devices, additional applicants will be placed on a waiting list. As spaces become available, additional permits shall be
issued according to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
3. The permittee shall pay an administrative processing fee and maintenance fee as established by the annual fee ordinance for each space in the
village owned newspaper dispensing device or devices if requesting placement in more than one village owned device. The initial administrative
processing permit fee andmaintenance fee shall be applicable to the initial permit year, or any part thereof. The permittee shall pay a renewal
administrative processing fee and maintenance fee as established by the annual fee ordinance per year for each space. Permits shall be for a term
of one year and shall not be assignable. Permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. Applications and fees for permits shall be filed with the
village business office manager no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon December 15 of each year. Fees paid after twelve o'clock (12:00) noon
December 15 shall include a late fee as established by the annual fee ordinance. In the event the renewal fees are not paid on or before January 16,
the space shall be forfeited and the coin mechanism locked by the village. If the permittee desires to retain a space in the village owned newspaper
dispensing device by payment of the required permit fees, said fees shall include an additional late fee as established by the annual fee ordinance if
paid after January 16 of the permit year. Upon payment of all fees the village shall remove any locking devices placed on the coin mechanism. Only
one of the same publication shall be allowed per each village owned newspaper dispensing device. (Ord. 2005-3909, 3-21-2005)
4. The permittee during the term of the permit shall be responsible for the following:
(a) Providing and maintaining an adequate supply of newspapers, flyers, handbills or other printed materials in the space;
(b) Providing routine housekeeping and removal of trash and debris from the space;
(c) Repair and maintenance of the coin mechanism;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 354/460
(d) Maintaining the price display plaque and replacing, as necessary, with approved replacement;
(e) Repair and maintenance of all interior spaces and surfaces;
(f) Displaying and maintaining a valid phone number on the space for refunds or complaints.
5. The permittee, upon removal of the materials from the newspaper dispensing device, shall restore the newspaper dispensing device to the same
condition as when the device was initially installed, ordinary wear and tear excepted. The permittee shall be responsible for reimbursing the village
for the cost of any repairs to the newspaper dispensing device resulting from damage caused by the permittee.
(C) The village will be responsible for the exterior maintenance of village owned newspaper dispensing devices including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Faded, cracked or vandalized lenses;
2. Exposed door hardware;
3. Exterior surfaces of doors and boxes and all structural components.
The village specifically excludes maintenance responsibility for price display plaques. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
7-11-6: APPEAL OF DENIAL OF PERMITS; REMOVAL OF DEVICE:
(A) The decision of the village business office manager in refusing to grant or renew a permit shall be appealable. The applicant shall have the right to
appeal the decision to the village board provided that the applicant file a written notice of appeal, including a statement of the grounds of appeal, with
the business office manager, within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the notice of denial. The village board shall set a hearing on the appeal at
its next regularly scheduled village board meeting and notice of such time and place shall be given to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The village board shall have the power to reverse, affirm, or modify the original decision. In making its determination, the village board shall
only consider the standards set forth in this chapter. The decision of the village board shall be rendered the same day as the hearing. The decision of
the village board shall be final.
(B) The decision of the village to remove a newspaper dispensing device shall be appealable. The applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to
the village board provided that the applicant file a written notice of appeal, including a statement of the grounds of appeal, with the business office
manager, within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the notice of removal. The village board shall set a hearing on the appeal at its next regularly
scheduled village board meeting and notice of such time and place shall be given to the owner/user of the newspaper dispensing device by certified
mail, return receipt requested. The newspaper dispensing device may remain in place during the appeal period. The village board shall have the power
to reverse, affirm or modify the original decision. In making its determination, the village board shall only consider the standards set forth in this chapter.
The decision of the village board shall be rendered the same day as the hearing. The decision of the village board shall be final. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-
2003)
7-11-7: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
The village board shall revoke a permit issued under the terms of this chapter after a finding of guilt for any of the following causes, which shall constitute
violations of this section including:
(A) Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement contained in the application for a permit;
(B) Violation of any term or condition of the permit granted tothe permittee;
(C) Violation of any term, condition or provision of this chapter or any other chapter of this code. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
7-11-8: EMERGENCY PROVISIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the village may remove any newspaper dispensing device from public property which, because of its
location or condition, poses an immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public or a member thereof. In this event, a hearing before the
village manager shall be held, upon the request of the owner, within three (3) days following the removal, for the purpose of determining whether there is a
continued need for the removal. The village manager shall issue a ruling immediately at the time the hearing is concluded. This decision is appealable
pursuant to the provisions of section 7-11-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
7-11-9: ENFORCEMENT:
Except as otherwise specifically stated herein, the facilities maintenance supervisor, and his designees, shall be responsible for enforcement of this
chapter. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
7-11-10: PENALTIES:
Any person or entity who shall be guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as established by the annual fee
ordinance. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for every day a violation continues. (Ord. 2003-3465, 6-2-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 355/460
Chapter 12
SEX OFFENDERS PROHIBITED IN VILLAGE PARKS
7-12-1: RECITALS:
(A) Protection of children in the village of Lisle is a priority of the village;
(B) Under the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9.4, it is unlawful for a child sex offender to knowingly be present in any public park
building or on real property comprising any public park when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present, and knowingly loiter or reside within
five hundred feet (500') of a playground or loiter five hundred feet (500') from a public park; and
(C) The board of trustees has determined that in order to protect children in village parks, it is necessary to designate all park property as off limits to any
person who has been convicted of a child sex crime under Illinois law and to place similar restrictions on loitering and residing near park property and
residing next to a sex offender's victim. (Ord. 2007-4095, 2-19-2007)
7-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHILD SEX OFFENDER: Any person who:
(A) Has been charged under Illinois law, the Illinois code of criminal procedure of 1963 or any substantially similar federal law or the law of another
state, with a sex offense set forth in this section or the attempt to commit an included sex offense, and:
1. Is convicted of such offense or an attempt to commit such offense; or
2. Is found not guilty by reason of insanity of such offense or an attempt to commit such offense; or
3. Is found not guilty by reason of insanity pursuant to subsection (c) of section 104-25 of the code of criminal procedure of 19631 of such offense or
an attempt to commit such offense; or
4. Is the subject of a finding not resulting in an acquittal at a hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (a) of section 104-25 of the code of criminal
procedure of 19632 for the alleged commission or attempted commission of such offense; or
5. Is found not guilty by reason of insanity following a hearing conducted pursuant to a federal law or the law of another state substantially similar to
subsection (c) of section 104-25 of the code of criminal procedure of 19633 of such offense or of the attempted commission of such offense; or
6. Is the subject of a finding not resulting in an acquittal at a hearing conducted pursuant to a federal law or the law of another state substantially
similar to subsection (a) of section 104-25 of the code of criminal procedure of 19634 for the alleged violation or attempted commission of such
offense; or
(B) Is certified as a sexually dangerous person pursuant to the Illinois sexually dangerous persons act5 or any substantially similar federal law or the
law of another state, when any conduct giving rise to such certification is committed or attempted against a person less than eighteen (18) years of
age; or
(C) Is subject to the provisions of section 2 of the interstate agreements on sexually dangerous persons act6. Convictions that result from or are
connected with the same act, or result from offenses committed at the same time, shall be counted for the purpose of this section as one conviction.
Any conviction set aside pursuant to law is not a conviction for purposes of thissection.
EXTRATERRITORIAL CONVICTIONS: A conviction for an offense of federal law or the law of another state that is substantially equivalent to any offense
listed in subsections (A) and (E)1 of the definition of Sex Offense shall constitute a conviction for the purpose of this section. A finding or adjudication as a
sexually dangerous person under any federal law or the law of another state that is substantially equivalent to the sexually dangerous persons act7 shall
constitute an adjudication for the purposes of this section.
LOITER: (A) Standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a vehicle or remaining in or around public park property; or
(B) Standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a vehicle or remaining in or around public park property, for the purpose of committing or
attempting to commit a sex offense.
SEX OFFENSE: (A) A violation of any of the following sections of the Illinois criminal code of 19618: 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-7, aiding and
abetting child abduction under 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-5(b)(10); 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-5(b)(10), child luring; 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-6, indecent solicitation of a child; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-6.5, indecent solicitation of an adult; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
9, public indecency when committed in a school, on the real property comprising a school, on a conveyance owned, leased, or contracted by a school to
transport students to or from school or a school related activity, or in a public park; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9.1, sexual exploitation of a child;
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-15.1, soliciting for a juvenile prostitute; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-17.1, keeping a place of juvenile prostitution;
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-18.1, patronizing a juvenile prostitute; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-19.1, juvenile pimping; 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-19.2, exploitation of a child; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20.1, child pornography; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-21, harmful
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 356/460
material; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-14.1, predatory criminal sexual assault of a child; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-33, ritualized abuse of a
child; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20, obscenity; when that offense was committed in any school, on real property comprising any school, on any
conveyance owned, leased, or contracted by a school to transport students to or from school or a school related activity, or in a public park. This includes
an attempt to commit any of these offenses.
(B) A violation of any of the following sectionsof the criminal code of 19619, when the victim is a person under eighteen (18) years of age: 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12-13, criminal sexual assault; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-14, aggravated criminal sexual assault; 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/12-15, criminal sexual abuse; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-16, aggravated criminal sexual abuse, or an attempt to commit any of
these offenses.
(C) A violation of any of the following sections of the criminal code of 196110, when the victim is a person under eighteen (18) years of age and the
defendant is not a parent of the victim: 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-1, kidnapping; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2, aggravated
kidnapping; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-3, unlawful restraint; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-3.1, aggravated unlawful restraint, or an
attempt to commit any of these offenses.
(D) A violation of any former law of this state substantially equivalent to any offense listed above.
(E) For purposes of section 7-12-5 of this chapter:
1. A violation of any of the following sections of the criminal code of 1961: 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-5(b)(10) (child luring), 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/10-7 (aiding and abetting child abduction)11, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-6 (indecent solicitation of a child), 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-6.5 (indecent solicitation of an adult), 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-15.1 (soliciting for a juvenile prostitute), 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-17.1 (keeping a place of juvenile prostitution), 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-18.1 (patronizing a juvenile
prostitute), 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-19.1 (juvenile pimping), 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-19.2 (exploitation of a child), 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-20.1 (child pornography), 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-14.1 (predatory criminal sexual assault of a child), 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12-33 (ritualized abuse of a child), or an attempt to commit any of these offenses.
2. A violation of any of the following sections of the criminal code of 1961, when the victim is a person under eighteen (18) years of age: 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12-13 (criminal sexual assault), 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-14 (aggravated criminal sexual assault), 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12-16 (aggravated criminal sexual abuse), and subsection (a) of section 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-15 (criminal
sexual abuse), or an attempt to commit any of these offenses.
3. A violation of any of the following sections of the criminal code of 1961, when the victim is a person under eighteen (18) years of age and the
defendant is not a parent of the victim: 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-1 (kidnapping), 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2 (aggravated
kidnapping), 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-3 (unlawful restraint), 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-3.1 (aggravated unlawful restraint), or an
attempt to commit any of these offenses.
4. A violation of any former law of this state substantially equivalent to any offense listed above.
VILLAGE PARK: All parks and associated buildings on real property comprising any public park, playgrounds, forest preserves or conservation areas
under the jurisdiction of the state or a unit of local government and within the corporate limits of the village of Lisle as of the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-4095, 2-19-2007)
7-12-3: PROHIBITION OF SEX OFFENDERS IN VILLAGE PARKS:
It is unlawful for a child sex offender to knowingly be within five hundred feet (500') of any village park when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are
present in the village park, and to approach, contact or communicate with a person under eighteen (18) years of age, unless the child sex offender is a
parent or guardian of a person under eighteen (18) years of age present in the village park. (Ord. 2007-4095, 2-19-2007)
7-12-4: LOITERING NEAR VILLAGE PARKS:
It is unlawful for a child sex offender to knowingly loiter on a public way within five hundred feet (500') of a village park while persons under the age of
eighteen (18) are present in the village park, and to approach, contact or communicate with a person under eighteen (18) years of age, unless the child
sex offender is a parent or guardian of a person under eighteen (18) years of age present in the village park. (Ord. 2007-4095, 2-19-2007)
7-12-5: RESIDING NEAR VILLAGE PARKS:
It is unlawful for a child sex offender to knowingly reside within five hundred feet (500') of a village park or a facility providing programs or services
exclusively directed toward persons under eighteen (18) years of age. Nothing in this section prohibits a child sex offender from residing within five
hundred feet (500') of a village park if the property is owned by the child sex offender and was purchased before the effective date of this chapter. (Ord.
2007-4095, 2-19-2007)
7-12-6: RESIDING NEAR CHILD SEX VICTIMS:
It is unlawful for a child sex offender to knowingly reside within five hundred feet (500') of the victim of his or her sex offense. Nothing in this section
prohibits a child sex offender from residing within five hundred feet (500') of the victim if the property in which the child sex offender resides is owned by
the child sex offender and was purchased before the effective date of this chapter. However, this section does not apply if the victim of the sex offense is
twenty one (21) years of age or older. (Ord. 2007-4095, 2-19-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 357/460
7-12-7: PENALTIES:
Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be subject to fines as established in the annual fee ordinance. A violation of any
provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each day such violation continues. The imposition of any penalties prescribed under this
chapter neither limits nor prohibits any other civil, criminal, or quasi-criminal, legal or equitable remedies available to the village for activities that constitute
a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-4109, 5-7-2007)
Title 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
NUISANCES
8-1-1: POLLUTION OF WATERWAYS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to deposit or dump in any waterway located within the village any grass clippings, brush, tree limbs or
stumps, topsoil, sand, or clay or other yard waste; motor oil, paint, paint thinner, fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, pharmaceuticals, or hazardous wastes;
soap or detergents; or cans, bottles, glass, wooden or paper boxes, crates, old metals or alloys, stone, ashes, brick, tires, garbage and the like. The term
"waterways" shall include rivers, creeks, streams, or wetlands; inlets, catch basins, or other parts of the storm sewer system; or ditches or swales.
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense, and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2008-4220, 8-4-2008)
8-1-2: THE SMOKE FREE ILLINOIS ACT:
(A) Definitions: As used in this section, the below terms shall have the following ascribed meanings:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT: A product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of
nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. "Alternative nicotine product"
excludes cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products as these terms are defined in section 1 of the prevention of tobacco use by minors
and sale and distribution of tobacco products act1 and any product approved by the United States food and drug administration as a nontobacco
product for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold
solely for that approved purpose.
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than
ten percent (10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises. "Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs,
cocktail lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his
or her services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or partially enclosed with: 1) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways,
or 2) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies and
corridors.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller
rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in
athletic competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or other events.
GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the Illinois gaming board rules of the Illinois administrative code.
GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the
purposes of accruing business revenue.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes
for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within
these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through
during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance of fifteen
feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and work
areas; restrooms; conference and class rooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home based business,
unless used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a "place of employment",
nor are enclosed laboratories, not open to the public, in an accredited university or government facility where the activity of smoking is exclusively
conducted for the purpose of medical or scientific health related research.
PRIVATE CLUB: A not for profit association that: 1) has been in active and continuous existence for at least three (3) years prior to the effective date of
this amendatory act of the 95th general assembly, whether incorporated or not, 2) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 358/460
exclusively for club purposes at all times, 3) is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but
not for pecuniary gain, and 4) only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of this definition, "private club" means an
organization that is managed by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has
established bylaws, a constitution, or both to govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club
under 26 USC 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including, without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment,
mobile home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar
public accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be considered a private residence.
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole
or in part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, the village of Lisle, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for
admission, including a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed
area where smoking is prohibited. A "public place" does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide licensed
childcare, foster care, or other similar social service care on the premises. A "public place" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail
stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities,
nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places,
private clubs, gaming facilities, all government owned vehicles and facilities, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service
establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns,
bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than seventy five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn,
lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.
RESTAURANT: An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school
cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, and a kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere. "Restaurant" includes a bar area within the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than eighty percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco,
plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of
other products is merely incidental. "Retail tobacco store" includes an enclosed workplace that manufactures, imports, or distributes tobacco or tobacco
products, when, as a necessary and integral part of the process of making, manufacturing, importing, or distributing a tobacco product for the eventual
retail sale of that tobacco or tobacco product, tobacco is heated, burned, or smoked, or a lighted tobacco product is tested, provided that the involved
business entity: 1) maintains a specially designated area or areas within the workplace for the purpose of the heating, burning, smoking, or lighting
activities, and does not create a facility that permits smoking throughout; 2) satisfies the eighty percent (80%) requirement related to gross sales; and
3) delivers tobacco products to consumers, retail establishments, or other wholesale establishments as part of its business. "Retail tobacco store" does
not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant
license.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or burning cigarette, cigar, pipe, hookah pipe, pipe weed, or other lighted
tobacco product in any manner or in any form; or the use of any alternative nicotine product causing the user to exhale any smoke, vapor, or other
substance other than those produced by unenhanced human exhalation. (Ord. 2007-4168, 12-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2011-4364, 1-17-2011; Ord. 2016-
4650, 5-2-2016)
(B) Smoking Prohibited In Public Places And Places Of Employment:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any public place or place of employment within the village of Lisle.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any place designated as a "no smoking area", as provided in subsection (D) of this section.
3. It shall be unlawful for an employer to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in any place of employment.
4. It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or lessee in control of a public place to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in said
public place.
5. It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or lessee in control of a public place to fail to post signage or remove ashtrays, as provided in
subsection (E) of this section.
(C) Exemptions: The prohibitions on smoking set forth in this section shall not apply to:
1. Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited under the
provisions of this section. Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms
where smoking is permitted. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms.
2. Private vehicles, not including public transportation facilities or government vehicles.
3. Private residences or dwelling places except when used as a childcare, adult daycare, healthcare facility, or any other home based business open to
the public.
4. Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted.
5. Retail tobacco stores as defined in subsection (A) of this section, provided that smoke generated by smoking on the premises of the tobacco store
does not infiltrate into enclosed areas where smoking is otherwise prohibited. Retail tobacco stores claiming an exemption shall annually file an
affidavit with the Illinois department of public health stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar year that was derived from
the sale of loose tobacco, plants, herbs, cigars, cigarettes, and related smoking accessories. Any retail tobacco store that begins operation after
January 1, 2008, may only qualify for the exemption if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the tobacco store.
(D) Designation Of Other No Smoking Areas: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator,
manager, or other person in control of any public place or place of employment may designate a nonenclosed area of said public place or place of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 359/460
employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is also prohibited, provided that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall
conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in subsection (E) of this section.
(E) Responsibilities Of Proprietors: Each owner, lessee, occupant, employer or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment shall be
responsible for all the following:
1. Post conspicuous signs no smaller than five inches by seven inches (5" x 7") in enclosed areas and the entrance or vestibule to the public place,
place of employment or the building wherein they are located, as the case may be, bearing the text "no smoking" or the international "no smoking"
symbol, which consists of a pictorial representation of a cigarette enclosed in a circle with a bar across it. Such signs shall also be posted outside of
the main entrance to the public place or place of employment and shall contain the telephone numbers of the designated enforcement authorities
noted in this section, in addition to the telephone number and website designated by the Illinois department of public health for registering
complaints.
2. Remove ash trays or other similar containers intended for the deposit of tobacco ash, cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products from public places.
3. Request any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited to refrain from smoking, and if the person continues to smoke, request the
person to leave.
4. Notify employees regarding the requirements of this section. (Ord. 2007-4168, 12-17-2007)
5. Owners, lessees, occupants, employers or other persons in control of retail tobacco stores, as defined in this section, must prohibit the entrance of
persons under the age of eighteen (18) onto the premises of such establishments. Further, any such owner, lessee, occupant, employer, or person in
control of a retail tobacco store must post a sign informing the public of this age restriction at each entrance to any such establishment stating the
following:
PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE ARE PROHIBITED BY VILLAGE ORDINANCE FROM ENTERING THIS PLACE OF BUSINESS
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said letters to be at least one inch (1") high. (Ord. 2010-4354, 12-6-2010)
(F) Enforcement:
1. This section shall be enforced by the village of Lisle police department.
2. Notice of the provisions of this section shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the village of Lisle.
3. Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this section may initiate enforcement by contacting the village of Lisle police department.
4. An employer, owner, lessee, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this section shall inform persons violating this section
of the appropriate provisions thereof and request that the violator cease smoking in a prohibited area and, if the person continues to smoke, request
the person to leave. (Ord. 2007-4168, 12-17-2007)
5. The citations issued pursuant to this section shall conspicuously include the following:
(a) The name of the offense and its statutory reference;
(b) The nature and elements of the violation;
(c) The date and location of the violation;
(d) The name of the enforcing agency;
(e) The name of the violator;
(f) The amount of the imposed fine and the location where the violator can pay the fine without objection;
(g) The address and phone number of the village where the violator can request a hearing before the department of public health to contest the
imposition of the fine imposed by the citation;
(h) The time period in which to pay the fine or to request a hearing to contest the imposition of the fine imposed by the citation; and
(i) The verified signature of the person issuing the citation.
6. One copy of the citation shall be provided to the violator, one copy shall be retained by the village, and one copy shall be provided to any entity
authorized by the village to receive fines on the village's behalf.
7. Any person may register a complaint with the department of public health, a state certified local public health department, or the village police
department for a violation of this act.
8. The department of public health shall afford a violator the opportunity to pay the fine without objection or to contest the citation in accordance with
the Illinois administrative procedure act.
9. Upon receipt of a request for hearing to contest the imposition of a fine imposed by a citation, the village shall immediately forward a copy of the
citation and notice of the request for hearing to the department of public health for initiation of a hearing conducted in accordance with the Illinois
administrative procedure act and the rules established thereto by the department applicable to contested cases. Parties to the hearing shall be the
village and the violator.
The department shall notify the violator in writing of the time, place, and location of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted at the nearest
regional office of the department or in a location contracted by the department in the county where the citation was issued.
10. Fines imposed under this section may be collected in accordance with all methods otherwise available to the village or the department, except that
there shall be no collection efforts during the pendency of a hearing before the department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 360/460
(G) Penalties:
1. Any person who shall violate subsection (B)1 or (B)2 of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine as established by the annual
fee ordinance. Each day in which a violation of subsection (B)1 or (B)2 of this section occurs constitutes a separate and distinct violation.
2. Any person who shall violate subsection (B)3 or (B)4 of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine as established by the annual
fee ordinance. Each day in which a violation of subsection (B)3 or (B)4 of this section occurs constitutes a separate and distinct violation.
3. Any person who shall violate subsection (B)5 of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine as established by the annual fee
ordinance. Each day during which a violation of subsection (B)5 of this section continues beyond the specified time for correction shall constitute a
separate punishable offense, although owners, operators, managers or other controllers of public places and places of employment shall be given a
reasonable time to come into compliance with subsection (B)5 of this section following issuance of a notice of violation, but such period shall not, in
any event, exceed one week.
4. In addition to the fines established by this subsection, violation of this section by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a
public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on
which the violation occurred.
5. One-half (1/2) of any fine imposed under this section shall be distributed to the department of public health and one-half (1/2) of any fine under this
section shall be retained by the village.
6. Violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by an action in the circuit court for injunctive relief, or other
means provided for by law, and the village may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. (Ord. 2011-4364, 1-17-2011)
8-1-3: INTENTIONALLY FEEDING WILD ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to intentionally feed, shelter or otherwise harbor any wild animals within the village.
For purposes of this section, wild animals include, but are not limited to, raccoons, geese, ducks, deer, skunks, coyotes, squirrels, possum and fox.
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense, and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2007-4160, 12-17-2007)
Chapter 2
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND HAZARDOUS WASTE
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMPOST PILE: A pile or collection of organic materials maintained for noncommercial, private, home gardening use, expressly constructed for the
purpose of obtaining decomposed organic matter and consisting of one or more of the following materials: leaves, grass clippings, garden debris,
excluding branches and shrubs, and manure.
HDPE: High density polyethylene.
HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature.
LDPE: Low density polyethylene.
PET: Polyethylene terephtyalate.
RECYCLABLES: Brown kraft paper bags, paper magazines and catalogs, paper telephone books, corrugated cardboard, newspaper and newspaper
inserts, colored HDPE and HDPE plastic milk or water jugs, tin cans, steel cans, bimetal cans, PET plastic beverage containers, clear, brown or green
glass bottles or jars, aluminum cans, aluminum foil and aluminum formed containers, junk mail, 6-pack rings, aerosol cans, juice boxes, wet strength
carrier stock, mixed papers, 12-pack rings #4, paint cans, frozen food packages, chipboard, polystyrene #6, envelopes and any other items the village
decides to recycle in the future.
TOTER: A wheeled container in sizes ranging from fifty (50) to ninety (90) gallons, with cover, requiring a semiautomatic lifting mechanism for collection,
and approved by and/or supplied and billed to the resident directly by the scavenger for a monthly charge.
WASTE: Garbage, refuse, rubbish, litter, and recyclables, including, but not limited to, the following general and specific items:
(A) Items subject to decay, including, but notlimited to, putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from handling, preparing, cooking and
consumption of food; waste that attracts insects or rodents and vermin; dead animals; and any items subject to rapid decay, putrefaction and
generation of noxious gases or odors; however, this definition expressly excludes compost piles.
(B) Paper products, including, but not limited to, paper, newspapers, magazines, books, cartons, wrappings and cigarettes.
(C) Wood products, including, but not limited to, boxes, barrels, excelsior and straw; however, neatly stacked firewood limited in amount to one and
one-half (11/2) cords is permitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 361/460
(D) Metal products and household items, including, but not limited to, nails, metal scraps and shavings, cans, machinery, abandoned or inoperable
vehicles, used pipe and fittings, appliances, refrigerators, furniture, furnishings, fixtures and bedding.
(E) Yard leavings, including, but not limited to, downed trees, downed shrubs, loose branches.
(F) Construction material (on a lot where no active building permit is in force), including, but not limited to, concrete, bricks, blocks, shingles, siding,
aluminum trim and mud and debris on public or private streets, sidewalks or pathways created by construction traffic.
(G) Textile products, including, but not limited to, rags, shoes, and articles of clothing.
(H) Anything creating a danger or nuisance to the public health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to, ashes and cinders and any of the
items mentioned above. (Ord. 92-2342, 12-7-1992; amd. Ord. 94-2499, 4-18-1994)
8-2-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
(A) Burning, Burying Or Accumulating Waste: It shall be unlawful, and shall constitute a nuisance, for any person to burn or bury waste within the village,
to permit waste to accumulate in any manner so as to create a nuisance and to attract flies, vermin or rats, or to permit any waste to accumulate for
more than seven (7) days. However, properly installed gas incinerators or similar equipment that has been inspected and approved by the building
commissioner or health inspector, and which does not constitute a health hazard, may be used for the burning of waste, and properly installed kitchen
disposal units may be used for the disposal ofwaste into sewer lines within the village. This subsection shall not apply to those items contained within
the definition of "compost pile" in section 8-2-1 of this chapter.
(B) Deposits In Streets: Except recyclables which are regulated by subsection (E) of this section, no waste of any kind shall be deposited in any street,
alley or public way, excepting waste wrapped in tightly closed and tied plastic bags or placed in a toter and maintained in good order and in an
inconspicuous place so as not to create a nuisance to neighbors, by the owner or occupant of each residential or commercial unit in the village and
placed for pick up by a scavenger service; and no such waste shall be so placed that it can be blown or scattered by the wind.
(C) Deposit On One's Own Property Or The Property Of Another: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly deposit waste on his or her own property
or on the property of another without consent of the owner, or to deposit waste on the property of a public entity without the consent of the public entity;
for purposes of this subsection, "property" shall include both real and personal property.
(D) The Placement Of Handbills On Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon
any vehicle.
(E) Deposits Of Recyclables In Streets On One's Own Property Or The Property Of Another: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly deposit
recyclables in any street, alley, public way, on his or her own property or property of another. However, any person may place recyclables in his or her
own recycling bins or other means of containment approved by the village, from time to time. Further, the recyclables shall be maintained in good order
and in an inconspicuous place so as not to create a nuisance to neighbors and no such refuse shall be so placed that it can be blown or scattered by
the wind. In addition, all recyclables shall be placed for pick up on the day of collection by the scavenger service. (Ord. 92-2342, 12-7-1992)
(F) Windblown Material: No waste of any kind shall be deposited in such a manner so that it can be blown or scattered by the wind.
(G) Presumption Of Responsibility: Whenever any waste has been deposited in violation of any ordinance prohibiting said deposit, the person whose
name appears as an addressee on said waste shall be prima facie responsible for such violation and subject to the penalty therefor. (Ord. 93-2352, 1-
18-1993)
(H) Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
8-2-3: COLLECTION AND REMOVAL; LIEN:
(A) As it is hereby declared to be illegal for the owners of real estate to permit the accumulation of waste on public or private property, as set forth under
section 8-2-2 of this chapter, if the owner of such real estate, after reasonable notice, refuses or neglects to remove such waste, the village manager of
the village may direct that said waste be removed and that the costs of said collection and removal be assessed to and collected from the owner of the
real estate in question.
(B) The cost of collection and removal of waste shall be a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all subsequent liens and encumbrances, except tax
liens, if the village, or the person performing the service by authority of the village in his or its own name, files notice of lien in the office of the recorder
of deeds of DuPage County. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
1. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof;
2. The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service; and
3. The date or dates when such costs and expense was incurred by the village. However, the lien of the village shall not be valid as to any purchaser
whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to removal of waste and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien of the village
shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 362/460
The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in case of mortgages or mechanics' liens. An action to foreclose this lien shall be
commenced within two (2) years after the date of filing notice of lien. (Ord. 92-2342, 12-7-1992)
8-2-4: RESIDENT REQUIREMENTS:
The owner or occupant of any multi-family unit receiving scavenger service shall maintain clean waste collection containers and areas. All segregated
waste, including, but not limited to, recyclables shall be placed in covered containers. The owner or occupant of any unit receiving single-family residential
scavenger service shall:
(A) Place all waste, except yard leavings, either in plastic bags of thirty three (33) gallons or less or in a toter which the resident may rent from the
scavenger. Plastic bags may be placed inside a plastic or metal container;
(B) Not place more than sixty (60) pounds in any one plastic bag which has been placed for pick up by the scavenger service;
(C) Affix a sticker approved by the village and purchased by theresident from the scavenger, to the plastic bag, toter or container or to any item of
nonrecyclable waste too large to fit into a thirty three (33) gallon plastic bag;
(D) Place recyclable materials in bins provided by the village and place those bins at the curbside for pick up by the scavenger service. However, if
recyclable materials are not segregated from the nonrecyclable waste, they shall be placed in plastic bags as other waste. When placing waste,
recyclables and other materials at curbside for pick up by the scavenger, the resident shall place all such materials as close to the roadway as possible
without interfering with or endangering the movement of vehicles, pedestrians or snow plowing operations. (Ord. 92-2342, 12-7-1992)
(E) Not place any material in bins for recyclable material pick up except as follows:
1. Paper Products: The following products shall be kept separate from nonpaper recyclables. Paper products may be commingled and unbound if
placed in a paper products only recycling container next to their nonpaper products recycling bin.
(a) Brown kraft paper bags folded with all receipts and other packaging removed.
(b) Paper magazines and catalogs with all nonpaper inserts such as plastic records and cloth samples removed.
(c) Paper telephone books with covers.
(d) Corrugated cardboard free of any food debris, packaging materials (i.e., Styrofoam, wood chipboard, bubble wrap) and excessive tape, flattened
and cut into pieces no larger than three feet by three feet (3' x 3').
(e) Junk mail.
(f) Mixed papers.
(g) Chipboard.
(h) Envelopes.
(i) Wet strength carrier stock.
(j) Frozen food packages.
(k) Newspapers, either commingled in the paper products only container or bundled with string or bagged in kraft paper bags (grocery) and placed
next to the container.
2. Nonpaper Products: The following nonpaper products, none of which shall be containers greater than two (2) gallons in size, shall be kept separate
from paper products and shall be commingled in a LEAP recycling bin.
(a) Colored HDPE plastic narrow necked containers marked #2 rinsed free of visible debris with caps or lids removed, crushed and placed in the
nonpaper recycling bin.
(b) Tin cans, steel cans and bimetal cans rinsed free of visible food debris and when applicable, all labels removed, flattened and placed commingled
in the nonpaper recycling bin.
(c) PET plastic beverage containers rinsed free of visible food debris with caps or lids removed, crushed and placed commingled in the nonpaper
recycling bin.
(d) Clear, brown or green glass bottles or jars rinsed free of visible food debris and with caps or lids removed and placed commingled in the
nonpaper recycling bin.
(e) Aluminum cans rinsed free of visible food debris, crushed and placed commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
(f) Aluminum foil and aluminum formed containers rinsed free of visible food debris, crushed and placed commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
(g) HDPE plastic milk or HDPE plastic water jugs rinsed free of visible food debris and with caps or lids removed, crushed and placed commingled in
the nonpaper recycling bin.
(h) (1) Polystyrene #6 plastic meat and produce trays rinsed free of visible food debris and placed commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
(2) Polystyrene white packaging grade only clearly marked #6 commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
(3) Polystyrene clear grade packaging clearly marked #6 commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 363/460
(4) Polystyrene foam packaging peanuts, bagged in a clear plastic bag and commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
(5) Polystyrene #6 foam drinking cups and yogurt containers if clearly marked #6 and commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
(i) Steel aerosol cans completely emptied of all contents with plastic caps removed and commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
(j) LDPE #4 soft 6-pack and 12-pack carriers and rigid containers commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
(k) HDPE #2 brittle 6-pack and 12-pack carriers commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
(l) Steel only completely emptied paint cans with lids removed and commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
(m) Gable top cartons and small juice boxes, with cellophane and straws removed, commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
(n) Polypropylene (PP) #5 rigid containers rinsed free of visible food debris commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
(o) Polyvinylchloride #3 rigid containers rinsed free of visible food debris, commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin.
(p) #7 other rigid containers rinsed free of visible food debris, commingled in the nonpaper recycling bin. (Ord. 95-2654, 6-5-1995)
(F) Place all grass clippings, leaves and prunings of small diameter, green stemmed shrub and plant stalks, if the owner or occupant desires scavenger
pick up of said materials, in biodegradable thirty (30) gallon kraft paper bags or other village approved bags which are specifically provided by the
scavenger service through retailers for said materials. A sticker approved by the village shall be affixed by the owner or occupant to the bag when
placed at the curbside for pick up. Said material may also be placed at curbside for pick up in a toter rented from the scavenger service.
(G) Place all brown stemmed branches and shrub prunings with large diameter stems or trunks, individually not to exceed five feet (5') in length and two
inches (2") in diameter, in bundles tied with biodegradable natural fiber twine. Said bundles shall not exceed sixty (60) pounds in weight or eighteen
inches (18") in diameter and shall have affixed to it a sticker approved by the village when placed at curbside for pick up by the scavenger service.
(H) Not place material referenced in subsections (F) and (G) of this section, at curbside for pick up except during April 15 through December 15 of each
year unless otherwise approved by the village manager.
(I) Not place any waste, recyclables, yard leavings, refuse or containers nearer to the street than the front of the residence, except during the period of
time between four o'clock (4:00) P.M. the day prior to garbage pick up and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. the day of garbage pick up. (Ord. 92-2342, 12-7-
1992)
8-2-5: HAZARDOUS WASTE:
The term "hazardous waste" as used in this code shall mean a solid waste, or combination of solid wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
(A) Cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
(B) Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or
otherwise managed. (Ord. 92-2342, 12-7-1992)
8-2-6: COMPOST PILES:
(A) Compostable materials such as grass trimmings, wood waste, leaves, weeds and other garden refuse may be placed in a compost pile; provided, that
it is enclosed in a fence, box or other barrier or container equal in height to the compost pile and in a manner to prevent material from being windblown.
Said fence or box shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area and shall not exceed five feet (5') in height. The container shall be set back
from the lot line equal to the setback for accessory buildings and shall not be located in the front yard or on a drainage or utility easement. The
depositing of garbage; pet waste, meat scraps or other materials that may attract animals or vermin to the compost pile or which may produce an
obnoxious odor shall be prohibited.
(B) Any compost pile shall be maintained in accordance with Illinois department of energy and natural resources pamphlet entitled "A Homeowner's Guide
To Recycling Yard Wastes" (reference numbers LENR/RN-89103 and STA-9-50M-8-89) as hereafter may be amended, from time to time, which is
incorporated herein by reference and forms a part hereof. In the event of a conflict between said pamphlet and the provisions of this code, the code
shall supersede the pamphlet and shall govern the maintenance of compost piles to the extent of the conflict. (Ord. 92-2342, 12-7-1992)
Chapter 3
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
8-3-1: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to burn or cause the burning at any location within the village, of any paper, cardboard, leaves, twigs, branches, wood, grass, grass
clippings or other refuse from farming or gardening, or other combustible materials of any nature whatsoever, except as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 364/460
(A) Burning any combustible materials wholly within a building in a fireplace or other equipment or facility designed and constructed for such purpose,
provided that any refuse burning incinerator installed in any residence building shall comply with the rules and regulations of the Illinois air pollution
control board, as the same may from time to time be in effect1. (Ord. 93-2372, 3-15-1993)
(B) Burning is permitted in an outdoor fireplace or cooking unit, but only if:
1. The fuel used is primarily charcoal, propane gas or dry, seasoned wood;
2. The fireplace is raised above ground level;
3. The fireplace is constructed of noncombustible brick, stone or metal materials, and is commercially designed for outdoor fires or cooking;
4. The fireplace, if moveable, is placed on a noncombustible surface during use;
5. The fireplace is directly attended at all times during use; and
6. The fire shall be entirely extinguished prior to leaving the fireplace unattended. (Ord. 97-2847, 2-17-1997)
(C) Burning combustible materials in a high temperature incinerator providing complete combustion and complying with the rules and regulations of the
Illinois air pollution control board as the same may from time to time be in effect.
(D) Burning of a bonfire in connection with a secondary school event; provided, however, that such bonfire is approved andsanctioned by the secondary
school authorities and complies with all rules and regulations of the Illinois air pollution control board and the state as from time to time may be in
effect.
Further, any such bonfire under this subsection shall be allowed only after the grant of a permit or approval of the corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 93-2372, 3-15-1993)
(E) Controlled open burning of landscape areas is permitted, in nonresidential areas of the village but only if:
1. A waiver is granted by the village president and board of trustees pursuant to ordinance; and
2. The petitioner has complied with all requirements and conditions as stated in "Village Of Lisle, Policies And Procedures, Requesting Granting Of A
Waiver From The Village Code Open Burning Prohibitions February 7, 1995", as amended from time to time. (Ord. 98-2960, 2-16-1998)
Chapter 4
WEEDS
8-4-1: PURPOSE:
The Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lisle hereby determine that, under certain circumstances as set forth herein, the presence of tall grass,
tall weeds, noxious weeds, and exotic weeds creates blight and constitutes a nuisance. It is recognized that such blight lowers property values, leads to
deteriorating housing conditions, undermines the quality of neighborhood life, and adversely affects the public health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the community. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
8-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
EXOTIC WEED: In accordance with the Illinois Exotic Weeds Act, exotic weeds are plants not native to North America which, when planted either spread
vegetatively or naturalize and degrade natural communities, reduce the value of fish and wildlife habitat, or threaten an Illinois endangered or threatened
species.
NATIVE ILLINOIS PRAIRIE GRASSES: Illinois native plant species as designated by the United States Department of Agriculture Illinois Natural
Resources Conservation Service.
NOXIOUS WEED: In accordance with the Illinois Noxious Weed Law, a noxious weed is any plant which is determined by the Director, the Dean of the
College of Agricultural, Consumer and Environmental Sciences of the University of Illinois and the Director of the Agricultural Experiment Station at the
University of Illinois, to be injurious to public health, crops, livestock, land or other property. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
8-4-3: NOXIOUS WEEDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any lot, tract, or parcel of land to allow for the presence of noxious weeds. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-
2018)
8-4-4: EXOTIC WEEDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any lot, tract, or parcel of land to allow for the presence of exotic weeds. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-
2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 365/460
8-4-5: NUISANCE DECLARED:
(A) All weeds, turf grasses, annual plants, vegetation, and plant growth in excess of eight inches (8") in height is hereby declared a nuisance; and it shall
be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any lot, tract, or parcel of land to allow for the presence of weeds, turf grasses, annual plants,
vegetation, and plant growth in excess of eight inches (8") in height.
1. This subsection (A) does not apply to the following:
(a) Trees and shrubs;
(b) Cultivated flowers;
(c) Vines attached to trees and shrubs, fences, or walls;
(d) Areas used for scientific and educational purposes through accredited programs;
(e) Areas of public open space or open space governed by a homeowners' association;
(f) Areas within conservation easements;
(g) Areas that contain documented State or Federally listed threatened and/or endangered species;
(h) Buffers associated with lakes, ponds, and wetlands;
(i) Buffers associated with channels, creeks, streams, and rivers;
(j) Golf courses;
(k) Heavily wooded property;
(l) Legal farms, agricultural uses, and gardens;
(m) Rain gardens;
(n) Regulatory mitigation areas including stormwater management facilities; or
(o) Native Illinois prairie grasses.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any lot, tract, or parcel of land abutting right-of-way to allow for the presence of weeds, turf
grasses, annual plants, vegetation, and plant growth in excess of eight inches (8") in height in the area between the edge of pavement or curb and their
property line.
1. This subsection (B) does not apply to the following:
(a) Trees and shrubs;
(b) Cultivated flowers;
(c) Vines attached to trees and shrubs, fences, or walls;
(d) Areas that contain documented State or Federally listed threatened and/or endangered species;
(e) Buffers associated with lakes, ponds, and wetlands;
(f) Buffers associated with channels, creeks, streams, and rivers;
(g) Rain gardens;
(h) Regulatory mitigation areas including stormwater management facilities. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
8-4-6: NATIVE ILLINOIS PRAIRIE GRASSES:
(A) Nuisance Declared: The Village hereby declares that it shall be a nuisance if native Illinois prairie grasses are allowed to grow uncontrolled, without
limitation, and without proper management/maintenance; and it shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any lot, tract, or parcel of land to
allow for the presence of native Illinois prairie grasses within five feet (5') of all lot lines. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
8-4-7: ABATEMENT:
(A) The Village shall have the right to abate by cutting, pulling, plowing under, chemically spraying or otherwise destroying any existing noxious weeds,
exotic weeds, weeds, turf grasses, annual plants, vegetation, plant growth, and native Illinois prairie grasses which violate the provisions of this
chapter. If the Village chooses to abate, the Village shall first serve a notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail upon the
owner of record at the address shown on the County tax rolls. Said notice shall:
1. Demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10) days after the date of mailing; and
2. Provide that upon failure to abate the nuisance, the Village may proceed to abate the nuisance at the owner's expense and issue a citation if
deemed appropriate.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 366/460
(B) If the nuisance is not abated within ten (10) days after notice has been mailed, the Village may proceed to abate the nuisance, or cause such nuisance
to be abated, keeping an account of the expense of abatement, and any such expenses shall be charged to and paid by the owner.
(C) Any property owner found to be in violation of this chapter shall receive only one notice in a calendar year. This notice shall serve as notice for
subsequent violations in that same calendar year. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
8-4-8: LIEN:
(A) All costs incurred by the Village for abatement pursuant to this chapter, shall be a lien upon the property as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-20-6 and 5/11-20-7. This cost shall be a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens; provided,
that within sixty (60) days after such cost or expense is incurred, the Village or person performing on behalf of the Village, in his or its own name files a
notice of lien in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 1) a description of the real estate
sufficient for identification thereof; 2) the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service; and 3) the date or
dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the Village. However, such lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such
real estate have arisen subsequent to the abatement service and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien of the Village shall not be valid as to any
mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice. Upon payment of the cost
and expense (including costs and expenses of releasing the lien) by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been
filed, the lien shall be released by the Village or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record as in the case of
filing notice of lien.
(B) The cost of abating weeds and grasses shall not be a lien on the real estate affected unless a notice is personally served on, or sent by certified mail
to, the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the last preceding year. The notice shall be delivered or sent after
the abatement of weeds and grasses on the property. The notice shall state the substance of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-7 and this section,
and shall identify the property by common description, and the location of the weeds and grasses abated. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
8-4-9: FORECLOSURE OF LIEN:
(A) Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed or abatement charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as in the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the
name of the Village.
(B) The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings, in the name of the Village, in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters, against any property for which a bill for weed and grass abatement has remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered. (Ord.
2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
8-4-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which such nuisance remains unabated. (Ord. 2018-4797, 11-19-2018)
Chapter 5
PARKWAY TREES, TREE COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-4639, 4-4-2016)
Chapter 6
ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
8-6-1: PURPOSE:
(A) The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of DuPage County, and protect and enhance water
quality in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.) through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of discharges other than
those occurring as a direct result of precipitation and/or snowmelt into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and the storm drainage
system in order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) phase II permit process. Other purposes
of this chapter include:
1. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 and the storm drainage system by nonstormwater discharges; and
2. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4 and the storm drainage system.
(B) The purposes of this chapter are consistent with the plan and advance the following objectives of the plan:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 367/460
1. Protect and enhance the quality, quantity, and availability of surface and ground water resources.
2. Preserve and enhance existing aquatic and riparian environments and encourage restoration of degraded areas.
3. Promote equitable, acceptable, and legal measures for stormwater management.
The purposes of this chapter shall be implemented by its provisions. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
(A) For the purposes of this chapter, the terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
1. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; and
2. Words used in the singular number include the plural number and words used in the plural number include the singular number; and
3. The words "shall", "will", and "must" are mandatory, not permissive; and
4. The phrase "director" refers to the individual responsible for the enforcement.
(B) For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words
and terms not defined shall have the meanings indicated by common dictionary definition.
BUILDING: A structure that is constructed or erected partially or wholly aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term "building"
includes manufactured homes and includes both the aboveground and the belowground portions of the structure.
CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA): The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
COMMITTEE: The stormwater committee of the village of Lisle.
COMMUNITY: Any municipality, or the unincorporated county, within DuPage County acting as a unit of local government.
COUNTY: The county of DuPage, Illinois.
DEPARTMENT: The village of Lisle community development department.
DIRECTOR: The village of Lisle community development director or his or her designee.
DIVISION: The DuPage County stormwater management division.
DRAIN: Piping and appurtenances for conveying a fluid.
FACILITY: Something that is built, installed, or established to serve a particular purpose.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material which may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial hazard to human health, safety, property, or
the environment.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Either of the following:
1. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system including, but
not limited to, any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the community, or
2. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drainage system that has not been documented in
plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the community.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drainage system, except as exempted in subsection 8-6-5(A)3 of
this chapter.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to an industrial NPDES stormwater permit, as defined in 40 CFR section 122.26(b)(14).
LINE: A hollow conduit through which fluids are transported between two (2) or more points.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A conveyance or system of conveyances (including, but not limited to, sidewalks, roads
with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, and storm sewers) owned or operated by a
governmental entity and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT: A permit issued by Illinois environmental protection agency
(IEPA) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general
areawide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not the direct result of precipitation and/or snowmelt in the
tributary drainage basin.
NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI): Illinois environmental protection agency notice of intent to participate in coverage under the general permit to discharge
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 368/460
stormwater associated with industrial activity.
PARCEL: Contiguous land under single ownership or control.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, public or private corporation, municipality, political subdivision, government agency, or any other
legal entity, including heirs, successors, agents, officers, and assigns of such entity.
pH NEUTRAL: pH value between 6.5 and 9.0 standard units.
PLAN: The DuPage County stormwater management plan, adopted by the DuPage County board in September 1989, as amended from time to time.
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and
other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, wastewater, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues
that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
RUNOFF: The waters derived from precipitation and/or melting snow within a tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of that
basin.
SEWAGE: Polluted stormwater, wastewater, or other refuse liquids usually conveyed by sewers.
SEWER: An artificial conduit to carry off sewage and/or surface water (as from rainfall), including sanitation, stormwater, and/or combined sewers.
SEWERAGE: A system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation, pumping, and treatment of sewage.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: A facility by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and humanmade or
altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STRUCTURE: Anything that is erected or constructed. The term "structure" includes, without limitation: buildings, manufactured homes, tanks, dams,
sewers, constructed channels, outfalls, freestanding signs, parking lots, driveways, roads, sidewalks, carports, and concrete patios.
WASTEWATER: Water that has been used and is not for reuse unless treated by a wastewater treatment facility.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: As defined in the CWA, "waters of the United States" applies only to surface waters, rivers, lakes, estuaries,
coastal waters, and wetlands. Not all surface waters are legally "waters of the United States". Generally, those waters include the following:
1. All interstate waters;
2. Intrastate waters used in interstate and/or foreign commerce;
3. Tributaries of the above;
4. Territorial seas at the cyclical high tide mark; and
5. Wetlands adjacent to all the above. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
(A) Applicability: This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system from any developed or undeveloped lands within the jurisdiction
of the village of Lisle, unless explicitly exempted by subsection 8-6-5(A)3 of this chapter, including any amendments or revisions thereto.
(B) Interpretation:
1. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience,
prosperity, and general welfare and the environment of the residents of the village of Lisle, and to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and
enabling legislation.
2. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by
any other applicable statute, law, chapter, regulation, or rule, the provision that is most restrictive or imposes the higher standards or requirements
shall apply.
3. The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other chapters, laws, codes, and
regulations, in existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this chapter. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this
chapter shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations, and
with each other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest application. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-4: ADMINISTRATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 369/460
(A) Full Participant Community: The village of Lisle shall promulgate and enforce this chapter in partnership with DuPage County, as a full participant
community under DuPage County's illicit discharge detection and elimination ordinance. Duties of a full participant community include:
1. Completion of an intergovernmental agreement for full participation in the illicit discharge detection and elimination program.
2. Provide DuPage County stormwater management division with a current storm sewer atlas. An updated storm sewer atlas shall be provided to this
division annually.
3. Provide assistance to the division in acquiring access to the storm drainage system as mutually deemed necessary.
4. Provide timely prosecution of persons found to be in violation of this chapter when necessary per section 8-6-8 of this chapter.
5. Provide the division with documentation of any enforcement action or prosecution from the previous year for inclusion in the IEPA annual facility
inspection report.
(B) Responsibility For Administration: The department shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or
duties imposed upon the department may be delegated in writing by the director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest, or in the employ,
of the department as representatives, contractors, designees and/or assigns.
(C) Duties Of Director: The duties and functions of the director shall include:
1. Determining policy related to and directing the enforcement of this chapter, as applicable; and
2. Supervising the execution of this chapter.
(D) Representative Capacity: In all cases when any action is taken by the director, or his or her duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, such action shall be taken in the name of and on behalf of the village of Lisle, and neither the director nor his or her designee, in so acting for
the village of Lisle shall be rendered personally liable. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-5: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
(A) Prohibition Of Illicit Discharges:
1. No person shall place, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under their control to place, drain, or otherwise discharge into the storm
drainage system or MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than normal stormwater unless specifically exempted in subsection
(A)3 of this section.
2. The following discharges into the MS4 or the storm drainage system shall be prohibited:
(a) Discharges that are not a direct result of precipitation or snowmelt within the drainage area of the MS4.
(b) Discharges from an illicit connection.
3. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established herein, provided, they do not cause an adverse effect on water quality
as determined by the director:
(a) Discharges caused by governmental public works and stormwater management units as part of their standard operations in compliance with all
applicable regulations.
(b) Discharges required by law or authorized by permit, including any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the USEPA and/or IEPA.
(c) Water line and fire hydrant flushing.
(d) Landscape irrigation water.
(e) Rising groundwaters.
(f) Groundwater infiltration.
(g) Pumped groundwater.
(h) Discharges from potable water sources.
(i) Foundation drains.
(j) Air conditioning condensate.
(k) Irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation).
(l) Springs.
(m) Water from crawl space pumps.
(n) Footing drains.
(o) Storm sewer cleaning water.
(p) Water from outdoor individual residential car wash.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 370/460
(q) Routine external building washdown which does not use detergents.
(r) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(s) Dechlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges.
(t) Residual street wash water.
(u) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
(v) Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges.
(w) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been removed).
(x) Discharges associated with dye testing of water line, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, private drains or septic systems; however, this activity shall
not take place until the discharger, or tester, has provided notification to the department at least two (2) full business days prior to the test date,
unless an emergency situation does not allow time for such notification.
(y) Other discharges approved by the department as being substantially like any of the discharge types enumerated in this subsection (A)3.
(B) Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
1. The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system or MS4 is prohibited.
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible
under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
3. A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drainage system or MS4, or
allows such a connection to continue.
4. Connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved wastewater management system or the
sanitary sewer system upon approval of the department and the appropriate sanitary treatment facility.
5. Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system or
MS4, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the department requiring that such
locating be completed. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined,
that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm
sewer system, MS4, sanitary sewer system, or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and
provided to the department. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-6: INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
(A) Submission Of Notice Of Intent (NOI) To The Department:
1. Any person operating a facility subject to the IEPA's general permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity shall submit a copy of
the notice of intent (NOI) to the department at the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent to the IEPA as applicable.
2. The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the department either in person or by mailing it to:
Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater
Community Development Department
Village of Lisle
925 Burlington Ave.
Lisle, IL 60532-1838
3. A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having
submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the department. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-7: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
(A) Notification Of Spills:
1. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person owning, leasing or exercising control over a property, or responsible for
emergency response for a property, has information of any known or suspected spill of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges
or pollutants discharging into the MS4 or the storm drainage system, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment,
and cleanup of such spill.
(a) In the event of such a spill, said person shall immediately notify local emergency dispatch services and act in accordance with Illinois emergency
management agency (IEMA) and IEPA regulations.
(b) Said person shall notify the department of the spill in person or by phone, facsimile, or e-mail no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the department within three (3) business days of the phone
notice.
(c) If the spill emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on site written
record of the spill and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five (5) years.
2. Proper notice, including containment and cleanup as outlined in subsection (A)1 of this section, shall exempt the notifying parties from applicable
fines set forth in subsection 8-6-8(F) of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 371/460
3. Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this chapter.
4. Notwithstanding the language of subsection (A)2 of this section, a party causing a spill that contaminates or harms a storm sewer system shall not
be relieved of liability for damages resulting from such act. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-8: VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES:
(A) Enforcement; Violations:
1. The director shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The village of Lisle may enter into agreements
with other governmental units for the purpose of implementing this chapter.
2. A person violates this chapter when that person:
(a) Performs any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this chapter; or
(b) Disobeys, neglects, or fails to carry out or comply with any provision of this chapter or of any order or notice issued by the director; or
(c) Allows any condition or act that violates any provision of this chapter to continue unabated on property owned, leased, managed, or under the
control of such person; or
(d) Directs, orders, permits, or allows a second person to do any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this chapter, or to maintain or continue
unabated any condition or act that violates any provision of this chapter on property owned, leased, managed or under the control of the first
person.
(B) Notice To Correct Violations; Director May Take Action:
1. The director may issue a notice of violation ordering a person to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter and/or to cease
and desist from any action conducted in violation of this chapter. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a notice of violation and/or order
to cease and desist shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(a) The director shall set forth the form and content of any notices issued under this chapter.
(b) The director may issue a warning of violation ordering a person to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If a
person fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a warning, the director may, thereafter, issue a notice of violation.
(c) The director may issue a warning of violation and disburse educational materials outlining appropriate measures to minimize the discharge of
pollutants.
2. If a person fails to comply with an order issued under this section, the director may direct the appropriate legal counsel to commence any legal
proceeding authorized by this chapter, under the law or equity, necessary to enforce any provision of this chapter and/or to protect public health and
safety. Any legal action brought under this chapter shall be in the name of the village of Lisle.
(C) Emergency Cease And Desist Orders:
1. The department may obtain an emergency order in the event of the following:
(a) Any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations
are likely to recur; and
(b) That the person's violation has caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or storm drainage system and an imminent
threat of violation is present.
2. The department may issue the emergency order to the violator directing that the violator:
(a) Immediately cease and desist all such violations;
(b) Immediately comply with all requirements of this chapter; and
(c) Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
3. Any person notified of an emergency order under this subsection shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the
event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the department may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the
environment, including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The department may
allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the department that the period of endangerment has
passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this chapter. A person that is responsible, in whole or in
part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge
and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the department within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of
an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
(D) Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance: Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a threat to
public health and safety and is declared and deemed a public nuisance.
(E) Nuisance Abatement: Whenever a nuisance shall be found to exist on any premises, the director may order such nuisance to be abated upon
determination that the nuisance constitutes a threat to public health or safety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 372/460
1. In the event of an emergency situation, as determined by the director, involving an immediate threat to public health and safety, the director may
direct legal counsel to immediately commence any legal or equitable proceeding necessary to restrain, abate, and/or remedy said situation. The
director may take such action without having to first issue a notice of violation to the person(s) having control of, or acting as agent for, such
premises where the nuisance is located, or waiting for such person(s) to abate or remove such nuisance as previously ordered by the director.
2. In all other cases, the director may notify, in writing, the person(s) having control of, or acting as agent for, such premises where the nuisance is
located and directing such person(s) to abate or remove such nuisance within such time as is stated on the notice. Upon the failure or refusal of such
person(s) to comply with the notice, the director may direct that appropriate proceeding commence to compel the abatement, or removal, of such a
nuisance in any manner allowed by law, equity, or this chapter and/or authorizing the department to act to abate, or remove, such nuisance. The
person(s) having control of such premises, in addition to the other remedies provided by this chapter, shall be liable to the department for any costs
incurred by the department to effect such abatement, or removal, including reasonable attorney fees and other costs of enforcement, to be recovered
by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(F) Fines: Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such nuisance remains unabated.
(G) Remedies Not Exclusive: The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedy available under this chapter or under any
applicable federal, state, or local law and do not supersede or limit, any and all other penalties provided by law. The director may seek, at his
discretion, cumulative remedies. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-9: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
(A) Suspension Of MS4 Access Due To Detection Of Illicit Discharges:
1. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The department shall notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the department for a
reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section,
without the prior approval of the department.
2. In emergency situations, the department may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary
to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or
welfare of persons, or to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the department may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4, storm drainage
system, or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to public health and safety. The department shall obtain an emergency court order
authorizing such termination. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-10: APPEALS:
(A) Right To Appeal:
1. Every request for an appeal shall be made, in writing, to the director. The director may delegate the hearing of appeals to the stormwater committee
of the village of Lisle in the manner provided for below.
2. Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling, or determination by the director, or by any interpretation or application of any provision of this chapter
may appeal such matter. An appeal of any decision made by the director shall be made within seven (7) days of the decision contested, excepting an
appeal involving the assessment charge or calculation of any fine or penalty in which cases such an appeal shall be brought before said amount
becomes thirty (30) days past due.
(a) The appeal procedure shall commence when the person aggrieved notifies the director, in writing, of the intent to appeal the decision of the
director. Such notice shall contain a short, clear statement stating the following:
(1) Identifying the decision of the director which such person is appealing and how this chapter has been misread, misinterpreted, or misapplied in
this instance and/or any mistakes of fact the aggrieved believes the director to have relied upon.
(2) The name and a mailing address, e-mail address, and a telephone number of the person making the request, which contact information shall
be used for giving notices related to the appeal. The person making the request shall attach all written materials on which he or she intends to
rely upon in support of the request.
(b) The director may, without conducting a hearing, grant relief sought by the appeal, or may set the matter over for a hearing in the manner provided
in subsection (A)2(c) of this section.
(c) Upon receipt of such notice of appeal, if relief is not granted by the director in accordance with subsection (A)2(b) of this section, the director shall
set a date for a hearing. Such hearing shall take place no fewer than fourteen (14) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date that the
director receives such notice of appeal unless the director and party requesting the hearing agree to a different schedule. The director shall notify
the person making the appeal of the date of such hearing.
(d) At the hearing, the person making the appeal may appear in person or represented by counsel, or submit his case in writing. The decision
concerning the appeal shall be in writing, shall be communicated to the person making the appeal, and shall state a finding upon which the
decision is based.
3. The stormwater committee shall have the authority to reverse, modify, or affirm any decision, ruling, or determination by the director made pursuant
to this chapter upon appeal. The stormwater committee shall not act in a manner that would violate or in any way conflict with any federal or state
standard or requirement. The stormwater committee or village board may adopt such additional rules and procedures as it deems appropriate for
performing such matters.
4. The decision of the stormwater committee shall be final.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 373/460
(B) Enforcement Measures After Appeal: If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the
event of an appeal, within seven (7) days of the decision of the director or stormwater committee upholding the decision of the department, then
representatives of the department are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. In no case
shall an appeal stay or bar the village of Lisle from commencing a legal action seeking emergency relief. (Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
8-6-11: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
(A) Ultimate responsibility: The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore, this chapter does
not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 2009-4280, 10-19-2009)
Title 9
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
9-1-1: COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT:
The police department of the village shall consist of one chief of police, two (2) deputy chiefs, five (5) sergeants, and not less than twenty eight (28) nor
more than thirty six (36) patrol officers as the corporate authorities may determine from time to time, excluding any chief, deputy chief, sergeant, or patrol
officer on disability leave or disability pension. (Ord. 2014-4518, 1-13-2014)
9-1-2: APPOINTMENTS; TERM OF CHIEF:
(A) Chief Of Police:
1. Henceforth, all appointments to the position of chief of police, temporary and permanent, within the village, shall be made by the president subject to
the advice and consent of a majority of the trustees then holding office.
2. All such temporary appointments are to remain in force until regular appointments may be made under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-1, but
never to exceed sixty (60) days, and no temporary appointment of any one person to the position of chief of police shall be made more than twice in
any one calendar year.
3. All other procedures and actions pertaining to temporary and permanent appointment of chief of police shall otherwise be according to the statute in
such cases made and provided. (Ord. 78-779, 6-13-1978)
(B) Other Appointments:
1. All other appointments to or promotions within the department shall be made by the board of fire and police commissioners as may be provided by
law. However, the board shall not assign or appoint persons to any nonrank, appointed positions that may be established unless the board of
trustees shall expressly grant such authority to the board.
As a prequalification standard, a refundable deposit in a reasonable amount established from time to time by the board of fire and police
commissioners, shall be required at the time an application for testing is provided to a potential applicant. The deposit shall be refunded at the time
an applicant takes the initial test. No refund will be made to any applicant who does not participate in the testing process.
2. If a member of the department is appointed chief of police prior to being eligible to retire on pension, he shall be considered as on furlough from the
rank he held immediately prior to his appointment as chief. If he resigns as chief or is discharged as chief prior to attaining eligibility to retire on
pension, he shall revert to and be established in such prior rank, and thereafter be entitled to all the benefits and emoluments of such prior rank,
without regard as to whether a vacancy then exists in such rank. (Ord. 96-2759, 4-1-1996)
(C) Term: The chief of police shall serve for such term as may be provided by law, and may be removed in the manner provided for the removal of village
officers. (Ord. 195, 10-19-1965)
9-1-3: RANK:
The chief of police shall be head of the department and have supervision over all officers and members thereof. Following him in rank shall be the
sergeants and patrolmen in order of seniority in each group. (Ord. 195, 10-19-1965)
9-1-4: DIVISIONS OF DEPARTMENT:
With the approval of the corporate authorities, the chief of police may establish or set up divisions or units within the department, assigning such policemen
to such divisions or units and designating such duties therefor as may be deemed necessary. (Ord. 195, 10-19-1965)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 374/460
9-1-5: REMUNERATION OF MEMBERS:
The salaries of the various members and officers of the police department shall be as set forth from time to time in the salary structure ordinances of the
village. (Ord. 2014-4538, 7-21-2014)
9-1-6: DUTIES OF CHIEF AND DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
(A) Duties Of Chief Of Police:
1. The chief of police shall perform all duties as chief of police as set forth in village ordinances, village police department rules and regulations, police
department policy and procedure manuals and as directed by the village manager and as from time to time assigned by the village manager. The
chief of police shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of the police department as may be required by statute, by
village ordinance, by the corporate authorities or by the village manager. The chief of police shall be responsible for the performance by the police
department of its functions; all members of the police department both sworn and nonsworn shall serve subject to all orders of the chief of police.
2. The chief of police shall have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen property located in the village.
(B) Duties Of Members: It shall be the duty of all members of the police department, subject to all village ordinances, village procedures and policies,
police department rules and regulations, police department procedures and policies, board of fire and police commissioners rules and regulations and
the board of fire and police commissioners policies and procedures, to enforce all village, county, state and federal laws and to preserve order and
prevent violations of law. (Ord. 195, 10-19-1965; amd. 1979 Code)
9-1-7: REQUIREMENTS OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
(A) Conduct Of Members: All members of the police department shall conduct themselves in a proper and law abiding manner and shall serve subject to
the terms and provisions of applicable village ordinances, village procedures and policies, police department rules and regulations, police department
procedures and policies, board of fire and police commissioners rules and regulations and board of fire and police commissioners policies and
procedures. Each member of the department shall obey the orders and directions of his supervisor. (Ord. 195, 10-19-1965; amd. 1979 Code)
(B) Witness Fees: Every member of the police department shall appear as witness whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an
ordinance or of any state or federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as witness in any action or suit to which the village is
a party; any fees paid for such services shall be turned over to the chief who shall deposit the same with the village treasurer.
(C) Rewards: The chief of police, for meritorious service rendered by any member of the police force in the due discharge of his duty, may permit such
member to retain for his own benefit, so far as he may be permitted by law, any reward or present tendered to him therefor, and it shall be cause of
removal for any member of the force to receive any such reward or present without notice thereof to the chief of police and without his permission.
(Ord. 195, 10-19-1965)
(D) Residency: Six (6) months after completing the eighteen (18) month employment probationary period, every member of the police department shall
reside: 1) within fifty (50) miles of the corporate limits of the village; and 2) within the state of Illinois. (Ord. 89-2015, 12-18-1989)
9-1-8: SERVING PROCESS:
No member of the police department, except the chief, shall serve any process except on command of said chief of the police department. (Ord. 195, 10-
19-1965)
9-1-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as he shall deem advisable; such rules, when approved by the mayor and board of
trustees, shall be binding on such members. Such rules and regulations may cover, besides the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to be
worn or carried, hours of service, vacations and all other similar matters necessary or desirable for the better efficiency of the department. (Ord. 195, 10-
19-1965)
9-1-10: POLICE PENSION FUND:
There shall be a police pension fund of the village which shall be maintained separate from all other funds and monies of the village and which shall be
administered in accordance with the provisions set out under title 2, chapter 7, "Police Pension Fund Board Of Trustees", of this code, and the applicable
provisions of the Illinois statutes.
The board of trustees of the village shall, annually, levy a tax upon all taxable property of the village at the rate on the dollar which will produce an amount
which, when added to the deductions from the salaries or wages of policemen, and receipts available from all other sources, will equal a sum sufficient to
meet the annual requirements of the police pension fund. The annual requirements to be provided by such tax levy shall be equal to the reserve
prescribed by 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-127, and as the same may hereafter be altered or amended. The tax shall be levied and collected in like
manner with general taxes of the village and shall be in addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized to be levied upon all property within the
village, and shall be in addition to the amount authorized to be levied for general purposes, as provided in the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 194, 10-7-
1965)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 375/460
9-1-11: POLICE SERGEANTS' USE OF VILLAGE VEHICLES:
(A) Mileage Limits: (Rep. by Ord. 2004-3857, 8-2-2004)
(B) Personal Use: (Rep. by Ord. 2004-3857, 8-2-2004)
(C) Unauthorized Use: Unauthorized use of the vehicle beyond the limitations set forth herein may result in loss of vehicle use privileges.
(D) No Rights Created: The policy set forth in this section may be amended, modified, revoked or rescinded at any time at the sole discretion of the village
board. It is not intended to be construed to create or constitute a property interest, contract or any right whatsoever to the privileges described. (Ord.
93-2439, 10-18-1993)
Chapter 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
9-2-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the Village to protect animals from neglect and abuse, to protect residents from annoyance and injury to persons and animals, to assist
in providing housing for animals in the custody of the Village, to cover the cost of caring for animals and to establish a program to discourage the
excessive multiplication of animals. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms specified in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Animal
Control Act1. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-3: ADMINISTRATION:
The Village Manager is responsible for the administration of this chapter. Powers delegated to the Village Manager may be delegated by him to other
appropriate Village departments as he may deem expedient for the effectuation of this chapter. The Village Manager shall establish such animal control
centers as are necessary to effectuate this chapter. The Village may contract for the services of a licensed veterinarian to provide an animal control center.
(Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-4: AUTHORITY OF COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICERS AND POLICE OFFICERS:
Community service officers and/or police officers shall enforce animal regulations. A community service officer shall have authority to issue citations for
violations of this chapter; shall wear a uniform; and shall carry proper identification. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-5: IMPOUNDING ANIMALS:
A community service officer or police officer may impound in an animal control center any dog, cat, or other animal found running at large; any abandoned
animal; any dangerous animal that has acted in a threatening or terrorizing manner or who has bitten or attempted to bite a person or animal; any vicious
dog; or any animal maintained in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-6: RECORD OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
A record shall be made of all impounded animals, entering the breed, color and sex, rabies tag number, if known, and the name and address of the owner
or keeper, if known. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-7: NOTICE TO OWNER OF IMPOUNDMENT:
If ownership of an impounded animal can be determined, the owner shall be notified immediately by telephone or other means if possible, and also by
written notice. Such notification shall include the procedure to regain custody of the animal. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-8: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
(A) An animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter, except for vicious dogs, may be redeemed by the owner within seven (7) days after the
impounding thereof upon the payment of the following fees:
1. An amount as established by the annual fee ordinance per animal for every day or portion thereof in which the animal is impounded.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 376/460
2. A percentage, as established by the annual fee ordinance, of any and all fees pertaining to service necessary to impound the animal.
3. A percentage, as established by the annual fee ordinance, of any and all costs expended in impounding of the animal.
4. A percentage, as established by the annual fee ordinance, of any and all fees for medical services for the impounded animal.
5. Any fines for violations of any provision of this chapter as established by the annual fee ordinance for each day during or on which such violation
occurs or continues.
(B) Any impounded dog or cat not inoculated against rabies shall be inoculated prior to redemption.
(C) Vicious animals shall be impounded by or turned over immediately to DuPage County Animal Services. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-9: DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS NOT REDEEMED:
Any animal, except vicious dogs, not redeemed or in the process of being redeemed, as provided herein, within seven (7) days after notice being sent to
its owner, shall be turned over to DuPage County Animal Services. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-2-10: IMPOUNDED ANIMALS; INTERFERENCE:
No unauthorized person shall interfere with the impounding of, or shall release, any animal that has been impounded by the Village. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-
17-2018)
9-2-11: PENALTY:
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such violation occurs or continues. Any person violating any provision of this
chapter involving a dangerous dog shall be subject to more serious fines than those found to have violated a similar provision involving a
nondangerous dog, with such fines being established and set forth in the annual fee ordinance. The procedure set forth in section 9-4-22 of this title
may be used to settle and compromise a violation of those animal offenses set forth therein.
(B) Upon a finding or plea of guilty to a violation of this chapter, the Village may assess all or a portion of the costs incurred to respond to violations against
the violator. Costs that are assessed shall be based on the Village's actual response costs, including, but not limited to:
1. Time required by the Village staff to coordinate response and to respond;
2. Time spent traveling and providing administrative support;
3. Equipment and supplies; and
4. Contractual support, if any, incurred by the Village.
(C) Upon receipt from the Village of a cost assessment, the violator may within seven (7) days of receipt thereof file a written appeal of the amount of the
assessment with the Village Manager. The Village Manager's determination shall be final. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
Chapter 3
ANIMAL OWNER'S DUTIES
9-3-1: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE, DEFINITIONS:
(A) Every owner of an animal in the Village shall comply with the Animal Control Act of the State of Illinois, 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., and
the Humane Care for Animals Act1, the provisions of which are adopted by reference.
(B) As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms specified in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the
Animal Control Act2. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-2: ANIMAL CARE:
Each owner shall provide for each of his animals:
(A) Sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and water;
(B) Adequate shelter and protection from the weather;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 377/460
(C) Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and
(D) Humane care and treatment. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-3: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES:
No owner shall permit or suffer his animal to:
(A) Molest persons or vehicles by chasing or barking or biting;
(B) Attack or attempt to attack other animals;
(C) Damage property other than that of the owner;
(D) Bark, whine or howl excessively;
(E) Create noxious or offensive odors. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL OF EXCRETA:
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for immediate removal and sanitary disposition of any excreta deposited by his animal(s) anywhere in the
Village. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-5: UNLAWFUL TO RUN AT LARGE:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat to run at large. For the purposes of this section, any dog or cat not upon the premises of its owner or such other
person having custody, possession or control over any such dog or cat, which is not on a leash and under the control of a person physically able to
control it, shall be deemed to be running at large.
(B) It shall be considered a separate offense for an owner to knowingly allow a dangerous dog to run at large, whereby said action results in injury to a
person or animal.
(C) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined in amounts as established
by the annual fee ordinance for the first offense, for the second offense, and for each offense after the second offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed during or on which such violation occurs or continues. Dangerous dogs found running at large in violation of this section will be
subject to a fine greater than that of nondangerous dogs found in violation, with said fines being set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
(D) Any animal illegally running at large in the Village shall be impounded in the animal control center. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-6: PROHIBITED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to house, keep, or maintain livestock or exotic animals, within the Village, except in zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions,
educational institutions, veterinary hospitals, animal shelters, or as otherwise provided in this chapter or within the Village's Zoning Code. Livestock and
exotic animals shall be defined as follows:
EXOTIC: Meaning any animal that is not normally domesticated in the United States or is wild by nature, whether bred in the wild or captivity and also their
hybrids with domestic species.
LIVESTOCK: Meaning breeds of animals primarily raised for commercial purposes on agricultural property, in out-buildings or open spaces separate from
residences. Typical animals include, but are not limited to fowl, poultry, bison, cattle, pigs, swine, sheep, goats, horses, donkeys, equidae, camelids, and
ratites. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-7: NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS:
(A) No person shall house, keep, or maintain more than four (4) dogs or cats, or any combination thereof, over the age of four (4) months within the
Village, with the following limitations and exceptions:
1. Residential dwelling units within a multi-family building, as defined by the Village's Building Code, shall be limited to not more than one dog and one
cat over the age of four (4) months.
2. Limitations on the number of dogs and cats shall not apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, educational institutions, veterinary
hospitals, animal shelters, or as otherwise provided in this chapter or within the Village's Zoning Code. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-8: NUISANCE DEFINED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 378/460
Any animal that repeatedly violates the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and said animal may be destroyed in a humane fashion. (Ord.
2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-9: UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF COLLARS, TAGS AND MUZZLES; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a police officer, community service officer, licensed veterinarian or owner, to remove the collar, license tag or
muzzle from any dog or cat within the limits of the Village without the consent of the owner of such animal. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-10: DISEASED ANIMALS:
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or an infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place
whereby the health of other animals or man may be affected. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-11: GROUND FEEDING OF ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
Ground feeding of animals and/or birds, including but not limited to cats, squirrels, chipmunks, rats, mice, rabbits, raccoons, opossum, skunk, deer, ducks,
geese is prohibited. "Ground feeding" means to spread, cast, deposit or dump food, including birdseed, corn, bread pieces, food scraps, animal chow or
any like or similar substance on any public or private property in the Village. Above-ground bird feeders shall be permitted as long as all feed is placed in a
container or feeder designed for the specific purpose of feeding birds. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-12: LEG HOLD TRAPS PROHIBITED:
(A) No person shall manufacture, sell, offer for sale, import, transport, set or otherwise use or possess any leg hold animal trap or similar device with
spring activated jaws of the type used for the trapping of furbearing animals.
(B) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the sale, transfer, possession, setting or use of standard household mouse or rat traps for the purpose of
controlling mice and rats; nor shall this section apply to the possession or use of leg hold traps for display or exhibition purposes. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-
17-2018)
9-3-13: BEEKEEPING:
(A) Definitions:
BEE: Any stage of the common domestic honeybee, Apis mellifera.
BEEKEEPING: The keeping of one or more colonies of honeybees on one's own property.
COLONY: A hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb, honey, pollen, and brood.
HIVE: A man-made receptacle or container inhabited by a colony of bees.
(B) Regulations And Restrictions: Beekeeping shall comply with the following regulations and restrictions:
1. Property: Beekeeping is prohibited on multi-family property.
2. Lot Area: The minimum lot area for beekeeping shall be one-half (1/2) acre.
3. Yard Location: Beekeeping is prohibited in all front, side, and street yard areas.
4. Number Of Colonies: Lots having less than two (2) acres of lot area shall not have more than two (2) colonies. Lots having two (2) to ten (10) acres
of lot area shall not have more than four (4) colonies. Lots having over ten (10) acres of lot area shall not have more than ten (10) colonies.
5. Setbacks: No colony shall be kept closer than ten feet (10') from any lot line.
6. Fencing Or Flyways: The owner shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least six feet (6') in height consisting of a solid wall, fence, dense
vegetation or combination thereof. The flyway barrier shall be parallel to the property line, located only upon such property line as is closest to the
colony, and extend ten feet (10') beyond the colony in each direction so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six feet (6') above the
ground level over the property lines in the vicinity of the hive. In instances where more than one hive is kept, a flyway shall be installed and
maintained per hive. This flyway barrier requirement shall not apply if the setback between any colony and the closest lot line is twenty five feet (25')
or more.
7. General Maintenance: Each owner shall ensure that no bee comb or other materials are left upon the grounds of the property where a hive is
maintained. Upon their removal from the hive, all such materials shall promptly be disposed of in a sealed container or placed within a building or
other beeproof enclosure.
8. Queens: In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually aggressive characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due provocation, or
exhibits an unusual disposition toward swarming, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to requeen the colony. Queens shall be selected from stock
bred for gentleness and nonswarming characteristics.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 379/460
9. Noncommercial Use: No commercial use or retail sales of bees, honey, honeycomb or other bee products or beekeeping products shall be permitted
from any residential property.
10. Water: Each beekeeper shall ensure a convenient source of water is available to the bees at all times during the year so the bees will not
congregate at swimming pools, pet watering bowls, birdbaths, or other water sources where they may cause human, bird, or domestic pet contact.
11. Registration: The beekeeper must register the colonies and maintain valid registration with the Illinois Department of Agriculture or as otherwise
required by the State of Illinois.
12. Compliance: All beekeepers shall be in compliance with the Illinois Bees and Apiaries Act, including, but not limited to having all hives accessible
for State inspectors to check on a routine basis on their practice and schedule or as needed.
13. Permit Required: Beekeeping shall require a permit from the Village. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
9-3-14: PENALTY:
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such violation occurs or continues. Any person violating any provision of this
chapter involving a dangerous dog shall be subject to more serious fines than those found to have violated a similar provision involving a
nondangerous dog, with such fines being established and set forth in the annual fee ordinance. The procedure set forth in section 9-4-22 of this title
may be used to settle and compromise a violation of those animal offenses set forth therein.
(B) Upon a finding or plea of guilty to a violation of this chapter, the Village may assess all or a portion of the costs incurred to respond to violations against
the violator. Costs that are assessed shall be based on the Village's actual response costs, including, but not limited to:
1. Time required by the Village staff to coordinate response and to respond;
2. Time spent traveling and providing administrative support;
3. Equipment and supplies; and
4. Contractual support, if any, incurred by the Village.
(C) Upon receipt from the Village of a cost assessment, the violator may within seven (7) days of receipt thereof file a written appeal of the amount of the
assessment with the Village Manager. The Village Manager's determination shall be final. (Ord. 2018-4801, 12-17-2018)
Chapter 4
GENERAL OFFENSES
9-4-1: ACTIONS PROHIBITED:
The specific conduct, demeanor, states of behavior and actions hereinafter described are hereby declared to be illegal and prohibited. (Ord. 719, 11-15-
1977)
9-4-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
Disorderly conduct shall be unlawful. A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:
(A) Breach Of The Peace:
1. Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to provoke, make or aid in making a breach of peace; or
2. Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present danger
of a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence; or
3. Refuses or fails to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or activity likely to produce a breach of the peace where there is an imminent threat of
violence, and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to protect the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity, and have requested that said
conduct and activity be stopped and explained the request if there be time; or
4. Shouts or causes or makes other loud and tumultuous noises to the disturbance of any locality or neighborhood; or
5. Makes or causes to be made any noise or sounds of such volume or of such a nature as to cause annoyance to residents of the village; or disturbs
the peace by the making of any unnecessary noise.
(B) Fail To Obey Peace Officer: Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by him to be a peace officer under circumstances where three
(3) or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are likely to cause substantial harm or serious
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm.
(C) Unlawful Assemblages:
1. Assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of using force or violence to disturb the public peace; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 380/460
2. Is in or remains in any crowd, body or assembly of persons collected, gathered or being together for unlawful purposes, or for the purpose of
annoying or disturbing any person, pedestrian or traveler.
(D) Riot, Affray, Assault:
1. Causes or engages in or encourages any riot, affray, or other like diversion, which tends to, or constitutes, a breach of the peace; or
2. Starts a fight, or to fight, or to commit any assault or battery in any public place in the village.
(E) Disturb Lawful Assemblages:
1. Disturbs any orderly public assembly of any kind; or
2. Loiters or lingers about any door or entrance of any church, hall or other room or building used for public assembly after being ordered away by any
person in charge of such church, hall, room or building.
(F) Congregation Of Disorderly Persons; Premises: Causes or permits any roadhouse, shop, building or place of any description (while having the control
thereof) to become the gathering place of any disorderly persons, or permits therein any tumultuous disturbance or party to the annoyance of the
neighborhood.
(G) Disorderly Conduct Relating To Alcoholic Liquor And Drugs:
1. Appears in any public place manifestly under the influence of alcohol, narcotics or other drug, not therapeutically administered, to the degree that he
or she may endanger himself or herself or other persons or property, or annoy persons in his or her vicinity; or
2. Is drunk or in a state of intoxication, or is a person who shall be drinking, selling or giving away any fermented cider, hard cider, ale, porter, beer,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, bitters or other intoxicating liquors in any quantity upon any highway, street, thoroughfare or other public place within the
village or shall be drunk or be in a state of intoxication in any private house or place, to the annoyance of any citizen.
(H) Disorderly Conduct Involving Weapons:
1. Carries in a threatening or menacing manner, without authority of law, any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles,
slingshot, an object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or substance or other dangerous weapon, or conceals said weapon on or about the
person or vehicle; or
2. Keeps concealed about one's person any weapon of a deadly nature; or (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
3. Fires or discharges any gun, pistol, fowling piece or other firearm, or any air gun or toy pistol on which percussion caps are used, within the village,
unless authorized by the village board following recommendation by the police chief; or (Ord. 2005-3927, 5-16-2005)
4. Sells, loans or furnishes to any minor any gun, pistol or any other dangerous weapon. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
(I) Fireworks:
1. It shall be unlawful to discharge, fire or give any exhibition of fireworks or pyrotechnics within the village without having first secured a permit therefor
from the village board. Prior to the village board's approval the fireworks plan shall be reviewed and a recommendation received from the chief of the
Lisle-Woodridge fire protection district, or the chief's designee.
2. It shall be unlawful to store, sell or offer for sale any fireworks or pyrotechnics in the village, either at wholesaleor retail; provided that the storage of
such materials for use in an exhibition for which a permit has been granted shall not be construed as a violation of this subsection. (Ord. 2006-4047,
8-7-2006)
(J) Obstruction To Public And Private Properties:
1. Annoys or causes injury to passersby on any street or sidewalk or other walk in any street or other public place by placing any obstruction upon or
across the same, or by throwing missiles of any kind, or by jeering at or deriding in any other manner with intent to annoy and cause discomfort or
inconvenience to any person in the lawful and orderly pursuit of his or her business or pleasure in such street or public place.
2. Obstructs or encumbers or lounges in, on or about any street corner, or sidewalk, church, clubhouse, hallway or other public building or place after
being requested by a policeman or other village officer to move on.
(K) Injure, Damage Public Or Private Properties:
1. Breaks or injures street or public lights, lamps or lighting apparatus;
2. Defaces, destroys, alters, or mutilates, steals, obstructs or withholds any books, documents, papers, accounts or property of the village;
3. Interferes with, removes, destroys, or in any manner causes injury to any property belonging to the village or to any person, and located in any
street, alley or other public place in the village, unless duly authorized by the owner of such property;
4. Throws, places or deposits in any street, alley or other public place any wastepaper, brick, bottle, stone, glass or other rubbish, decayed vegetables
or fruit or other garbage refuse of any kind. However, deposits made for purpose of pick up and immediate removal, when placed and contained in a
compact fashion by the village or its agent according to direction or custom, shall not be punishable so long as said deposit is not made for a period
in excess of twenty four (24) hours or is moved or removed from said areas promptly upon request of the village or any person inconvenienced
thereby;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 381/460
5. Cuts, injures or destroys any tree, vine, shrub or other plant in, or cuts or removes any sod or earth from, any street, alley, park or other public place,
without due authority;
6. Throws or leaves any peel, rind or other paring or remnant of fruit on any sidewalk;
7. Throws stones, missiles, nails or tacks, ice, glass, brokencrockery or china, iron or metal scraps or other article or thing by which persons or animals
may be injured, or vehicles damaged, or endangered; or throws or casts any stone or other missile at any building, railroad cars or other public or
private property within the village, or at or upon any person, or abets all of the same;
8. Dumps or deposits or causes to be dumped or deposited any grass, leaves, branches, or any other things in the roadway or gutter of any public
street in the village.
(L) Picketing; Demonstrations:
1. Pickets or demonstrates on a public way within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any primary or secondary school building while the school is in
session and one-half (1/2) hour before the school is in session and one-half (1/2) hour after the school session has been concluded; provided, that
this subsection does not prohibit the peaceful picketing of any school involved in a labor dispute; or
2. Pickets or demonstrates on a public way within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any church, temple, synagogue or other place of worship while
services are being conducted and one-half (1/2) hour before services are to be conducted and one-half (1/2) hour after services have been
concluded; provided, that this subsection does not prohibit the peaceful picketing of any church, temple, synagogue or other place of worship
involved in a labor dispute.
(M) Aid Or Abet Escape: Aids or abets the rescue or escape of any person under arrest or under pursuit for the purpose of being arrested.
(N) Disorderly Conduct Involving Animals:
1. Engages in or encourages cockfighting;
2. Cruelly beats or otherwise inhumanely abuses or maltreats any domestic or other animal;
3. Induces or encourages dogfighting or street fighting. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
(O) Gambling: Gambles or keeps a gambling place in violation of the provisions of this subsection.
1. A person gambles when he:
(a) Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of value, unless excepted in subsection (O)2 of this section; or
(b) Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or any political nomination, appointment or election; or
(c) Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells, bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or distributes any gambling device;
or
(d) Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or apparatus by means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or registered, or
knowingly possesses any money which he has received in the course of a bet or wager; or
(e) Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or chance, political nomination, appointment or election; or
(f) Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or transfers any ticket or share for any lottery; or
(g) Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document or other
similar device; or
(h) Knowingly drafts, prints or publishes any lottery ticket or share, or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by and conducted in accordance with the ordinances of the village or the laws of
Illinois or any other state or foreign government; or
(i) Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by and conducted
in accordance with the ordinances of the village or the laws of Illinois or any other state; or
(j) Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar
means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or receipt of such information; except that nothing in this subsection
(O)1(j) prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting of sporting events or contests.
2. Participants in any of the following activities shall not be convicted of gambling therefor:
(a) Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance including, without limitation, contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life or
health or accident insurance;
(b) Offers of prizes, award or compensation to the actual contestants in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or
endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest;
(c) Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, fortransportation in interstate or
foreign commerce to any place outside this state when such transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law;
(d) The game commonly known as "bingo", when conducted in accordance with the "bingo license and tax act", approved July 22, 1971, as
amended;
(e) Lotteries when conducted by the state of Illinois in accordance with the "Illinois lottery law", approved December 14, 1973, as amended;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 382/460
(f) Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor intended to be used in the operation and promotion of any unlawful gambling
activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this subsection (O)2(f), an antique slot machine is one manufactured twenty five (25) years ago or earlier;
(g) Raffles when conducted in accordance with title 3, chapter 14 of this code;
(h) Charitable games when conducted in accordance with the "charitable games act";
(i) Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under the Illinois pull tabs and jar games act; or
3. For the purpose of this subsection (O), the terms of "gambling device", "lottery", and "policy game" shall have the meanings as set forth in the Illinois
criminal code, section 28-2.
4. A "gambling place" is any real estate, vehicle, boat or any other property whatsoever used for the purpose of gambling other than those gambling
activities authorized by the law of the state of Illinois or the ordinance of the village. No person shall knowingly permit any premises or property
owned or occupied by him or under his control to be used as a gambling place. Such premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may
be proceeded against as such. (Ord. 92-2295, 7-20-1992)
(P) Obscenity:
1. Urinates or deposits human or animal excrement upon the streets or alleys or public grounds of the village;
2. Writes, draws, carves, makes or shows any lewd, indecent or obscene word, sentence, design, picture or figure on any place open to public access
or view;
3. Appears in a public place in a state of nudity or in an indecent or lewd dress. No person shall make any indecent exposure of his person or be guilty
of any indecent act or behavior or exhibit or perform any indecent, immoral or lewd play or representation.
(Q) House Of Ill Fame; Inmates Of, Keepers: No person shall keep or maintain or be an inmate of or in any way contribute to the support of any house of ill
fame or assignation.
Any person found in any house of ill fame or assignation shall be considered an inmate within the meaning of this subsection.
Every house of ill fame or house of assignation where men and/or women resort for the purpose of prostitution is declared to be a nuisance.
(R) Signs And Advertising Matter1:
1. Except as permitted in the sign ordinance of the village, no person shall hang or suspend a sign from any building to hang over any sidewalk or
street within the village.
2. No person shall distribute handbills, circulars, dodgers, pamphlets, cards, pictures or any advertising matter of any kind whatsoever, by placing the
same in or upon any motor vehicle standing or parked in the public streets of the village.
(S) Uninvited Solicitations: No person shall engage in solicitations upon any premises or in any dwelling house, apartment or other residence located
thereon after having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises or residence.
(T) Solicit, "Thumb" Rides: No person shall stand or loiter upon any sidewalk, street, avenue, alley or public highway or grounds within the limits of the
village for the purpose of "thumbing", requesting, asking or soliciting a ride from the operator of any motor vehicle.
(U) Abandoned Refrigerators, Containers: It shall be unlawful to abandon any refrigerator, freezer or icebox or other device having an automatic lock on a
compartment large enough to enclose a human being in any place accessible to children without first removing the doors of such refrigerator, freezer or
icebox.
(V) Maintain Fire Hazards: No person shall permit or store any combustible refuse in such a way as to create a fire hazard or store or throw away any
refuse of any kind in an alley, street or public way in the village.
Accumulations of waste paper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter or combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind shall not be permitted to
remain upon any roof or in any court, yard, vacant lot or open space or upon any public street, sidewalk, easement or alley abuttingthereon. All weeds,
grass, vines or other growth, when the same endangers property or is liable to be fired, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the
property, including all weeds, grass, vines or other growth2 growing in or upon any public street, sidewalk, easement or alley abutting said property.
However, deposits made for purpose of pick up and immediate removal, when placed and contained in a compact fashion, by the village or its agent
according to direction or custom3, shall not be punishable so long as said deposit is not made for a period in excess of twenty four (24) hours or is
moved or removed from said areas promptly upon request of the village or any person inconvenienced thereby. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-3: DISCRIMINATORY ACTIONS:
It is unlawful to create a clear and present danger of a riot or assault, battery or other unlawful trespass against any person or group of persons because of
his or her or their race, religion, color, national origin, or ancestry, or to create a clear and present danger of arson, vandalism, defacement or other
unlawful trespass against property because of the race, religion, color, national origin, or ancestry of the owner, possessor, or authorized user or users of
said property, or, in the case of a cemetery, of the decedent buried therein.
The term "person", as used in this section, shall include one or more individuals, copartnerships, corporations, firms, organizations, associations, leagues
or other bodies. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 383/460
9-4-4: OPEN BOTTLE LAW:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic liquor, as defined by law on any public way or in or about any motor vehicle upon a public way
in the village.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in or upon or about the passenger area of any motor vehicle
upon any public way in the village except in the original package and with the seal unbroken. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or possess alcoholic liquor in an open container in any common area of a multi-family residential
development, except in those common areas on the property so designated in writing by an owner,manager or management company, homeowners' or
condominium association, or other entity having control over said common areas.
For the purpose of this subsection the following definitions shall apply:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: As defined in section 3-2-1 of this code.
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: Any residential development within the R-4 zoning district with more than two (2) dwelling units.
OPEN CONTAINER: Any container other than the original package with the seal unbroken. (Ord. 97-2851, 3-3-1997)
9-4-5: DESTROY, DAMAGE PROPERTY; GRAFFITI:
(A) Cemeteries; Places Of Worship: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully deface, mar, injure, destroy or remove any vault, tomb, monument, gravestone,
memorial of the dead, church, synagogue, or any other structure consisting of a place of worship of any religion, sect or group or any part of any
contents thereof, or any fence, tree, shrub or plant appurtenant thereto.
(B) Public Or Village Property: It is unlawful for any person to cut, injure, mark or deface any public building, sewer, water pipe, hydrant or other village
property, or any tree, grass, shrub or walk in any public way or public park. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit ordinary maintenance of
parkway areas and sidewalks by adjacent property owners.
(C) Telegraph Poles: It is unlawful for any person to scratch, stencil or post placards or bills on any of the poles used for wires of the police and fire alarm
telegraph, or in any other manner deface or injure the same.
(D) Graffiti Prohibited:
1. Graffiti Defined: For the purpose of this section "graffiti" shall be defined as any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram, sketch,
picture, letter or any other inscription or drawing.
2. Graffiti Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon the surface of any structure or wall that is publicly or privately owned without the
permission of the owner of the property. It shall be an affirmative defense to the alleged violation of the foregoing provision if such activity was
undertaken with the prior written consent of the owner of the property, demonstrating that the owner was awareof the content and method of the
graffiti to be placed on the structure or wall; however, no owner of property shall place or give permission to place on any property, real or personal,
which is in public view any graffiti which incites violence by reference to gang or criminal activity, depicts or expresses obscenity by referring to
sexual activity or contains defamatory material about a public or private person.
3. Removal Of Graffiti: The village hereby declares "graffiti", as defined in subsection (D)1 of this section to be a nuisance and as a nuisance, subject to
abatement as provided herein:
(a) Upon written notification by the village, the owner of property upon which graffiti has been illegally placed shall remove the graffiti within ten (10)
working days from the date of the notice.
(b) The village, upon notification of graffiti placed upon any village property, shall remove the graffiti within ten (10) working days from the date of the
notification. The village also may remove graffiti from the exterior of private property if owners comply with the following conditions:
(1) Owners must inform the village of the presence of such graffiti and of their inability to remove it;
(2) Owners must prepay the village for the cost of the removal; and
(3) Owners must sign a statement authorizing removal by the village and must sign a release holding the village harmless from any claims or suits
brought for damages pursuant to any chemicals or from the actions taken by the village or its employees to remove the graffiti.
If property owners do not request such removal as specified herein or do not remove the graffiti within the time specified, they shall be
subject to the penalties listed in subsection (D)4 of this section.
(c) An extension of the time in which graffiti must be removed may be granted by the chief of police upon application of the property owner to the
police department and a showing of cause. Cause shall include, but not be limited to: abnormal weather conditions, availability of chemicals, or
physical limitations of the owner. In no case shall an extension be granted which would extend the removal deadline more than thirty (30) days
beyond the initial notification referred to in subsection (D)3(a) of this section. (Ord. 92-2298, 8-3-1992)
4. Penalties: Upon a finding of guilty for violation of subsection (D)2 of this section, there shall be imposed a fine as established by the annual fee
ordinance. Upon a finding ofguilty for a violation of subsection (D)3 of this section, there shall be imposed a fine as established by the annual fee
ordinance. Additionally, the court may require that the party guilty of violating the provisions of subsection (D)2 of this section make full and complete
restitution to the village and/or the owner of the property for expenses incurred in the removal of the graffiti and/or restoration of the structure or wall
to its previous condition. In addition, the court may order as further penalty, community service in the form of time to be spent in cleaning property
that has been defaced by graffiti in any location in the village. (Ord. 98-2948, 1-19-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 384/460
9-4-6: REMOVAL OF EARTH:
No person shall dig, cut, or remove any sod or earth from any public way or other public place within the village without a permit from the village manager,
or from any premises not his own without the consent of the owner thereof. Further, no person shall dig, cut or remove any sod or earth from any property
adjoining or contiguous to a public way in such a manner as to leave said property in an unsafe or unsanitary condition or in such condition as will
constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-7: POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS:
No person shall post, stick, stamp, tack, paint or otherwise fix, or cause the same to be done by another person, any notice, placard, bill, handbill, sign,
poster, card, advertisement or other device calculated to attract the attention of the public, upon any building or part thereof, wall or part thereof, or
window, without first obtaining the written consent of the owner, agent, lessee or occupant of such premises or structure; provided, however, that no
person shall paste, post or fasten any handbill, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause the same to be done, which exceeds twelve (12)
square feet in area without first obtaining a permit so to do in accordance with the provisions of the sign ordinance relating to billboards and signboards;
and provided, further, that this section shall not apply to advertising matter upon billboards owned or controlled by private individuals. (Ord. 719, 11-15-
1977)
9-4-8: SPORT ARENAS; THROWING DANGEROUS OBJECTS IN:
No person shall throw, drop or place upon any baseball park, athletic field or other place where games are played, any bottle or other glass receptacle or
any broken bottle or other broken instrument or thing or refuse. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-9: SIGNAL BOXES; FALSE ALARMS:
(A) No person, unless duly authorized, shall open or use any signal box, unless it be to give an alarm of fire or to communicate with the police on
necessary business, nor break, cut, injure, deface, derange, or in any manner meddle or interfere with any signal box or the fire alarm or police
telegraph wires or with any municipal electric wires, poles, conduits or apparatus.
(B) Whoever, without reasonable cause, by outcry or otherwise, makes or circulates, or causes to be made or circulated, any false alarm of fire, shall be
fined not to exceed the maximum sum prescribed herein. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-10: TRESPASS:
Trespass shall be unlawful. A person commits trespass when he knowingly:
(A) Enters the property or any part thereof of another when, immediately prior to such entry, he receives notice, either oral or written, from the owner or
occupant that such entry is forbidden; or
(B) Remains upon the property or any part thereof of another, after receiving notice, either oral or written, from the owner or occupant to depart; or
(C) Enters upon property open to the public, or any part thereof, and remains thereon with a malicious and mischievous intent after receiving notice, either
oral or written, from the owner or occupant to depart; or
(D) Wilfully defaces, mars, injures or destroys any building or part of any building or any property of another with paint, tar, acid, grease, oil or other such
substance which would detrimentally alter the outer face or substance of such building or any property of another, or any fence, tree, shrub or plant
appurtenant thereto. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-11: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
The maintenance of a public nuisance shall be unlawful. Every common, ill governed, or disorderly house, room, or other premises kept for the
encouragement of idleness, gaming, drinking, fornication or other misbehavior, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the keeper and all persons
connected with the maintenance thereof, and all persons patronizing or frequenting the same, shall be fined not to exceed the maximum sum prescribed
herein. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-12: DISTURB LAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
Any person who shall disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly met for religious worship by making a noise, or by rude and indecent behavior or
profane discourse within the place of worship, or so near to the same as to disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting, shall be fined not to exceed the
maximum sum prescribed herein. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-13: WEAPONS:
(A) Possession, Discharge And Use:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 385/460
1. No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within the village except upon premises used by a duly licensed shooting gallery,
gun club or rifle club.
2. No cannon or piece of artillery shall be discharged or fired off in any public way or other public place within the village except upon the express
permission of the village.
3. The provisions of this section shall not apply to sheriffs, or members of the police force, or other peace officers engaged in the discharge of their
official duties, or to any person summoned by any of such officers to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while such person so
summoned is engaged in assisting such officer.
4. No person shall sell, offer for sale, keep, possess, loan or give to any person any knife, the blade of which is released by a spring mechanism,
including knives known as "switchblades", any blackjack, slingshot, sand club, sandbag, metal knuckles or bludgeons. No person shall sell, offer for
sale, loan or give to any person eighteen (18) years of age or under, any type or kind of knife, any blade of which is two inches (2") in length or
longer.
5. No person shall carry or possess any knife, the blade of which is released by a spring mechanism, including knives known as "switchblades", any
blackjack, slingshot, sand club, sandbag, metal knuckles or bludgeons. No person eighteen (18) years of age or under shall carry or possess any
knife, the blade of which is two inches (2") in length or longer.
6. No person shall carry or possess with intent to use same unlawfully against another a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, stiletto or other dangerous
or deadly weapon.
7. No person shall carry concealed on or about his person a pistol, revolver, derringer or other firearm or dagger, dirk, stiletto, bowie knife, commando
knife, any blade of which is released by a spring mechanism, including knives known as "switchblades" or any other type or kind of knife, any blade
of which is more than two and one-half inches (21/2") in length, ordinary razor or other dangerous weapon except that no person eighteen (18) years
of age or under shall carryconcealed on or about his person any knife, the blade of which is two inches (2") in length or longer. This provision shall
not apply, however, to the following officers while engaged in the discharge of their official duties: sheriffs, policemen or other duly constituted police
officers, or to persons lawfully summoned by an officer to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace, while so engaged in assisting such officer.
8. No person shall at any time discharge or set off anywhere within the village or have in his possession for such purpose any toy firearm, air rifle, toy
cannon, or any gun that discharges projectiles either by air, spring, explosive, substance or any other force.
(B) Gun Free School Zones:
1. It shall be unlawful for any individual knowingly to possess a firearm at a place that the individual knows, or has reasonable cause to believe, is a
school zone.
2. Subsection (B)1 of this section shall not apply to the possession of a firearm:
(a) On private property not part of school grounds;
(b) If the individual possessing the firearm is duly licensed to do so pursuant to all applicable state and local laws;
(c) Which is:
(1) Not loaded; and
(2) In a locked container or a locked firearms rack which is atop a motor vehicle;
(d) By an individual for use in a program approved by a school in the school zone;
(e) By an individual in accordance with a contract entered into between a school in the school zone and the individual or an employer of the
individual;
(f) By a law enforcement officer acting in his or her official capacity; or
(g) That is unloaded and is possessed by an individual while traversing school premises for the purpose of gaining access to public or private lands
open to hunting, if the entry on school premises is authorized by school authorities.
3. For the purposes of this subsection (B), the term "school" means any public, private or parochial institution as defined in section 5-1-7 of this code.
The term "school zone" means in, on the grounds of, or within one thousand feet (1,000') of a public, private or parochial school.
4. The village shall post signs around school zones warning of the prohibition of the possession or discharge of firearms in a school zone. (Ord. 92-
2309, 9-8-1992)
9-4-14: OFFENSES INVOLVING MOTOR VEHICLES:
(A) No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked, nor shall any person accelerate a moving vehicle unless or until such movement
can be made and is made with reasonable safety and without unnecessary noise of the engine or squealing or screeching of the tires on the pavement.
(B) Every motor vehicle driven or operated in the village shall at all times be equipped with an adequate muffler or exhaust system in constant operation
and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise. No such muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with a cutout, bypass or
similar device. No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise of such vehicle above
that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle, and such original muffler shall comply with all the requirements of this section. (Ord. 719,
11-15-1977)
9-4-15: CONCEAL IDENTITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 386/460
It shall be unlawful for any person within the village to appear in public in any mask, cap, cowl, hood, or other thing concealing the identity of the wearer;
provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to persons attending or taking part in carnivals, masked balls, public shows, entertainments or
celebrations in the village, or under permission of the proper authorities of said village, nor to any person holding a written permit issued by the mayor, nor
to minors who go about the village "trick-or-treating", without accompanying malicious conduct. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-16: BURGLAR TOOLS, POSSESSION OF:
A person possesses burglary tools when he possesses any tool, key, instrument, device or any explosive suitable for use in breaking into any building,
house trailer, watercraft, aircraft, vehicle, railroad car, or any depository designed for the safekeeping of property, or any part thereof, with intent to enter
any such place and with intent to commit therein a felony or theft.
A person convicted of the possession of burglary tools shall be fined not to exceed the maximum sum prescribed herein. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-17: SIGNATURES FORGED ON PETITIONS:
Whenever it may be necessary, in order to procure a license, permit, grant or privilege of any kind, or to obtain a referendum vote on a proposition, to
secure signatures to a petition for the same under the provisions of any law or ordinance affecting the whole or any part of the village, it shall be unlawful
for any person, individual, or any firm or corporation by its members, officers or agents, to forge the signature or procure the forging of the signature to the
same of any person who is by law qualified to sign such petition, or to sign or procure the signing of a fictitious name to such petition, or to procure the
signature to the same of the person qualified to sign such petition by payment of money or other valuable thing to the person so signing. The signing or
procuring of each false or fraudulent name to such petition shall be regarded as a distinct and separate offense. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-18: BENEFITS, NAME OF BENEFICIARY ON PROMOTIONAL MATERIALS:
No person shall use any ticket, poster, placard, badge or other advertisement in the promotion of any dance, bazaar, picnic, game, theater or other
entertainment or performance purporting to be given for charitable purposes unless the names of the persons or organizations intended to be benefited by
the receipts from such entertainment or performance are stated on such ticket, poster, placard, badge or other advertisement. (Ord. 719, 11-15-1977)
9-4-19: RESPONSIBILITY FOR UNDERAGE CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL AND ATTEMPTED UNLAWFUL PURCHASE:
(A) Unlawful Possession And Consumption By Persons Underage:
1. No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall consume, purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her
possession within the village; provided the possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years, of
alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, the consumption by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years, under
the direct supervision and approval of the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such underage person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home, or the
possession and delivery of alcoholic liquors in the course of a person's employment when otherwise authorized by this code or by the Illinois
municipal code is not prohibited.
2. No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of
twenty one (21) years, except as otherwise allowed in this code and the Illinois municipal code.
(B) Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly suffer or permit any minor child of which he or she may be the
parent or guardian to violate any provision of this chapter.
(C) Responsibility Of The Owner Or Occupant Of Premises: No person shall knowingly permit a gathering at a residence which he or she occupies of two
(2) or more persons where any one or more of the person(s) is under twenty one (21) years of age and the following factors also apply:
1. The person occupying the residence knows that any such person under the age of twenty one (21) is in possession of or is consuming any alcoholic
beverage; and
2. The possession or consumption of the alcohol by the person under twenty one (21) is not otherwise permitted by this act.
For the purposes of this subsection where the residence has an owner and a tenant or lessee, there is a rebuttable presumption that the residence
is occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(D) False Identification:
1. No person shall transfer, alter or deface any identification card issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties; or use the
identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information.
2. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor by the use of an altered, forged or defaced identification card or by
the use of an identification card of another person.
3. No person shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.
(E) Hotel And Motel Room Rental: No person shall rent a hotel or motel room from the proprietor or agent thereof for the purpose of or with the knowledge
that such room shall be used for the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person or persons under the age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 92-2239, 1-
20-1992)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 387/460
(F) Possession; Presence Of Alcohol Within Body: For the purpose of this section, "possession" shall include, but not be limited to, the presence of any
amount of alcohol within the body of a person. (Ord. 95-2616, 2-20-1995)
9-4-20: PENALTY, SECTIONS 9-4-1 THROUGH 9-4-19:
(A) Any person found to have violated any provision ofsections 9-4-1 through 9-4-18 of this chapter, shall be fined as established by the annual fee
ordinance for each offense.
(B) Any person found to have violated any provision of section 9-4-19 of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each
offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
9-4-21: VANDALISM:
(A) Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms specified have the meanings ascribed to them:
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a person
appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the juvenile court act.
MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years but not yet nineteen (19) years of age.
(B) Damage To Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously or negligently break, deface, injure or destroy any property within the
village, whether such property is owned by the state, county, village or any other governmental body or owned by any private person.
(C) Parents' Responsibility: The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the
absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and said minor shall be deemed to have committed the
acts described below with the knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of this section, upon the occurrence of the events
described in subsections (C)1, (C)2 and (C)3 of this section:
1. An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt in violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property; and
2. Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned from the police department of the village, following said adjudication or nonjudicial
sanction; and
3. If at any time within one year following receipt of thenotice set forth in subsection (C)2 of this section, said minor is either adjudicated to be in
violation of any ordinance, law or statute, as described in subsection (C)1 of this section, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another
official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection (C)1 of this section.
(D) Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each
offense. (Ord. 661, 11-16-1976)
9-4-22: CLAIMS FOR CERTAIN OFFENSES; PROCEDURES:
(A) Whenever any person is accused of any offense hereinafter enumerated, the police officer so accusing may, in lieu of instituting a prosecution for the
alleged offense, issue to the alleged violator a citation, unless the alleged offense involves serious injury to a person or animal as defined in section 9-
2-2 of this title, whereby the police officer shall institute a prosecution for the alleged offense.
(B) Any person receiving a citation may settle and compromise the claim against him for such offense by paying to the village the sum provided for herein
for such offense within the time specified in the citation which shall not be less than forty eight (48) hours nor more than ten (10) days from the date on
which the offense was committed.
(C) All such payments shall be made either by mailing a check or money order for the required amount, in the self-addressed envelope provided, or by
paying the same in person at the police station or at the village hall during regular business hours. If paid in person the copy of the citation must
accompany payment.
(D) The citation will be in the following form:
Failure to pay the fine within the time specified on the citation shall be cause for the filing of a complaint against you in the Circuit Court of DuPage
County, and the issuance of a warrant for your arrest.
(E) The amount at which the claim may be settled, pursuant to the citation, for the following offenses, shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance:
1. Parking alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking would obstruct traffic.
2. Parking within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 388/460
3. Bicycle riding on sidewalk in business district.
4. Double parking.
5. Overtime hourly parking.
6. Parking in excess of the maximum time limit in the central business district.
7. Parking in front of a driveway.
8. Parking in reserved lot without paying rental fee.
9. Parking on a crosswalk.
10. Parking on any street between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. without special permission. (Special permission for overnight
parking for blacktop, seal coating driveway, special meetings or parties, out of town guests, may be granted by the police department.)
11. Parking on sidewalk.
12. Parking upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel.
13. Parking within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
14. Parking within thirty feet (30') of the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway.
15. Parking within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station.
16. Overtime parking on expired meters.
17. Parking in space designated with signs prohibiting parking.
18. Parking not entirely within the limits of a single striped parking space.
19. Parking on private property without consent.
19a. Failure to obtain an animal license.
20. Failure to display animal license.
21. Open burning.
22. Parking in area prohibited during or after snowfall.
23. Permitting an animal to bark, whine or howl excessively.
24. Permitting an animal to create noxious or offensive odors.
25. Permitting animal to run at large.
25a. Permitting a dangerous dog to run at large.
25b. Knowingly permitting a dangerous dog to run at large.
25c. Permitting a vicious dog within the corporate limits of the village.
26. Unlawful accumulation of garbage and debris.
27. Permitting animal to run at large - second violation within twelve (12) month period.
28. Parking in space designated for handicapped person.
(F) In the event that the owner or operator of a vehicle fails to make the applicable payment referred to in subsection (E) of this section within the ten (10)
day period set forth in subsection (B) of this section, the said fine shall be increased as established by the annual fee ordinance.
In the event of the failure of an owner or operator of a vehicle in violation of the foregoing to make such payment as referred to above within ten (10)
days, the chief of police shall direct a "final notice" to such owner setting forth the date, time and place of said violation and advising that said owner
may, within ten (10) days after receipt of said "final notice", pay to the village, at the Lisle police station, the sums established by the annual fee
ordinance, in full satisfaction of such violation and further advising that failure to make said payment shall be a cause for the issuance of a "notice to
appear" for the registered owner. The maximum fine for violations set forth in this section shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance.
(G) The fact that an automobile which is illegally operated or parked is registered in the name of the alleged violator shall be considered prima facie proof
that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of the alleged offense. (Ord. 2007-4098, 3-5-2007)
9-4-23: SNOW DEPOSIT ON STREETS:
(A) Unlawful Actions; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any snow or ice from any private property and deposit the same upon any
public street or alley or any part thereof if such deposit is a bulk deposit which presents an obstacle to vehicle traffic on said street or alley. Thissection
shall not apply to:
1. A bona fide snow removal operation if the resulting bulk deposit is immediately removed after the snow removal operation;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 389/460
2. The village when using the center of a cul-de-sac for the deposit of snow or ice. (Ord. 82-1072, 10-19-1982)
(B) Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each
offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
9-4-24: CURFEW:
(A) It is unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the
following times unless one of those exceptions listed in subsection (B) of this section applies:
1. Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Saturday;
2. Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Sunday; and
3. Between one minute after eleven o'clock (11:01) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
(B) This section shall not apply to any person less than seventeen (17) years of age who is involved in the following activities:
1. Accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian, or other responsible companion of at least seventeen (17) years of age who is approved
by the parent or legal guardian;
2. Engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this state authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform;
3. Attending or traveling to or from an official school, religious or civic activity;
4. Attending or traveling to or from any assembly activity for which a permit has been lawfully issued;
5. Involved in an emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage; or
6. Any activity which involves the exercise of the minor's first amendment rights.
(C) Before issuing any citation pursuant to this section, the citing officer shall reasonably determine if the person is involved in any activity as considered
under subsection (B) of this section. If the officer determines that the person is involved in such an activity, then no citation shall be issued. If the officer,
however, has reasonable belief that the person is not involved in such activity as considered under subsection (B) of this section, then the officer shall
issue a citation pursuant to this subsection.
(D) It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a minor in his custody or control to violate subsection (A) of this section.
(E) A person violating this section shall be issued a citation and fined as established by the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 2004-3828, 5-3-2004)
9-4-25: OFFENSES RELATING TO DRUGS:
(A) Inhaling, Drinking Or Possessing Certain Substances: No person shall inhale, breathe, or drink, or possess with the intent to inhale, any compound
liquid or chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl acetone, trichloroethane, isopropanol,
methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, or any other substance for the purpose of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation,
dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner to change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or mental processes. For the purpose of this
section, any such condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition. In addition, for the purpose of this section, the possession of
any itemaltered so as to facilitate the inhalation of such substance, or the possession of any other item or device designed to enable the inhalation of
such substance shall create a rebuttable presumption of intent to inhale said substance. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to:
1. Any person who inhales, breathes or drinks such material or substances pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, physician, surgeon,
dentist or podiatrist authorized to so direct or prescribe.
2. Any person who inhales, breathes, drinks or otherwise in any manner uses any narcotic, dangerous drug, or other material or substance or
combination thereof, which material or substance or combination thereof is defined by, and the use of which, is prohibited or regulated by any law of
this state.
(B) Sale Of Certain Substances: No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale, deliver or give away to any person any substances containing any of the
following volatile solvents, where the seller, offerer or deliverer knows or has reason to believe that the substance will be used for the purpose of
inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner to change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or
mental processes: toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl acetone, trichloroethane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl
ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, or any other substance for the purpose of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness,
paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner to change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or mental processes.
(C) Possession Of Cannabis:
1. Findings: The board of trustees is advised that there is a widespread illegal use of cannabis within the village and further finds that the adoption of a
local ordinance governing said illegal use of cannabis will be helpful for the effective control and elimination of this drug.
2. Cannabis Defined: "Cannabis" includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis
sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt derivative,
mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its
naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 390/460
chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced
from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
mature stalks(except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
3. Possession Unlawful: It shall be a violation of this subsection for any person knowingly to possess any quantity of any substance containing
cannabis, except that the effect of this subsection shall be limited to persons knowingly possessing less than thirty grams (30 g) of any substance
containing cannabis.
(D) Drug Paraphernalia:
1. Drug Paraphernalia Defined: The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for
use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance as those substances are
defined in 702 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/3 and 570/204 through 570/210, as amended. The term "drug paraphernalia" shall be deemed to
include, but not by way of limitation, the following items:
(a) Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
(b) Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances.
(c) Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance.
(d) Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances.
(e) Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
(f) Diluents and adulterants such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose used, intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances.
(g) Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana.
(h) Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
(i) Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances.
(j) Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
(k) Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in injecting controlled substances into the human
body.
(l) Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into
the human body, such as:
(1) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
(2) Water pipes;
(3) Carburation tubes and devices;
(4) Smoking and carburation masks;
(5) Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand;
(6) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
(7) Chamber pipes;
(8) Carburetor pipes;
(9) Electric pipes;
(10) Air driven pipes;
(11) Bongs;
(12) Ice pipes or chillers.
(m) Cocaine spoons, that is a spoon with a bowl so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adopted or designed is to hold or administer
cocaine, and which is so small as to be unsuited for the typical, lawful uses of a spoon. A cocaine spoon may or may not be labeled as a "cocaine"
spoon or "coke" spoon.
(n) Marijuana or hashish pipe, that is a pipe characterized by a bowl which is so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adopted or
designed is the smoking of marijuana or hashish rather than lawful smoking tobacco and which may or may not be equipped with a screen.
2. Aids In Interpretation: In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other
logically relevant factors, the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 391/460
(a) Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use.
(b) Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the object under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance.
(c) The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this section.
(d) The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
(e) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
(f) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows or should
reasonably know intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this section; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as
to a direct violation of this section shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
(g) Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use.
(h) Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use.
(i) National and local advertising concerning its use.
(j) The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
(k) Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
(l) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprises.
(m) The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
(n) Expert testimony concerning its use.
3. Drug Paraphernalia Prohibited: It shall be a violation of this section for any merchant or other person to knowingly sell, offer for sale, display or be in
the possession of any drug paraphernalia.
4. Penalty: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance.
Each day that a violation exists and each separate occurrence shall constitute separate offenses.
(E) Responsibility Of Parents And Owners Of Residences:
1. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly suffer or permit any person under nineteen (19) years of age, of which he or she may be
the parent or guardian, to violate any provision of this section. (Ord. 2001-3321, 7-2-2001)
9-4-26: OFFENSES REGARDING PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
(A) Impersonation:
1. No person, other than a member of the police department, shall assume to act as a policeman in any capacity within the village.
No person shall impersonate any of the members of the police department, or shall maliciously or with intent to deceive, use or imitate any of the
signs, signals or devices adopted and used by the police department, or shall wear in public the uniform adopted as the police uniform, after having
been removed or suspended.
2. No person shall impersonate without lawful authority any village officer or employee.
(B) Interfering With Officers: No person shall interfere with or hinder any officer or employee of the village while engaged in the duties of his office or
employment.
(C) Resisting Or Obstructing Village Official: A person who knowingly resists or obstructs the performance by one known to the person to be an officer or
employee of the village of any authorized act within his official capacity shall be guilty of a violation of this section. (Ord. 2001-3321, 7-2-2001)
9-4-27: SCHOOL CURFEW:
(A) Established: It shall be unlawful for any person less than eighteen (18) years old who is enrolled in any public, private or parochial school to be present
at, in or upon, within the corporate limits of the village, any public assembly, building, place, street or highway, other than school, during any time when
school is in session during the regular school term, unless that person is:
1. Traveling to or from school by the most direct available route; or
2. Engaged in school related activities with prior approval of school authorities or as otherwise authorized by written school policy; or
3. Engaged in personal business, including, but not limited to, employment, medical care or religious activities, with prior written notice thereof from a
parent or legal guardian addressed to school authorities.
4. Accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian, or other adult having lawful custody or supervision of such person.
5. Involved in an emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 392/460
(B) Investigatory Detention: Any police officer may stop and detain a person whom the police officer reasonably suspects to be violating this section for the
purposes of verifying the detained person's identity, age, school enrollment and authority to be absent from school. The police officer shall immediately
inform the detained person of the reason for the detention and that the detained person will be released on verification of authorization to be absent
from school. If the detained person refuses to provide the police officer with the necessary information, or if authorization to be absent from school
cannot be verified within fifteen (15) minutes after the detention, then the detained person shall be taken to school authorities, if practicable, or to a
parent, legal guardian or other responsible person having lawful custody or supervision of such person.
(C) First And Subsequent Violations: The first incident of violation of school curfew shall be handled by the school authorities according to the policy and
procedure of the school in which the minor is enrolled. The incident shall be documented and retained by the school district and the village. Any
subsequent violations of this section will result in the minor and/or parent or legal guardian receiving a citation for the offense.
(D) Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion to knowingly permit a person in his or her
custody or control to violate subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 2007-4090, 2-5-2007)
9-4-28: PROPERTY DAMAGE:
(A) Definitions: The following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them when used in this section:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY: Any real or tangible personal property.
(B) Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Knowingly damage any property of another without his consent; or
2. Recklessly, by means of fire or explosive damage property of another; or
3. Knowingly start a fire on the land of another without his consent; or
4. Knowingly injure a domestic animal of another without his consent; or
5. Knowingly deposit on the land or in the building of another, without his consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
intend to interfere with the use by another of the land or the building; or
6. Damage any property with intent to defraud an insurer; or
7. Knowingly shoot a firearm at any portion of a train; or
8. Knowingly damage the property of another without his consent by defacing, deforming or otherwise damaging such property by the use of paint or
other similar substance; or
9. Wilfully and maliciously cut, injure, damage, tamper with or destroy or deface any fire hydrant or any fire hose or any fire engine, or other public or
private firefighting equipment, or any apparatus pertaining to such equipment, or intentionally open any fire hydrant without proper authorization.
(Ord. 2001-3321, 7-2-2001)
9-4-29: RETAIL THEFT:
(A) Retail Theft Defined: A person commits the offense of retail theft when he or she knowingly:
1. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail price of such merchandise; or
2. Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag or marking indicative of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandisepersonally or
in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
3. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such
merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
4. Under rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise; or
5. Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart.
(B) Presumptions: If any person:
1. Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail
mercantile establishment; and
2. Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment, such
person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the intention of
depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail price of such merchandise.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 393/460
(C) Detention: Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has committed retail theft may detain such person on or off the
premises of a retail mercantile establishment in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
1. To request identification;
2. To verify such identification;
3. To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his possession unpurchased merchandise, and to make reasonable investigation of
the ownership of such merchandise;
4. To inform a peace officer of the detention of that person and surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer;
5. In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents, guardian or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of this detention
and to surrender custody of such minor to such person.
A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment only if such detention is pursuant to an
immediate pursuit of such person.
(D) Affirmative Defense: A detention as permitted in this section does not constitute an arrest or an unlawful restraint, nor shall it render the merchant
liable to the person so detained. (Ord. 2001-3321, 7-2-2001)
9-4-30: THEFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit theft.
(A) A person commits theft when he knowingly:
1. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
2. Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
3. Obtains by threat control over the property of the owner; or
4. Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to
believe that the property was stolen, and
(a) Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property; or
(b) Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
(c) Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit; or
5. Obtains or exerts control over property in the custody of any law enforcement agency which is explicitly represented to him by any law enforcement
officer or any individual acting in behalf of a law enforcement agency as being stolen.
(B) A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits theft when he:
1. Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows or is aware of, or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner, and
2. Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner, and
3. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property.
(C) A person commits theft from a coin operated machine when he knowingly and without authority and with intent to commit a theft from such machine,
opens, breaks into, tampers with, or damages a coin operated machine.
As used hereinabove, the term "coin operated machine" shall include any automatic vending machine or any part thereof, parking meter, coin
telephone, coin laundry machine, coin dry cleaning machine, amusement machine, music machine, vending machine dispensing goods or services,
money changer.
(D) It shall be prima facie evidence that a person "knowingly obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner" when a lessee of the
personal property of another fails to return it to the owner within thirty (30) days after written demand from the owner for its return. A notice in writing,
given after the expiration of the leasing agreement, addressed and mailed, by registered mail, to the lessee at the address given by him and shown on
the leasing agreement shall constitute proper demand.
(E) It is no defense to a charge of theft of property that the offender has an interest therein, when the owner also has an interest to which the offender is
not entitled. (Ord. 2001-3321, 7-2-2001)
9-4-31: LASER POINTERS:
(A) Definitions: When used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed herein:
LASER POINTER: Any device that emits light amplified by the stimulated emission of radiation or other energy that is visible to the human eye.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 394/460
PERSON: Any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm, organization or other legal entity.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including, but not limited to, any street, highway,
sidewalk, right of way, parking lot, plaza, place of amusement, park, playground, restaurant and any hallway, lobby and other portion of an apartment,
condominium, townhouse, or hotel building or complex not constituting a room or dwelling designated for actual residence.
SCHOOL PREMISES: Any building, grounds, or facilities, or any portion thereof, owned, occupied by, or under the custody or control of public or
private institutions for the primary purpose of providing educational or recreational instructionto students, and any vehicles owned, operated or leased
by or on behalf of such institutions that are used to transport such students or the personnel of such institutions.
(B) Prohibited Acts:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to give, sell or offer to give or sell a laser pointer to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase a laser pointer.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess a laser pointer while upon school premises; provided, however,
that nothing in this section shall preclude the temporary transfer on school premises of a laser pointer to, or possession of a laser pointer on school
premises by, a person under the age of eighteen (18) years for a valid instructional, school related or employment purpose, where such laser pointer
is provided by the school and used under the supervision of a school staff person, other authorized instructor, employee or employer's agent.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess a laser pointer in any public place; provided, however, that
nothing in this section shall preclude the temporary transfer in a public place of a laser pointer from an employer to, or possession in a public place of
an employer's laser pointer by, a person under the age of eighteen (18) years, during such person's hours of employment, for a valid employment
purpose, where such employer's laser pointer is used under the supervision of the employer or employer's agent.
5. It shall be unlawful for any person to direct light from a laser pointer so as to cause a laser beam, sight or "dot" to be placed upon any person,
building, vehicle, or other object.
(C) Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian to knowingly suffer or permit any child, of which he or she may be the
parent or legal guardian, to violate any provision of this section.
(D) Exemptions: The following persons are exempt from the provisions of this section:
1. Persons eighteen (18) years of age and older who use such laser pointers to conduct educational or instructional presentations.
2. Survey, construction, and medical workers eighteen (18) years of age and older who require such laser pointers to perform their job tasks.
3. Law enforcement officers who may use laser sighting devices and laser equipped firearms in the performance of their duties.
(E) Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 2001-
3321, 7-2-2001)
Chapter 5
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
CIVIL EMERGENCY: (A) A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by
immediate power to execute by three (3) or more persons acting together without authority of law; or
(B) Any natural disaster or manmade calamity, including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate limits of
the village resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to
protect the public health, safety and welfare; or
(C) A snowstorm of more than ten inches (10") of accumulation within a twenty four (24) hour period or any other unusual and potentially catastrophic
event shall be considered a civil emergency.
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or
vacant premises within the corporate limits of the village excepting officials of any governmental unit and person officially designated to duty with reference
to said civil emergency. (Ord. 273, 7-2-1968; amd. 1979 Code)
9-5-2: DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY:
Whenever an emergency as defined above exists, the mayor or his designee, shall declare the existence by means of a written declaration setting forth
the facts which constitute the emergency. (Ord. 89-1874, 7-24-1989)
9-5-3: GENERAL CURFEW:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 395/460
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the mayor, he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the village or to the village
as a whole, as he deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and
welfare. (Ord. 273, 7-2-1968; amd. 1979 Code)
9-5-4: REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED:
After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the mayor may make any or all of the following orders, in the interest of public safety and welfare:
(A) Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor and
beer is permitted;
(B) Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any wholesaler or retailer;
(C) Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a
gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
(D) Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever;
(E) Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property. (Ord. 273, 7-2-1968; amd. 1979 Code)
9-5-5: TERM OF PROCLAMATION:
The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of forty eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the mayor
indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The mayor shall have the power to reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each
forty eight (48) hour period during the time the said civil emergency exists. (Ord. 273, 7-2-1968; amd. 1979 Code)
9-5-6: NEWS MEDIA NOTIFIED:
Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the chief of police shall notify the news media situated within the village and shall cause three (3) copies
of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the following places within the village: the village hall, the police station, the
post office and all fire stations. (Ord. 273, 7-2-1968; amd. 1979 Code)
9-5-7: INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER; PENALTY:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to impair the powers contained in the ordinances of the village giving powers to the police department,
but shall be construed together with existing ordinances now in effect for the safety and welfare of the village.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense, and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
Chapter 6
ABANDONED, INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
9-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any vehicle that has not
been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been
removed, or in which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven
under its own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven
under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations.
JUNKED VEHICLES: Any vehicle which is without current, valid license and registration, or is in a wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperable or
abandoned condition.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, whether subject
to exemption from registration excepting however, bicycles, snowmobiles and devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. (Ord. 251, 12-5-1967; amd. Ord. 84-1187, 3-6-
1984; Ord. 88-1744, 11-7-1988)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 396/460
9-6-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
(A) Inoperable Vehicles Declared Nuisance: Inoperable motor vehicles as defined herein, whether on public or private property, and in view of the general
public, are hereby declared to be a nuisance. However, nothing in this sectionshall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept within a building when not in
use or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles. (Ord. 88-1744, 11-7-1988)
(B) Abandonment Of Vehicles: No person shall abandon any motor vehicle within the village and no person shall leave any motor vehicle at any place
within the village for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. (Ord. 251, 12-
5-1967)
(C) Keeping Of Junked Vehicles: No person shall keep any junked vehicle as defined herein on any property located within an R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4
residential district of the village unless the property is licensed for such use or unless the vehicle is kept within an enclosed structure. A "structure" shall
be that as defined in the building code of the village1. (Ord. 88-1744, 11-7-1988)
(D) Leaving Of Wrecked, Nonoperating Vehicles On Street: No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on
any street or highway in the village. (Ord. 251, 12-5-1967)
9-6-3: NOTICE OF REQUIRED DISPOSAL:
All persons are required to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicles under their control upon written notice received from the corporate authorities or from
the chief of police or any member of the police department commanding such disposition of said inoperable motor vehicle. (Ord. 251, 12-5-1967)
9-6-4: IMPOUNDING:
The chief of police or any member of the police department designated by him is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any motor vehicle left at
any place within the village which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter or which reasonably appears to be lost, stolen, or unclaimed, or
which is an "inoperable vehicle", as defined herein, or as defined in the Lisle police department rules and regulation manual. Such vehicle shall be
impounded in accordance with the Lisle police department rules and regulations manual until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/4-201 et seq., and in accordance with the Lisle police department rules and regulations manual. (Ord. 84-1187, 3-6-1984)
9-6-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for: a first offense, a second offense, a
third offense, the fourth offense or any offense thereafter. Further, a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
9-6-6: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter concerning licensing and storage shall not apply to temporary storage of corporately owned automobiles which have been
legally operated by the owner's employees, while such vehicles are awaiting transport to a legal storage site and only under the following conditions:
(A) No more than fifteen (15) such automobiles shall be permitted to be stored on a parcel at any time; and
(B) The automobiles must be parked on a paved lot which meets village code standards and specifications; and
(C) This exception shall only apply to the O-R office-research zoning district; and
(D) The storage shall not exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 95-2680, 8-21-1995)
Chapter 7
FAIR HOUSING1
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-4636, 3-21-2016)
Chapter 8
BURGLAR AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
9-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 397/460
ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER: Any person, firm or corporation that sells, leases or installs signaling devices which transmit alarms upon receipt of a
stimulus from a detection apparatus.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE: An electrically operated instrument which automatically sends a voice alarm over regular public telephone lines
upon detection of a fire or unauthorized intrusion.
FALSE ALARM: A visual and/or audible signal transmitted by a signaling device which indicates the existence of an emergency situation when in fact no
such emergency situation exists.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
PROTECTED PREMISES: The contiguous area protected by a single alarm system and under common ownership and use.
SIGNAL LINES: A line not connected to any standard telephone equipment which leads into an indicator panel in the communications center of the police
department or to such a panel in either a central station protective system or a modified central station and which is designed to transmit electrically an
alarm signal readily identifiable as to the location or origin.
SIGNALING DEVICE: An electrically operated instrument which sends, automatically, visual and/or audible signals over a signal line to be registered by
indicators at a monitor panel at the receiving terminal. Signaling devices may be one of two (2) types: either a system that transmits a signal directly to the
Lisle police department, or a system that transmits a signal to an independent monitoring company.
VILLAGE: The village of Lisle, Illinois. (Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992)
9-8-2: AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICES:
(A) No automatic protection device shall be installed after the effective date hereof by any person or premises of any kind in the village.
(B) Within ninety (90) days after the effective date hereof, all automatic protection devices in the village shall be disconnected. The owner or lessee of any
such device shall be responsible for the disconnecting of it.
(C) After the effective date hereof, no one except an alarm equipment supplier who has received written approval from the chief of police as required by
this chapter, shall install any automatic protection device in the village. (Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992)
9-8-3: SIGNALING DEVICES:
(A) Monitoring System: The village police department is authorized to contract for the installation of a uniform monitoring system to receive visual and/or
audible signals over a signal line or lines at a central location. This system shall have a capacity of nine hundred ninety nine (999) terminals and shall
be available to any subscriber who meets the requirements for a permit for connection.
(B) Financial Institutions: Any financial institution that is required by regulations of federal supervisory agencies issued pursuant to the bank protection act
of 1968 to have an appropriate device for notifying the police department that a burglary or robbery has occurred or is in progress, may arrange to have
the particular signaling device installed so as to operate pursuant to approval by the chief of police.
(C) Standards: All signaling devices shall be in compliance with the standards set by the National Fire Protection Association. (Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992)
9-8-4: TESTING EQUIPMENT:
No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of a signaling device designed to make direct connection with headquarters of the police department,
without first obtaining permission from the chief of police. Where the equipment to be tested or demonstrated is keyed to an intermediary, such permission
is not required unless the alarm or signal is to be relayed to the police department. (Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992)
9-8-5: PERMITS AND REGISTRATION:
(A) Permit Required: No person or alarm equipment supplier shall cause a signaling device to be connected to the Lisle police department monitoring
system without a valid alarm system permit. Any person or alarm equipment supplier who operates or causes to be operated an alarm system which
was connected to the police department monitoring system and who has paid a fee for said hookup shall be exempt from the initial permit fee, but shall
obtain a valid alarm system permit within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this chapter.
(B) Application For Permit:
1. Applications for permits to install, maintain and operate a signaling device connected to the police department monitoring system shall be filed with
the chief of police on forms supplied by the village, with the applicable fee.
2. Said application shall contain the name, address and telephone number of both the installer and the person or business on whose premises the
system was or is to be installed, as well as a description of the system and location where the system is or is proposed to be installed. In the case of
business applicants, the application shall also include the name, address and telephone number of one additional individual who shall be responsible
for and who has agreed to receive notification of an alarm at any time, and who agrees to grant access to the premises and deactivate the alarm
system if requested to do so by fire or police personnel, and shall indicate the location of at least one point of secondary access to the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 398/460
3. The chief of police shall approve such application if he finds that:
(a) The use of said signaling device to transmit a signal, message or warning to a designated village police department telephone line will not
interfere with the orderly conduct of municipal business;
(b) The alarm equipment supplier installing the system maintains a service organization capable of promptly and effectively repairing, maintaining
and otherwise servicing the signaling device sold or leased by him; and
(c) The signaling device is in compliance with all state and federal regulations.
(C) Registration Required: All other alarm systems, other than those which require a permit for connection to the police department monitoring system,
shall be registered with the police department. Registration is required at the time that an alarm equipment supplier completes installation and
activation of a system, at all protected premises within the village. Any person wishing to operate or cause to be operated an alarm system which was
installed prior to the effective date of this section must register said system within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992)
(D) Registration Process:
1. Alarm systems not otherwise requiring permits shall be registered with the village. Residential alarms shall be registered on forms supplied by the
police department. Business alarm systems shall be registered on the business registration form supplied by the village of Lisle business office. (Ord.
2010-4318, 5-3-2010)
2. Said registration shall contain the name, address and telephone number of both the installer and the person or business on whose premises the
system was or is to be installed, as well as a description of the system and location where the system is or is proposed to be installed. In the case of
business applicants, the application shall also include the name, address and telephone number of one additional individual who shall be responsible
for and who has agreed to receive notification of an alarm at any time, and who agrees to grant access to the premises and deactivate the alarm
system if requested to do so by fire or police personnel, and shall indicate the location of at least one point of secondary access to the premises.
3. Information as outlined above for both permits and registrations shall be updated as needed by the permit holder or registrant, but at least annually.
4. No local alarm which is audible beyond the premises being served shall be installed or maintained within the village without registration. Audible type
alarms which emit a sound intensity of greater than sixty five (65) decibels at any location outside the protected premises are prohibited. No such
alarm may be installed or maintained unless it shall be controlled by an automatic timing device after a period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
(Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992)
9-8-6: FALSE ALARMS:
(A) Responsibility: Each person holding a permit or registration for the operation or maintenance of a signaling device shall be strictly liable for any false
alarm transmitted by the device which the permit holder operates or maintains.
(B) False Alarms: Whenever the village police department or fire department responds to a signaling device, a member of the responding department shall
inspect the protected premises and shall determine whether the response was caused by a false alarm. If the responding department member
determines the alarm to be false, a report of the false alarm shall be forwarded to the chief of police who shall maintain a record of all false alarms so
transmitted.
(C) Exceptions: False alarms shall not include alarms activated by the following:
1. Attempted or actual criminal activity or forcible or unauthorized entry;
2. Structural damage to the protected premises due to earthquake, high winds, lightning or flooding caused by the overflow of natural drainage;
3. Telephone line malfunction;
4. Electrical service interruption; and
5. System malfunction within thirty (30) days of a new installation or modification of an existing system; provided, that the chief of police has received
prior notice of the work performed. (Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992)
9-8-7: LIABILITY OF VILLAGE LIMITED:
The village assumes no liability for any defects in operation of signal device systems for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an
alarm from such a source, nor for the failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation and operation of equipment, the transmission of
alarm signals and prerecorded alarm messages or the relaying of such signals and messages. (Ord. 92-2328, 11-16-1992)
9-8-8: ENFORCEMENT:
(A) False Alarm Charges:
1. To reimburse the costs of responding to false alarms, the permit holder or registrant shall pay to the village, for each false alarm in excess of three
(3) in any calendar year, the amounts as established by the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 2010-4317, 5-3-2010)
2. A false alarm charge shall be payable to the village within thirty (30) days of invoice. The permit holder or registrant shall be strictly liable for all false
alarms on the premises, and shall be responsible for the timely payment of all false alarm charges.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 399/460
(B) Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit; Disconnection:
1. Any permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police for any of the following reasons:
(a) The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any other applicable ordinance or statute; and
(b) The failure to pay fees and changes as required by this section.
2. Once a permit is revoked, the chief of police may order the disconnection from police department signal lines of an alarm system for the premises
subject to the previously revoked permit. The disconnection may be ordered and may take place without further notice to the permit holder. (Ord. 92-
2328, 11-16-1992)
3. In addition to any fees or charges prescribed by this chapter, any permit holder or registrant convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter may be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. All remedies provided by this chapter shall be cumulative and the
use of one or more remedies by the village shall not bar the use of any other remedy. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
Chapter 9
MOTOR VEHICLE TOWS
9-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
ANNUAL FEE ORDINANCE: The most current annual fee ordinance, as adopted by the board of trustees, as amended from time to time.
EXTENDED SERVICE: Any tow which required the operator to perform services beyond those required in a "normal tow". For the purpose of this definition
a "normal tow" is a tow where the vehicle's wheels are on the ground and the vehicle may be readily towed.
HEAVY DUTY: Involving vehicles forty thousand (40,000) GVWR or heavier.
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE: 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., as amended from time to time.
LIGHT DUTY: Involving vehicles up to, but not including, twelve thousand (12,000) GVWR.
MEDIUM DUTY: Involving vehicles from twelve thousand (12,000) up to, but not including, forty thousand (40,000) GVWR.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The village of Lisle police department.
TOW LIST: The most current list maintained by the Lisle police department containing the names of those tow operators approved by the chief of police to
respond to requests by the Lisle police department dispatcher for the towing of vehicles which are disabled where the person in charge of the vehicle has
no preference for any particular tow service or is unable to make such a decision. The list shall also be utilized: a) to tow village owned vehicles in need of
service to a location designated by the police department; and b) to tow vehicles impounded by the police department for evidentiary reasons.
TOW OPERATOR: A person or firm engaged in the business of, or offering the services of, vehicle towing whereby motor vehicles are or may be towed or
otherwise removed from one place to another by use of a tow truck, and which person or firm is listed on the tow list.
UPRIGHTING: Bringing a vehicle that is either overturned or on its side to the upright position in tow.
WINCHING: Bringing a vehicle that is completely off of the road surface onto the road surface for the purpose of towing. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-2: APPLICATION FOR TOW LIST:
Any person desiring to perform towing work for the village must submit a completed and correct "application form G" to the police department. After the list
is established, an operator must submit a current certificate of insurance each year by May 1. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-3: INVESTIGATION AND APPROVAL:
After receiving an application for towing the police department will conduct an investigation to determine the truth and accuracy of the information
contained in the application. Additionally, towing equipment will be inspected by the police department yearly. Upon completion of its investigation, the tow
operator will either be placed on the primary or secondary tow list or notified in writing that the application has not been approved. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-
2009)
9-9-4: INSURANCE:
The tow operator must maintain, at its sole cost and expense, general liability insurance with umbrella liability coverage as follows:
(A) Comprehensive General Liability: Must include the following industry standard forms of insurance:
1. Premises/operation coverage;
2. Products and completed operations coverage;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 400/460
3. Blanket contractual liability;
4. An amount as established by the annual fee ordinance for combined single limit or bodily injury and property damage.
(B) Comprehensive Auto Liability: Must include the following endorsements:
1. All owned autos, hired car coverage, and employers nonowned auto coverage;
2. The policy shall not contain a radius restriction of less than fifty (50) miles;
3. Hook liability in an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance.
(C) Garage Keepers' Legal Liability Or Motor Truck Cargo: The vendor shall provide coverage for the vehicles in their custody. Either a motor truck cargo
policy, listing all storage lots as terminal locations, or garage keepers' legal liability shall be required. The minimum amount of coverage shall be as
established by the annual fee ordinance.
(D) Workers' Compensation And Employers' Liability: Statutory limits for workers' compensation and an amount as established by the annual fee
ordinance for employers' liability limit.
All such insurance must be in amounts as established by the annual fee ordinance. The village must be named as an additional insured under all such
policies and the policies must contain a provision that the insurance shall not be canceled without giving the village at least thirty (30) days' notice of
cancellation or material change. All insurance policies must cover the operator, its carriers, agents and subcontractors and be maintained in full force,
at all times while on the tow list.
No tow operator will be placed on the tow list unless and until it provides a certificate of insurance conforming to the requirements of this section. (Ord.
2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-5: DUTIES AND REQUIREMENTS OF TOW OPERATORS ON TOW LIST:
(A) The tow operator is responsible for providing a secured lot where towed vehicles are stored, with an office at that location and staffed during
reasonable business hours. The storage lot shall be located within five (5) miles of the village limits.
(B) All tow trucks must be equipped with warning lights and all other equipment required by state law including, without limitation, one or more brooms and
shovels, oil-dry chemical, one or more trash cans at least eighteen inches (18") in height, and one fire extinguisher of a dry chemical or carbon dioxide
type with an aggregate rating of at least 4B.C units and bearing the approval of a laboratory qualified by the division of fire prevention for this purpose;
and have working two-way communication equipment on the same commercial frequency as the base station located at the point where calls are
received. All tow trucks must carry dollies at all times and must be equipped to safely transport motorcycles.
(C) The tow operator must possess a valid certification from the Illinois commerce commission.
(D) Each tow operator will provide twenty four (24) hour per day service each day of the year. There must be an attendant or answering service on duty at
all times for the purpose of receiving calls, and there must be a person on call at all times for the purpose of releasing stored vehicles or for receiving
vehicles.
(E) The tow operator will be required to sign an indemnification agreement, acceptable in form and substance to the village attorney, to indemnify, save
and hold the village harmless from any liability for injuries or damages to any person or property by vehicles being towed or stored. No tow operator will
be added to the tow list unless and until a signed original of the indemnity agreement is delivered to the police department.
(F) Tow operators will permit vehicle owners to remove personal property from vehicles stored at their facility during business hours at no charge. (Ord.
2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-6: COLLECTION OF COSTS; VILLAGE PAYMENTS; INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, collection of towing and storage charges from the owner or driver of the towed vehicle will be the sole
responsibility of the tow operator or his employee. The village will only be responsible for paying towing fees to a towing operator listed on the tow list
where the vehicle in question is: a) village owned, or b) is a lawfully seized vehicle, after forfeiture has been approved by a court, pursuant to the provision
of the Illinois vehicle code, or c) an abandoned vehicle that remains unclaimed and may be disposed of as junk, pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois
vehicle code. In no event will the village be responsible for any storage costs for any abandoned vehicle, as that term is defined in the Illinois vehicle code.
All tow operators on the tow list must maintain complete records and a system of releasing vehicles that assures vehicles are released only to the proper
owner, or authorized person. All records involving towing from the tow list will be open to the police department for inspection during normal business
hours or at such time as there is existing dispute concerning the amount or validity of any towing or storage charges. In addition, all tow operators must
use receipt forms of a type and manner specified by the police department. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-7: OPERATION OF TOW LIST:
The police department will contact tow operators for service in the order of the tow list, with the position on the tow list being determined by the order of
approval of each tow operator in accordance with this chapter. In no event will the police department call any towing service not on the tow list unless all
tow operators are unavailable. It is specifically permitted for the police department to call a tow operator out of sequence in a life threatening emergency
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 401/460
where there is an urgent need for services of a tow operator located in the near proximity of the event requiring service or where the estimated response
time makes it more practical to do so. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-8: TOW TRUCKS FOR SEMITRACTOR TRAILER VEHICLES:
A separate tow list of tow operators capable of towing semitractor trailer vehicles will be maintained and will operate in accordance with section 9-9-7 of
this chapter. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-9: SUSPENSION OR REMOVAL FROM TOW LIST:
(A) Power Of Chief Of Police: The chief of police may suspend or remove any tow operator from the tow list when he finds one or more of the following:
1. Placement on the list was secured by fraud or concealment of a material fact, that if known would have caused disapproval of the application; or
2. The tow operator has violated any of the provisions of this chapter; or
3. The service provided by the tow operator has been substantially inadequate, because of one or more of the following reasons:
(a) Failing to be available for or not accepting calls,
(b) Slow response time,
(c) Excessive damage claims,
(d) Repeated complaints from citizens, or
(e) Inadequate or substandard towing equipment.
The chief of police will provide written notice to the tow operator of a suspension or removal from the tow list. The notice will specify the reason for
the suspension or removal and, in the event of a suspension, the actions required by the tow operator for reinstatement on the tow list.
(B) Immediate Suspension Or Removal: If the chief of police determines that a tow operator presents an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare
of the village, or if the tow operator has not provided proof of valid and current insurance in the amounts required by this chapter, the chief of police
may, in his sole and absolute discretion, and without prior notice, suspend or remove the tow operator from the tow list.
(C) Appeals: Any suspended or removed tow operator may appeal the chief of police's decision in writing to the village manager. Any such appeal must
specify the factual bases that warrant reconsideration of the chief of police's decision or other facts showing that the chief of police's decision was
made in error. All decisions of the village manager will be final. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-10: SERVICES:
The following services must be provided by every tow operator:
General towing (hook or flatbed):
Light duty vehicle tow
Medium duty vehicle tow
Heavy duty vehicle tow
Medium duty extended service tow
Heavy duty extended service tow
Service call (lockout, vehicle starting, tire changing, out of gas)
Winching/uprighting vehicle:
First half hour
Each additional half hour
Standby:
Light duty tow per half hour after first half hour on scene
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 402/460
Each additional half hour
Medium and heavy duty per truck
Storage:
For first 24 hours
After 24 hours:
Light duty
Light duty after hours release
Light duty inside storage
Medium and heavy duty
Medium and heavy duty inside storage
Mileage:
Within village limits or to storage facility designated on application
To storage facility other than as designated on application:
First 10 miles
Light duty
Medium and heavy duty vehicles
Extra manpower for offloading, etc.:
Medium and heavy duty vehicles
Every tow operator on the tow list will have a placard posted in the cab of the tow vehicle at all times that completely corresponds to the list set forth in this
section and the fees for such services, which fees will be established in the annual fee ordinance. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section,
if, in the sole and absolute opinion of a police officer at the scene, special or unusual circumstances require an exceptional amount of extra work or
equipment, the tow operator may charge an additional reasonable fee; provided, however, that the owner or operator of the vehicle to be serviced, if
available, is first informed of any such additional reasonable fee. In the event that the owner or operator is not available, the fees for services shall be as
established in the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-11: SOLICITATION OF BUSINESS:
No tow operator may respond to the scene of an accident or emergency for the purpose of towing vehicles unless called there by the police department or
persons involved in the accident or emergency. Tow operators responding to an accident or emergency at the request of a person other than a police
officer, must record the name and address of the person and make such information available to the police department upon request.
This section is intended only to prohibit the soliciting of business at the scene of accidents and emergencies, and will not be construed to prohibit any tow
operator from contracting with any person. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-12: TOW TRUCK OPERATION:
(A) Every tow operator or driver of a tow truck will remove or cause to be removed all glass and debris deposited on any street or highway by the disabled
vehicle being serviced, and will, in addition, spread oil-dry upon that portion of any street or highway where oil or grease has been deposited by the
disabled vehicle being serviced. No fees for this service will be charged unless the spill requires special handling for removal.
(B) No tow operator or driver of a tow truck will respond to a call for service while under the influence of intoxicants.
(C) Towed vehicles will be taken to the location designated by the vehicle owner, driver or agent, should the person not wish to store the vehicle at the tow
operator's facility; provided, however, that vehicles towed upon the direction of the police department will be towed to such a place as designated by
the police officer in charge at the scene.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 403/460
(D) When a tow operator tows a vehicle pursuant to a DUI arrest, the tow operator will hold that vehicle in storage for six (6) hours and may only then
release the vehicle to the owner.
(E) When a tow operator tows a vehicle pursuant to a driving while license suspended (DWLS) or driving while licensed revoked (DWLR) arrest, the
vehicle cannot be released until the registered owner shows proof of insurance for the vehicle towed and in such cases may only be released to the
owner's agent who must submit proof of a valid and current state of Illinois driver's license.
(F) Once notified of a tow, the tow operator will provide the police department an approximate time it will take to arrive at the scene of a tow. If a tow
operator is unable to respond to a tow request within twenty (20) minutes, the tow operator or his employee will advise the police department that he is
not available. The tow operator will be marked unavailable. The police dispatcher will then call the next tow operator on the list. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-
2009)
9-9-13: STORAGE FACILITY:
Each tow operator will maintain a secure storage facility where all towed vehicles can be safely stored. A storage lot must be enclosed by a fence not less
than six feet (6') in height and have a locked gate and a storage building must be fully enclosed and secured. All storage facilities must meet all zoning and
fire ordinances and restrictions. When instructed by the police department that a vehicle in storage must be secured from tampering, the operator must
store the vehicle so that it is not accessible to any person except upon specific approval of the tow operator or his agent. A clearance of twenty four inches
(24") must be maintained around all vehicles from the tow list calls. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-14: TOW OPERATOR PERSONNEL QUALIFICATIONS:
Any person who has been convicted under the laws of the state of Illinois or any other state of an offense which under the laws of the state of Illinois would
be a felony theft of a vehicle or a felony offense under the Illinois vehicle code, will not be approved as a tow operator, nor will any tow operator knowingly
permit such a person to operate a tow truck on the tow list calls.
Each tow operator must furnish to the police department a complete and current list of all drivers who may respond to tow list calls. No driver will be
permitted to respond to any tow list call unless his name, date of birth and driver's license number have been furnished to the police department at least
twenty four (24) hours in advance by the tow operator on forms provided by the police department. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-15: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter will, upon conviction thereof, be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance. (Ord.
2009-4263, 7-20-2009)
9-9-16: AMENDMENT OR TERMINATION OF TOW PROCEDURE AND TOW LIST:
The village reserves the right to amend or terminate this chapter unilaterally at any time without any notice and without recourse. Any amendment to this
chapter will apply to all current tow operators. The termination of this chapter will automatically terminate the most current tow list. (Ord. 2009-4263, 7-20-
2009)
Chapter 10
PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES AT LISLE COMMUTER STATION AND DOWNTOWN AREA
9-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
COMMUTER FACILITIES: The platform, station and shelter areas, sidewalks and steps in, on and around the Lisle commuter train station lying north of
Front Street, south of Burlington Avenue, east of Main Street and west of a line extending north from the north end of Columbia Avenue and intersecting
the Burlington Northern Railroad right of way.
COMMUTER PARKING LOTS AND DRIVEWAYS: Those areas defined as lots A, B, C, D, E, and G in section 10-4-2 of this code.
DOWNTOWN AREA: Area defined in section 1-3-2 of this code.
MOTOR VEHICLES: A machine propelled by mechanical power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and used
to transport person(s) or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, motorized bicycles,
tractors and wagons.
ROLLER SKATES: Devices worn on the feet with a combination of wheels, either in-line or otherwise, which are propelled by human power.
SCOOTERS: Devices with two (2) or more wheels connected by a platform with a steering handle or wheel which are designed for standing on and which
are propelled by human power.
SKATEBOARDS: Devices with a combination of wheels connected by a platform designed for standing on and which are propelled by human power.
UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLE: A motor vehicle without current and valid license and registration, whether or not the vehicle is required to have such
license or registration. (Ord. 2008-4187, 3-17-2008; amd. Ord. 2009-4241, 1-12-2009; Ord. 2016-4623, 1-4-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 404/460
9-10-2: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
(A) No motor vehicles, skateboards, roller skates or scooters shall be used, operated or propelled in any way upon the commuter facilities, except those
vehicles owned and operated by the village or those used by a disabled or handicapped individual for access to or from a train.
(B) No unlicensed motor vehicles, skateboards, roller skates or scooters shall be used, operated or propelled in any way upon the commuter parking lots
and driveways.
(C) No motor vehicles, skateboards, roller skates or scooters shall be used or operated in any way upon sidewalks, curbs, walls, railings, borders, tables,
benches or chairs on any public property within the downtown area except those vehicles owned by the village or those lawfully used by a disabled or
handicapped individual. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the use or operation of skateboards, roller skates or
scooters upon any street in the downtown area, or upon any sidewalk immediately adjacent to and abutting a residentially zoned property within the
defined downtown area, nor shall anything in this subsection prohibit the carrying of skateboards, roller skates, or scooters in the downtown area. (Ord.
2009-4241, 1-12-2009)
9-10-3: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. The
procedure set forth in section 9-4-22 of this title may be used to settle and compromise a violation. Fines for such settlements shall be as established by
the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 2008-4187, 3-17-2008)
Title 10
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
10-1-1: SPEED LIMITS:
The chief of police recommends that certain speed limits be established on streets within the corporate limits of the village, and said speed limits are
therefore hereby set: (Ord. 636, 5-18-1976)
(A) It is hereby determined that the reasonable and safe absolute maximum speed is twenty five (25) miles per hour, and the maximum speed limit of
twenty five (25) miles per hour is hereby set for all portions of all village streets within the corporate limits unless otherwise specified in subsection (B),
(C), or (D) of this section. (Ord. 2008-4233, 11-17-2008)
(B) Further, the speed limits for the following streets and alleys, or portions thereof, are hereby set as follows: (Ord. 95-2703, 11-6-1995)
1. Main Street between Route 53 and Division Street 30 mph
2. Main Street between Southport Avenue and Warrenville Road 30 mph
3. Main Street between Division Street and Southport Avenue 20 mph
4. College Road within the corporate limits of the village 40 mph
5. That alley located along the west property lines of 4712 through 4760 Main Street 15 mph
6. Leask Lane between Warrenville Road and the corporate limits of the village 30 mph
7. Benedictine Parkway 30 mph
8. School Street between Center Avenue and Main Street 20 mph
(Ord. 2008-4233, 11-17-2008)
(C) No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of that permitted by statutes of the state, while traveling through a special school speed
zone. (Ord. 89-2003, 11-6-1989)
(D) Notwithstanding any of the above, the maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour is hereby set for those streets listed as follows:
Ashford Court
Holly Court
Kindling Court
Navistar Circle
Parksleg Court
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 405/460
Pruthmore Court
Stonehaven Way
Trowbridge Way
Woodbriar Court
Appropriate signs giving notice of the limits set herein shall be erected in accordance with the standards set forth in the state of Illinois "Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways".
Any person violating any of the speed limits set by this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as provided in the
applicable statutes of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2011-4414, 11-7-2011)
10-1-2: OPERATION OF VEHICLES RESTRICTED:
No person shall operate any motor vehicle in the village unless such motor vehicle is muffled to the maximum extent practicable so as to prevent
unnecessary noise, and further, no person shall operate any motor vehicle in the village so as to cause unnecessary noise by rapid acceleration or
deceleration of the vehicle, or by racing of the engine or by squealing or screeching of the tires on pavement1.
Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
10-1-3: SCHOOL CROSSINGS:
Permanently mounted automatic school crossing stop signs shall be installed at the locations hereinafter specified and all said signals shall bear red and
amber lenses and signs marked "School Crossing" and "Stop on Red Signal". After said signals are installed, they shall be placed in operation during
regularly scheduled school crossing periods only and shall not be operated outside of such periods.
When said signs are in operation, all pedestrian and vehicular traffic shall stop on the red signal and obey the flashing indications and signs on said
signals, and any person who shall fail to obey said signals shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance
for each offense.
(A) A school crossing sign, S 201, as listed in the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways", state of Illinois department of
transportation, shall be placed and a crosswalk designated at the following areas:
Kingston Avenue north of Division
Kingston Avenue opposite Schiesher School
Middleton Avenue opposite Tate Woods School
The placement of signs and designations of crosswalks shall be the responsibility of the street department of the village.
(B) The following sign, S 301, as listed in the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways", state of Illinois department of
transportation, shall be placed in the following locations:
Division and Kingston; Division eastbound, Kingston southbound and northbound
Kingston Avenue; southbound north of Gamble, northbound south of Ohio
Middleton Avenue and Schwartz; northbound on Schwartz
These signs shall be placed at a reasonable distance from the affected schools taking into consideration intersecting streets, driveways and other
appurtenances. The street department of the village shall be responsible for the placement of these signs. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
10-1-4: SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS:
The chief of police shall have the authority, and he is hereby authorized, to appoint such number of persons as the board of trustees shall from time to time
determine, to be known as school crossing guards, which guards, to be eligible for appointment, shall be a person of not less than twenty one (21) years of
age and shall be of good moral character and in good health.
The chief of police shall have the authority to assign guards to such localities and for such periods of time as shall be best suited to afford protection to
those attending schools, and said chief of police shall be the supervisor of the duties of the guards.
Guards shall maintain the orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic consistent with the safety of children attending schools in the village, and
shall adhere to and be governed by all the rules and regulations of the police department insofar as such rules and regulations are applicable to and
consistent with the special class of duties prescribed for school crossing guards. Guards shall also comply with all other applicable ordinances, rules and
regulations adopted by the village.
Said guards shall not be a part of or affiliated with the village police department in any official capacity except that they shall have and exercise such
limited police powers as may be delegated to them by the chief of police, and the guards may be dismissed by said chief of police when he finds such
dismissal to be in the best interest of the village. The village board may also dismiss any guard for any reason it shall deem sufficient.
Crossing guards shall be paid in accordance with the rate of pay as from time to time set forth by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 291, 11-5-1968; amd.
1979 Code)
10-1-5: SCHOOL BUSES, MEETING OR OVERTAKING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 406/460
The driver of a vehicle upon any public street or highway within the village, upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has
stopped on such street or highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children, shall stop said vehicle before reaching said school bus
when there is in operation on said bus a visual signal as specified in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1414.
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
10-1-6: VEHICLE WEIGHTS, LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
(A) Motor vehicles weighing in excess of five (5) tons are hereby prohibited from driving upon or using any street listed hereinafter, unless they qualify as
an exemption in subsection (B) of this section:
Street From To
Abbeywood Drive Naper Boulevard Golfview
Benedictine Parkway Maple Abbeywood
Breckenridge Road Green Trails Sun Valley
Burlington Avenue Yackley Route 53
Center Avenue Rolling Maple
Division Street Main Kingston
Front Street Venture Easterly corporate limits
Green Trails Drive New Albany Easterly corporate limits
Hitchcock Avenue Center Westview
Kingston Avenue Front Maple
Lacey Avenue Main Ogden
Lacey Avenue Yackley River
Larkspur Lane Jonquil Maple
Main Street Division Route 53
Middleton Avenue Center Ogden
Middleton Avenue Yender Schwartz
Ohio Court Ohio Street Short Street
Ohio Street Indiana Yackley
Riedy Road Main East corporate limits
Rolling Drive Route 53 Larkspur
Schwartz Avenue Middleton Burlington
Short Street Ohio Court Route 53
Short Street Route 53 Main
Southport Avenue Main Lacey
Sun Valley Road Telluride Old College
Westview Lane Hitchcock Maple
Yender Avenue Western Court Ogden
(Ord. 90-2118, 11-19-1990; amd. Ord. 93-2386, 6-7-1993; Ord. 99-3152, 10-4-1999)
(B) The following vehicles are exempt from this weight limit:
1. Emergency vehicles, including, but not limited to, fire district vehicles, when traveling to or from their destination.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 407/460
2. School buses and public mass transit buses, when engaged in local service. For the purposes of this section, "local service" is defined as travel
between passenger pick up points and passenger destinations.
3. Municipal vehicles, refuse and recycling trucks, and vehicles operated by private utilities, when actively engaged in service in the local area.
4. Vehicles making deliveries or pick ups on any of the various streets named in subsection (A) of this section, or vehicles which cannot reach a pick up
or delivery point except by driving upon or using any of said streets, when no alternate means of ingress or egress is available; in which case these
vehicles must use the shortest direct route between their destination and the nearest arterial street. For the purposes of this section, "arterial streets"
are defined as Naper Boulevard, Yackley Avenue, College Road, Route 53, I-355, I-88, Warrenville Road, Ogden Avenue and Maple Avenue.
5. Construction vehicles and equipment working on or along any of the various streets named in subsection (A) of this section, or which cannot
otherwise reach a construction area except by driving upon or using any of the streets listed in subsection (A) of this section when no alternate
means of ingress or egress is available; in which case these vehicles must use the shortest direct route between their destination and the nearest
arterial street. For the purposes of this section, arterial streets are defined as Naper Boulevard, Yackley Avenue, College Road, Route 53, I-355, I-
88, Warrenville Road, Ogden Avenue and Maple Avenue.
(C) Any person found to have violated any term or provision of this section shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each violation.
(Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
10-1-7: DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS, OTHER VILLAGE PROPERTY:
The operation of any motorized vehicle including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, minibikes, motorscooters, motorbikes, motorcycles and buses is
hereby prohibited on any village parkway, sidewalk, levee, marked depot area platforms or other property for which the village is responsible for
maintenance, excepting village streets and roadways. The foregoing shall not apply to any vehicle authorized by the village to operate or drive upon the
foregoing areas.
The operation of any motorized vehicle including, but not limited to, those listed above, is hereby prohibited on any village street or roadway unless said
vehicle is properly licensed in accordance with state and local laws and regulations.
Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
10-1-8: DRIVING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
(A) Definition: The term "vehicle" as used in this section shall be construed to mean any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn on a highway or otherwise, except devices moved solely by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks,
whether said vehicle is licensed or unlicensed. (Ord. 79-880, 8-21-1979; amd. Ord. 79-881, 8-21-1979)
(B) Private Property: For the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and property, the operation of any vehicle upon any private property without the
consent of the owner thereof is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 79-880, 8-21-1979)
(C) Public Property: For the protection of the public's health, safety, welfare and property, the operation of any vehicle upon any public property of or within
any public place in the village, except public highways, publicly dedicated and developed streets and alleys, designated municipal parking lots and
improved driveways transversing public parkways is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 79-811, 8-21-1979)
(D) Penalty: Any person found to have violated any provision of this section shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each violation.
(Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
10-1-9: PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALKS:
At those locations determined by the board of trustees of the village to require a marked crosswalk to assist pedestrians in traversing a street, road or
highway, said crosswalk shall be marked by paint striping or other designation upon the roadway and proper signage shall provide notice to oncoming cars
of the existence of such a crosswalk.
Wherever pedestrian crosswalks have been designated, all vehicular traffic shall yield to any and all pedestrians present within said crosswalk before
proceeding. Any person who shall fail to so yield shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
10-1-10: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTION:
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., of the Illinois vehicle code is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by this reference. Further, citations
may be issued by authorized personnel of the village, using the Illinois vehicle code in lieu of or in addition to using the sections of this title. (Ord. 91-2135,
2-18-1991)
10-1-11: TEMPORARY PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
The chief of police is hereby vested with the authority to direct, control and regulate traffic through the temporary designation and posting of signs or other
traffic control devices. Any sign or device posted per order of the chief of police shall be deemed an official sign and shall be valid for as long as public
safety requires. (Ord. 96-2754, 3-18-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 408/460
10-1-12: AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM:
(A) Definitions:
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM: A device within the village with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction
with a red light signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a steady or flashing red signal indication in
violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-306, or similar violation of this code.
DISREGARDING A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE: Failure to stop and remain stopped before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as
provided for in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-306.
NO TURN ON RED: Failure to stop and remain stopped, and not proceeding to turn right at, an intersection controlled by both a sign indicating "No
turn on red", or other similar language, and a red signal as provided for in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-306.
RECORDED IMAGES: Images produced by the automated traffic law enforcement system, which consist of either two (2) or more photographs; two
(2) or more microphotographs; two (2) or more electronic images; or, a video recording showing the motor vehicle and, on at least one image or
portion of the recording, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle.
TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR: The person appointed as such through 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes article 25 who shall have power
to adopt, distribute and process automated traffic law violation notices and other notices required by this article, collect money paid as fines and
penalties, operate the automated traffic law enforcement system, and make certified reports to the secretary of state as required by this article.
(B) Violations: It shall be a violation of this section for a vehicle to disregard a traffic control device or turn on red in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-306.
(C) Administrative Adjudication: For purposes of administrative adjudication of violations of this section, there is hereby established an administrative
hearing system pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-1, which is incorporated herein as though fully set forth. The village manager shall
appoint one or more hearing officers in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-1. The jurisdiction of the administrative adjudication
system shall include only violations of this section.
(D) Defenses: The following may be considered defenses by the hearing officer for a violation of subsection (B) of this section:
1. That the motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle were stolen before the violation occurred, and not under the control of or in the
possession of the owner at the time of the violation;
2. That the driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection when the light was red either: a) in order to yield the right of way to an emergency
vehicle or b) as part of a funeral procession.
To demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates were stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the control or
possession of the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration
plates was filed with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner.
(E) Notice Of Violation: When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a motor vehicle entering an intersection in violation of subsection (B)
of this section, the village shall issue a written notice of violation to the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, which shall be delivered by U.S. mail
within thirty (30) days after the Illinois secretary of state notifies the village of the identity of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, and in no
event later than ninety (90) days following the violation. The village shall only be required to notify a lessee if the leasing company/lessor provides the
lessee's name by an affidavit and a copy of the lease within sixty (60) days of the notice's issuance. If the driver information is not provided within sixty
(60) days, the leasing company/lessor may be found liable. If any notice to an address is returned as undeliverable, a second notice shall be sent to the
last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database of the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle. The second notice shall be
made by first class mail, postage prepaid. (Ord. 2007-4139, 9-10-2007)
A notice of violation associated with an automated traffic law violation shall require a review of the associated recorded image by the traffic compliance
administrator, who shall inspect the image and determine whether the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of subsection (B) of this section, or
whether one of the defenses enumerated in subsection (D) of this section is visibly applicable upon inspection. All violations must be reviewed and
approved by a law enforcement officer or retired law enforcement officer of the village. Upon determination that the recorded image captures a violation
and that no defense applies, the notice of violation shall be served upon the registered vehicle owner in the manner provided for above. The traffic
compliance administrator shall retain a copy of all violation notices, recorded images and other correspondence mailed to the owner of the vehicle.
Each notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation of the
above noted statutory and local provisions and shall be prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established
in this section. (Ord. 2007-4139, 9-10-2007; amd. Ord. 2010-4358, 12-20-2010)
The notice of violation shall include the following information:
1. The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, as indicated by the records of the secretary of state, or, if such information is
outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database;
2. The make (only if discernable) and registration number of the motor vehicle involved in the violation;
3. The violation charged;
4. The location where the violation occurred;
5. The date and time of the violation; (Ord. 2007-4139, 9-10-2007)
6. A copy of the recorded images, and a website address at which an alleged violator may have access to the recorded images through the internet;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 409/460
7. The amount of the civil penalty and the date by which the penalty should be paid (14 days from the date of issuance) and a statement that the
payment of the fine shall operate as a final disposition of the violation; (Ord. 2010-4358, 12-20-2010)
8. A statement that a failure to pay the civil penalty by the date noted may result in an additional late fee being assessed against the owner or lessee;
9. The amount of the late fee;
10. A statement that the failure to pay by the date specified will result in a final determination of liability and may result in the suspension of driving
privileges for the registered owner of the vehicle;
11. A statement that the recorded images constitute prima facie evidence of a violation;
12. A statement that the person may elect to proceed by paying the fine or challenging the charge in court, by mail or by administrative hearing; and
13. A statement of how an administrative hearing may be requested. (Ord. 2007-4139, 9-10-2007)
(F) Hearing: The owner of a vehicle being operated in violation of this section may request a hearing by the respond-by date on the notice of violation (14
days from the date of issuance), to challenge the evidence or set forth an applicable defense. The notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the
facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation of this section. The notice of violation shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in this section. (Ord. 2007-4139, 9-10-2007; amd. Ord. 2010-4358, 12-20-
2010)
The owner's failure to appear at the hearing will result in a finding of liability. In the event of a failure to appear, a "findings, decision and order" letter will
be sent to the owner. The owner's failure to pay the amount by the date specified in that letter will result in a final determination.
(G) Nonresidents: Where the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle is not a resident of the village but seeks to contest the merits of the alleged
violation, such person may contest the charges using the same available defenses as stated above, but rather than attend the administrative hearing,
they may submit any and all documentary evidence to the traffic compliance administrator no later than the hearing date, together with a written
statement reflecting that they are nonresidents of the village. The traffic compliance administrator shall forward all timely submitted materials to the
hearing officer for review and determination. (Ord. 2007-4139, 9-10-2007)
(H) Final Determination: A final determination of an automated traffic law violation(s) liability shall occur:
1. Following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty after the hearing officer's determination of an automated traffic law violation(s) liability
within twenty five (25) days and the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth, or
2. Where a person fails to appear at the hearing for an automated traffic law violation on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior mailed
notice. The hearing officer's determination of an automated traffic law violation(s) liability shall become final upon the exhaustion of or the failure to
exhaust any administrative or judicial review procedures hereinafter set forth:
(a) Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or
(b) Upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition without a filing having been made.
(I) Notice Of Determination Of Liability: A determination of automated traffic law violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty, or to
contest the alleged violation within fourteen (14) days of the notice of violation. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged
violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer will enter findings, decision and order's determination of
automated traffic law violation liability which shall become final: 1) upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or 2) upon expiration
of the period for filing such a petition without a filing having been made. If a person appears at a hearing and is found liable or contests the violation by
mail and is found liable, the hearing officer will enter findings, decision and order, which is a final determination of automated traffic law violation liability
that is a final, appealable order.
The owner (or lessee) of a motor vehicle is subject to a penalty as set forth in the annual fee ordinance. In the event that such penalty is not paid within
fourteen (14) days after service of a final determination of liability, an additional late payment penalty shall be imposed as set forth in the annual fee
ordinance. A penalty shall not apply if the driver of the motor vehicle received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer at the time of the violation.
The village shall not charge court costs or hearing fees to persons found liable after exercising their right to appear and contest the violation at an
administrative hearing. (Ord. 2010-4358, 12-20-2010)
(J) Notice Of Final Determination: A notice of final determination shall be sent following the final determination of automated traffic law violation liability and
the conclusion of judicial review. The notice of final determination shall include the following information:
1. A statement that the unpaid fine is a debt due and owing to the village;
2. A warning that a failure to pay any fine due and owing to the village of Lisle within fourteen (14) days may result in a petition to the circuit court of
DuPage County to have the unpaid fine rendered as a judgment or may result in the suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay
fines or penalties for five (5) or more violations under this section.
(K) Petitions To Set Aside Determination: A petition to set aside determination of an automated traffic law violation must be filed with or mailed to the traffic
control administrator within fourteen (14) days of the date of mailing of the notice of determination of liability. The grounds for the petition are limited to:
1. The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued;
2. The person having already paid the fine for the violation in question; and
3. Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of liability, the hearing officer shall review the petition to determine if cause has been
shown to set aside the determination. If cause has been shown, the village shall forward the petitioner a new hearing date on which the petitioner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 410/460
must appear to present his case. The village shall notify the petitioner of the hearing officer's decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within
fourteen (14) days of the village's receipt.
(L) Notice Of Impending Driver's License Suspension: A notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or
penalty that remains due and owing on five (5) or more violations of this section. The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall state the
following information:
1. The failure to pay the fine owing within forty five (45) days of the notice's date will result in the village notifying the secretary of state that the person
is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5;
2. A statement that the person may obtain a copy of the original ticket imposing a fine by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the village
along with a request for the copy.
The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the secretary of
state or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post office approved
database.
(M) Driver's License Suspension: The traffic compliance administrator, by certified report, may request that the secretary of state suspend the driving
privileges of an owner of a registered vehicle who has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing as a result of five (5) automated traffic violations.
The report shall be certified and contain the following:
1. The name, last known address as recorded with the secretary of state, as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease, or as
recorded in a United States post office approved database if any notice sent under this section is returned as undeliverable, and driver's license
number of the person who failed to pay the fine or penalty and the registration number of any vehicle known to be registered to such person in a
state;
2. A statement that the report is being made by the village of Lisle pursuant to this section; and
3. A statement that a notice of impending driver's license suspension has been sent to the person named in the report at the address recorded with the
secretary of state or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice sent under this section is
returned as undeliverable at the last known address recorded at a United States post office approved database; the date on which such notice was
sent; and address to which such notice was sent.
The traffic compliance administrator shall notify the secretary of state whenever a person named in the certified report has paid the previously
recorded fine or penalty or whenever the municipality determines that the original report was in error. A certified copy of such notification shall also
be given upon request and at no additional charge to the person named therein.
Any person receiving notice from the secretary of state that their driving privileges may be suspended at the end of a specified period may challenge
the accuracy of the certified report prepared by the traffic compliance administrator. The person shall, within seven (7) days after having received
notice from the secretary of state, request an opportunity to speak with the traffic compliance administrator to challenge the accuracy of the certified
report. If the traffic compliance administrator determines that the original report was in error due to the fact that the person challenging the report was
not the owner or lessee of the vehicle or that the person has already paid the fine for the five (5) or more automated traffic violations, the traffic
compliance administrator shall immediately notify the secretary of state of such error in a subsequent certified report. (Ord. 2007-4139, 9-10-2007)
10-1-13: TOW AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
(A) Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
AGGRAVATED ASSAULT AND AGGRAVATED BATTERY: A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-2 and 5/12-4, respectively.
ARMED ROBBERY: A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18-2.
BURGLARY AND RESIDENTIAL BURGLARY: A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/19-1 and 5/19-3, respectively.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any substance as defined and included in the schedules contained in article II of the Illinois controlled substance act2,
as amended from time to time, and cannabis as defined in section 3 of the cannabis control act3, as amended from time to time.
CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY: A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-1.
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE: Any violation as defined in 11-501 of the Illinois vehicle code4, as amended.
DRIVING WHILE LICENSE, PERMIT OR PRIVILEGE TO OPERATE A MOTOR VEHICLE IS SUSPENDED OR REVOKED: Any violation as defined in
6-303 of the Illinois vehicle code5, as amended.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: Any equipment, product and/or materials as defined in section 2 of the drug paraphernalia act6.
HEARING OFFICER: A licensed attorney who is not an officer.
OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLE WITHOUT A VALID DRIVER'S LICENSE: A violation of 6-101 and/or 6-303 of the Illinois vehicle code7, as
amended from time to time, where the driver's license or driving privileges have been suspended, revoked, canceled, never obtained or previously had
been obtained and have been expired for not less than six (6) months.
OWNER OF RECORD: The record titleholder to a motor vehicle.
RETAIL THEFT: A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16A-3.
UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS: A violation of 24-1 of the criminal code of 19618, as amended.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 411/460
(B) Vehicles Subject To Tow And Impoundment: A motor vehicle, operated with the permission, express or implied, of the owner of record, shall be
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to tow and impoundment under this section where such motor vehicle is used in the commission
of any of the violations of village or state laws or regulations specified in this subsection and where impoundment of the vehicle is determined by a
police officer on the scene to be reasonably necessary as a community caretaking function so that the vehicle does not jeopardize public safety and the
efficient movement of vehicular traffic. It shall not be necessary for criminal charges to be filed, prosecuted, and/or proven in order to demonstrate that
one of the following violations has been committed in order to trigger the towing and impoundment of the offending vehicle:
1. The possession or delivery of a controlled substance or drug paraphernalia; or
2. Driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof; or
3. Driving while license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-303,
except a person whose driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended only for a violation of the vehicle emissions
inspection law of 2005, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/13C-1 et seq.; or
4. Operation of a motor vehicle without a valid and current driver's license in violation of statutes including, but not limited to, either 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-101(a) or 5/6-101(b); or
5. The unlawful possession of a firearm in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.1, use of weapons in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/24-1, or discharge of a firearm in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.5; or
6. Retail theft, when the value of the merchandise exceeds one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00); or
7. Aggravated assault, aggravated battery, armed robbery, burglary, residential burglary and criminal damage to property; or
8. Any violation of the provisions of the Illinois cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1; or
9. Fleeing or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-204; or
10. Driving recklessly in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-503; or
11. Street racing in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-506; or
12. The commission or attempted commission of any felony offense; or
13. The motor vehicle is otherwise subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1.
(C) Tow And Impoundment Of Vehicles: Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to tow and impoundment
pursuant to this section, and none of the circumstances delineated in subsection (D) of this section are present, the police officer shall cause the motor
vehicle to be towed to a facility authorized by the village or its agents in accordance with the procedures set forth in title 9, chapter 9 of this code. When
the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify any person identifying himself or herself as the owner of the vehicle or any person who is found to be
in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the tow and of the vehicle owner's right to request a
preliminary hearing to be held in accordance with the administrative hearing procedures set forth in subsection 10-1-12(F) of this chapter, though the
owner is not restricted to the defenses enumerated in subsection 10-1-12(D) of this chapter. Said motor vehicle shall be impounded pending the
completion of the hearings provided for in this chapter, unless the owner of the motor vehicle posts with the village a cash bond as set forth in
subsection (E) of this section and in an amount established by the annual fee ordinance.
(D) Exceptions To Vehicle Tow And Impoundment: A police officer who has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to tow and
impoundment pursuant to this section shall first ascertain whether the tow and impoundment is necessary and reasonable under the circumstances. If
in the judgment of the police officer then present, a person authorized by the owner of record or the operator of the vehicle is present, capable and
willing to provide for the lawful immediate removal of the vehicle and the owner or operator of the vehicle executes an indemnification agreement,
holding the village harmless for releasing the motor vehicle into the custody of said person, the police officer shall allow that individual to promptly
remove the motor vehicle without it being subject to tow and impoundment.
(E) Posting A Bond: If a bond is posted with the village, the impounded vehicle shall be released to the owner of record, upon the payment by the owner of
record of the towing and storage costs to the applicable towing company. If an administrative fee is imposed pursuant to this section and established by
the annual fee ordinance, the bond shall be applied to said fee; provided, in the event that a violation of this section is not proven at the hearing
referenced in subsection (C) of this section, the bond shall be returned to the person posting the bond. All bond money posted pursuant to this section
shall be held by the village until the hearing officer issues a decision, or, in the event of judicial review, until a reviewing court issues a final decision.
(F) Preliminary Hearing: Where the owner of a motor vehicle seized under the provisions of this section requests in writing a preliminary hearing within
twelve (12) hours after the tow of the motor vehicle, the watch commander or designated supervising officer must conduct a preliminary hearing within
twenty four (24) hours after the request for a preliminary hearing is received by the village; provided that if the date for the hearing falls on a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday, the preliminary hearing will be held on the next business day following the Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. For purposes of
this section, the following shall apply:
1. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing.
2. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing, and hearsay testimony will be allowed and shall be admissible.
3. If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the watch commander or designated supervising officer determines that there is probable cause to believe that
the vehicle was properly towed and impounded in accordance with this section and that no enumerated exception justifies release of the vehicle from
impoundment, he or she shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle unless and until the owner of the vehicle posts a cash or certified
check bond with the village, and pays all towing and storage costs to the applicable towing company. The village shall hold the cash or certified
check bond, together with payment for all accrued towing and storage charges, until such time as the final hearing is completed.
4. If the watch commander or designated supervising officer determines that there is not probable cause to believe that the vehicle was properly towed
and impounded under this section, then the motor vehicle shall be returned to the owner of record of the vehicle without any penalty or other costs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 412/460
(G) Final Hearing:
1. Notice Of Hearing: Within twenty one (21) days after a motor vehicle is towed and impounded pursuant to this section, the village shall notify the
owner of record of the vehicle of the date, time and location of a final hearing, to be conducted in accordance with subsection 10-1-12(F) of this
chapter. Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record, as shown on the records of the Illinois
secretary of state. Notice by certified mail need not be given when the owner of the vehicle has been personally served with notice in written form of
the time, date and location of the hearing.
2. Hearing: For purposes of this section, the following shall apply at an owner's final hearing:
(a) Unless continued by order of the hearing officer, the hearing shall be held within forty five (45) days after the motor vehicle was impounded.
(b) All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the
hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. At the hearing, the violation citation shall be prima facie evidence that the violation was
committed as provided in the citation, and the burden of proof shall be upon the defendant to prove that the violation was not committed.
(c) If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was properly
impounded, the hearing officer shall enter an order for the continued impoundment of the vehicle until the owner of the vehicle pays to the village
the administrative fee, as established by the annual fee ordinance, plus all accrued towing and storage costs to the applicable towing company.
The administrative fee shall be a debt due to the village and the owner shall be civilly liable therefor. If a cash bond has been posted, said bond
shall be applied to the administrative fee.
(d) If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall enter an order of default in favor of the village, which order shall
require the payment to the village of an administrative penalty, as established in the annual fee ordinance, plus towing and storage costs to the
applicable towing company, as well as the continued impoundment of the vehicle until the owner remits to the village the administrative fee and
towing and storage costs to the towing company.
(e) If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was not used in violation of this section then the motor vehicle shall be returned to the owner of
the vehicle promptly and without any penalty or other costs, or, if a cash bond had previously been posted, said cash bond shall be returned.
(H) Unclaimed Vehicles:
1. Any motor vehicle that is not claimed within thirty (30) days after the expiration of time in which the owner of record may seek judicial review of the
action of the village under this section or any vehicle for which payment of all required monies to secure the vehicle has not been tendered within
thirty (30) days of the expiration of time in which the owner of record may seek judicial review of the order entered at the conclusion of the final
hearing, or the time at which a final judgment is rendered in favor of the village by a court of proper jurisdiction, or the time at which a final
administrative decision is rendered against an owner of record who is in default, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and may be disposed of as
an abandoned or unclaimed vehicle, as otherwise provided in the Illinois vehicle code.
(I) Liability For Penalty And Costs:
1. The owner of record of a motor vehicle that is seized or impounded shall be liable to the village for an administrative fee, established by the annual
fee ordinance, in addition to any fees and charges for the towing and storage of the motor vehicle by the applicable towing company.
2. Fees for towing and storage are established by the towing company and not by the village, in accordance with the provisions of title 9, chapter 9 of
this code.
3. A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall remain impounded until the earlier of the following events occurs:
(a) The administrative fee is paid to the village, and all towing and storage costs are paid to the applicable towing company.
(b) A bond in an amount equal to the liability of the owner as provided in this section is posted with the village and all applicable towing and storage
costs are paid to the applicable towing company.
(c) The vehicle is deemed unclaimed or abandoned, in which case the vehicle shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition
of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles.
(d) Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lien holder or any other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a motor
vehicle impounded under this section until the administrative fee and all towing and storage costs applicable under this section have been paid in
full. (Ord. 2009-4250, 4-20-2009)
Chapter 2
PARKING RESTRICTIONS
10-2-1: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES:
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no
person shall:
(A) Stop, stand or park a vehicle1:
1. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
2. On a sidewalk; (Ord. 451, 2-6-1973)
3. Beyond the edge of a driveway into any public right of way; (Ord. 2006-4021, 6-5-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 413/460
4. Within an intersection;
5. On a crosswalk;
6. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of the safety zone, unless
a different length is indicated by signs or markings;
7. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
8. Upon any bridge or other elevated structures or within a highway tunnel, underpass or subway;
9. On any railroad tracks;
10. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. (Ord. 451, 2-6-1973; amd. Ord. 2006-4021, 6-5-2006)
11. At any place which is designated by official signs as a cab stand, unless said vehicle is duly registered within the village, or is present at the cab
stand for the purpose of dropping off passengers who were initially picked up outside of the village. (Ord. 93-2360, 2-15-1993; amd. Ord. 2006-4021,
6-5-2006)
(B) Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
1. In front of a public or private driveway;
2. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
3. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
4. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway;
5. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when properly signposted);
6. In front of curbside mailboxes located on School Street between Main and Spencer;
7. At any place where official signs prohibit standing. (Ord. 88-1766, 12-5-1988)
(C) Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers:
1. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
2. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
(D) Further, there shall be no parking:
1. On any street between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. except by permission of the Police Department. (Ord. 451, 2-6-1973)
2. In any officially designated fire lane. Any person violating this subsection (D)2 shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each
offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
3. Where vehicle would reduce the usable width of a street to less than eighteen feet (18'). (Ord. 451, 2-6-1973)
4. In a prohibited parking zone; or in a limited parking zone longer than the time designated and authorized. Each continuing period of time equal to the
posted time limit shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 94-2603, 12-5-1994)
5. On private property without the consent of the owner of private property. (Ord. 83-1136, 8-2-1983)
10-2-2: RESTRICTIONS ENUMERATED:
Parking is restricted as hereinafter indicated on the following streets, except by permission of the Police Department:
Abbeywood Drive No parking Both sides, College Road to Angel Lane
No parking North side, College Road to a point 160 feet west of
Shorewood Court
No parking North side, from Naper Boulevard to Surrey Ridge Road
No parking North side, Lexington Road to a point 250 feet east of
Lexington Road
No parking South side, from Surrey Ridge Road west 300 feet
No parking South side, Timberview Drive to Lexington Road
Parallel parking only, no parking on
grass
South side, from a point 300 feet west of Surrey Ridge Road
to Naper Boulevard
Academy Drive No parking Both sides
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 414/460
Adams Drive No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9:30 A.M.,
weekdays except holidays
Both sides
Alley (located between the east property line
of 1108 Burlington Avenue and the west
property line of 4760 Garfield Avenue)
No parking, standing, stopping or
loading
Both sides, from Burlington Avenue to the north property line
of 4712 Main Street
Alley (located south of Lots 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12 and 13 in A.T. McIntosh and Company's
Ogden Farm Subdivision)
No parking Both sides, from Keller Street approximately 410 feet
westerly
Arbor View Drive No parking April 15 through July 15
West side, from 100 feet north of Basswood Drive to the
south end of the property at 4500 Arbor View Drive
Auvergne Avenue No parking West side, Ogden Avenue to Chicago Avenue
2 hour parking East side, Ogden Avenue to Chicago Avenue
Beau Bien Boulevard No parking Both sides, Ogden Avenue to Old Tavern Road
Benedictine Parkway No parking Both sides, from Maple Avenue to Abbeywood Drive
Black Partridge Lane No parking April 15 through July 15
East side, Old Tavern Road north to Shabbona Lane
Burlington Avenue No parking Both sides, Garfield Avenue to Yender Avenue
No parking Both sides, Main Street to Spencer Avenue
2 hour parking 5:00 A.M. to 7:00
P.M., Monday through Friday
North side, Main Street to Garfield Avenue; south side, from
Main Street west 142 feet
Burr Oak Drive No parking Both sides, Maple Avenue to Robin Lane
Cabot Drive No parking Both sides, Warrenville Road to Forbes Drive
Candlewood Court No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9:30 A.M.,
Monday through Friday
Both sides, from Oakhill Drive north to the dead end
Cascade Drive No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9:30 A.M.,
weekdays except holidays
Both sides
Center Avenue No parking Both sides, Burlington Avenue to Ogden Avenue
No parking Both sides, Inverness Drive to Rolling Drive
No parking East side, Front Street to Division Street
No parking school hours Both sides, Gamble Drive to Jonquil Avenue
2 hour parking West side, Front Street to Division Street
4 hour parking 6:00 A.M. to 1:00
P.M., weekdays except holidays
Both sides, Riedy Road to Gamble Drive
Chicago Avenue No parking Both sides, Auvergne Avenue to Elm Street
Columbia Avenue 2 hour parking Both sides, Front Street to Riedy Road, except during school
bus only hours on east side of street from Division Street
north 240 feet
School bus parking only on school
days 7:30 A.M. to 8:30 A.M. and
1:30 P.M. to 2:30 P.M.
East side, Division Street to a point 240 feet north of Division
Street
Devon Avenue No parking Both sides, from Ogden Avenue to a point 300 feet south of
Ogden Avenue
No parking East side, from Ogden Avenue north 300 feet
Division Street No parking North side, Main Street to Columbia Avenue
No parking South side, Main Street to Kingston Avenue
Pick up and drop off zone on school
days 7:00 A.M. to 3:00 P.M.
North side, Columbia Avenue to a point 145 feet east of
Columbia Avenue
2 hour parking North side, Columbia Avenue to Kingston Avenue
Driftwood Court No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9:30 A.M.,
Monday through Friday
Both sides, from Oakhill Drive north to the dead end
Dumoulin 4 hour parking Both sides, from Burlington Avenue to Ogden Avenue
Eisenhower Lane No parking Both sides, Burr Oak Road to Patton Drive
No parking Both sides, Patton Drive east to dead end
Elm Street No parking Both sides, Chicago Avenue to Burlington Avenue
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 415/460
Fender Avenue No parking Both sides, Ogden Avenue to Ridgeland Avenue
Forbes Drive No parking Both sides, from Warrenville Road to a point 1,050 feet north
of Warrenville Road
Front Street No parking Both sides, from Columbia Avenue, east to the east of
property lines of 722 and 727 Front Street
No parking South side, from Columbia Avenue to Spencer Street
2 hour parking 4:30 A.M. to 2:00
P.M., Monday through Friday
Both sides, from Spencer Avenue west to a point 100 feet
east of the east right-of-way of Main Street
Gamble Drive 4 hour parking 6:00 A.M. to 1:00
P.M., weekdays except holidays
Both sides, Center Avenue to Kingston Avenue
Garfield Avenue No parking East side, Burlington Avenue to Route 53
No parking any time Both sides, Burlington Avenue to Ogden Avenue
Glenbrook Court No parking April 15 through July 15
East side, Coach House Road to the cul-de-sac at the north
end of Glenbrook Court
No parking between signs From the east lot line of 6356 to the west lot line of 6357
Glenbrook Court
Golfview Drive No parking East side, from Green Trails Drive to Sleepy Hollow Lane
No parking West side, from Green Trails Drive to a point 300 feet north
of Carriage Hill Road
No parking West side, Trinity Drive to Heritage Lane
Hawthorne Lane 4 hour parking 6:00 A.M. to 1:00
P.M., weekdays except holidays
Both sides
Hitchcock Avenue 4 hour parking 6:00 A.M. to 1:00
P.M., weekdays except holidays
Both sides, Center Avenue to Kingston Avenue
Indiana Avenue No parking Both sides, Ogden Avenue to railroad tracks
Jonquil Avenue No parking Both sides, Oakview Drive to Center Avenue
No parking Both sides, Oakview Drive to Main Street
Keller Street No parking Both sides, Ogden Avenue to Wellington Avenue
Kingston Avenue No parking Both sides, Front Street to Division Street
No parking Both sides, Front Street to Maple Avenue (school area)
No parking Both sides, Gamble Drive to Rolling Drive
Lacey Avenue No parking Both sides, from Main Street, 250 feet easterly
4 hour parking 6:00 A.M. to 1:00
P.M., weekdays except holidays
Both sides, from School Street and McKenzie Station Drive
west to dead end
Larkspur Lane No parking Both sides, Ohio Street north to Jonquil Avenue (school
crossing)
Leask Lane No parking Both sides, entire street where indicated
Lisle Place No parking Both sides, Route 53 to Main Street
Main Street No parking Both sides, Burlington Avenue to Route 53
No parking Both sides, from Warrenville Road south to Ogden Avenue
15 minute parking 1 stall in front of 4738 Main Street
1 stall in front of 4740 Main Street
2 stalls in front of 4726 Main Street
2 stalls in front of 4752 Main Street
2 hour parking 5:00 A.M. to 7:00
P.M., Monday through Friday
except where otherwise restricted
Both sides, Ogden Avenue to Burlington Avenue
McKenzie Station Drive 4 hour parking 6:00 A.M. to 1:00
P.M., weekdays except holidays
Both sides
McKinley Avenue No parking, stopping or standing Both sides, from Dumoulin Avenue 350 feet generally
southeasterly
4 hour parking Both sides, from Burlington Avenue 700 feet northerly
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 416/460
Middleton Avenue No parking, stopping or standing South side, Schwartz Avenue to Devon Avenue
No parking weekdays 11:00 A.M. to
2:00 P.M.
Both sides, Yackley Avenue to Winchester Avenue
Newport Drive No parking East side, Robin Lane south to the end of the street
No parking West side, Robin Lane south to the north side of the
driveway at 5300 Newport Drive
Oakhill Drive No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9:30 A.M.,
Monday through Friday
Both sides, from Yackley Avenue to Pennywood Drive
Oakview Drive No parking West side, Jonquil Avenue to Rolling Drive
Ogden Avenue No parking Both sides
Ohio Court No parking Both sides, from Ohio Street 400 feet easterly
Ohio Street No parking Both sides, from Yackley Avenue to Ohio Court
No parking North side, from Kingston Avenue to the west side of 740
Ohio Street
No parking South side, from Kingston Avenue to Larkspur Lane
No parking South side, from Yackley Avenue to Illinois Street
Old Tavern Road No parking South side, Beau Bien Boulevard to Fender Avenue
Patton Drive No parking Both sides, Maple Avenue north to dead end
Plank Road No parking Both sides, from Ogden Avenue to a point 122 feet south of
the south right-of-way line of Ogden Avenue
Ranier Drive No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9:30 A.M.,
weekdays except holidays
Both sides
Riedy Road No parking North side, Main Street to east property line of 1024 Riedy
Road
No parking South side, Main Street to Center Avenue
4 hour parking 6:00 A.M. to 1:00
P.M., weekdays except holidays
North side, Elm Street to east property line of 1024 Riedy
Road
4 hour parking 6:00 A.M. to 1:00
P.M., weekdays except holidays
South side, Elm Street to Center Avenue
Rielly Place No parking Both sides (only 1 posted)
River Bend Drive No parking Both sides
River Drive No parking West side, from Ogden Avenue north 200 feet
Riverview Drive No parking Both sides, from Short Street, south 1,020 feet
Robin Lane No parking Both sides
Rolling Drive No parking North side, Rolling Drive at Center Street, 400 feet either
side of crossing (school crossing)
No parking South side, Route 53 to Kingston Avenue
Route 53 No parking From Burlington Avenue to Maple Avenue
No parking (within 15 feet of
pavement)
Both sides, Warrenville Road to Maple Avenue
School Street No parking North side, from Spencer Avenue to east end of School
Street
No parking South side, from a point 400 feet east of Center Avenue to
the east end of School Street
No parking South side, from Spencer Avenue to Center Avenue
2 hour parking South side, from Center Avenue to a point 305 feet east of
Center Avenue
2 hour parking 5:00 A.M. to 7:00
P.M., Monday through Friday
Both sides, Main Street to Spencer Avenue
4 hour parking South side, from a point 305 feet east of Center Avenue to a
point 400 feet east of Center Avenue
Shasta Drive No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9:30 A.M.,
weekdays except holidays
Both sides
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 417/460
Short Street No parking Both sides, from Main Street to the DuPage River Bridge
No parking Both sides, Main Street to Route 53
No parking North side, from a point 315 feet west of the west end of
DuPage River Bridge to a point 390 feet west of the west
end of the DuPage River Bridge
No parking North side, from the DuPage River west to Ohio Court
No parking South side, from Ohio Court east to the east parking lot
access drive of the Lisle Park District Community Center
Southport Avenue No parking Both sides, Main Street to Route 53
4 hour parking 6:00 A.M. to 1:00
P.M., weekdays except holidays
Both sides, from Main Street east to Lacey Avenue
Spencer Avenue No parking Both sides, from Ogden Avenue to School Street
No parking East side, from a point 140 feet south of School Street to
Burlington Avenue
No parking East side of Spencer Avenue from Front Street to Division
Street
2 hour parking West side, from Front Street to Division Street
2 hour parking 5:00 A.M. to 7:00
P.M., Monday through Friday
East side, from School Street to a point 140 feet south
2 hour parking 5:00 A.M. to 7:00
P.M., Monday through Friday
West side, from School Street to Burlington Avenue
Spencer Avenue alley No parking Entire length both sides between Spencer and Center
Avenues and the entire length both sides behind 1007 Front
Street to the south end
Surrey Ridge Road No parking West side, from Abbeywood Drive to New Albany Road
No parking any time East side, from Abbeywood Drive to Camden Court
2 hour parking East side, from Camden Court to New Albany Road
Tall Tree Court No parking 7:00 A.M. to 9:30 A.M.,
Monday through Friday
Both sides, from Oakhill Drive north to the dead end
Tangley Oaks Trail No parking Both sides, between 3016 and 3037 Tangley Oaks Trail
Trinity Drive No parking North side, Scarlet Oak Lane to Golfview Drive
No parking South side, Stonehaven Way to Golfview Drive
University Lane No parking Both sides, Ohio Court to Academy Drive
Varsity Drive No parking Both sides
Wayfaring Lane No parking any time North side and west side
Weeping Willow Drive No parking any time North side, from Benedictine Parkway to a point opposite the
extension of the west curb line of Wayfaring Lane
No parking any time South side and east side
Wellington Avenue No parking Both sides, Keller Street to Fender Avenue
Wellington Court No parking Both sides
Western Avenue No parking Both sides
Western Court No parking Both sides
Winchester Avenue No parking any time Both sides, from Ogden Avenue to a point 500 feet north of
Ogden Avenue
No parking any time Both sides, from Ogden Avenue to Burlington Avenue
Yackley Avenue No parking Both sides, from Ogden Avenue southerly 750 feet from
centerline of Ogden Avenue and from Ogden Avenue
northerly 750 feet from centerline of Ogden Avenue
No parking 500 feet immediately north of Ogden Avenue
Yender Avenue No parking East side, Burlington Avenue to Ogden Avenue
No parking West side, Burlington Avenue to Middleton Avenue
No parking Monday through Friday
(except national holidays)
East side, Ogden Avenue to Middleton Avenue
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 418/460
(Ord. 2018-4779, 8-6-2018)
10-2-3: MANNER OF PARKING VEHICLES:
(A) Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway in the village shall be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels parallel to and within
twelve inches (12") of the right hand curb or as close thereto as practicable to the right hand edge of the right hand shoulder.
(B) Every vehicle parked in a compact car space shall not exceed the size limitation indicated by the posted restriction and shall not protrude or overhang
any space limitation marked on the pavement. (Ord. 92-2321, 10-19-1992)
(C) Any person failing to obey these restrictions shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
10-2-4: TIME LIMIT IN DESIGNATED PLACES:
(A) When And Where Prohibited:
1. Parking Prohibited During Snowfall: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any portion of any public street or highway in the Village during or after
any snowfall resulting in an accumulation of one inch (1") or more, and for a period thereafter of twenty four (24) hours, or within such further period
as may be reasonably required to complete snow removal operations.
2. All Night Parking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any portion of any public street or highway in the Village between the hours of
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
(B) Authority To Impound Vehicles: Whenever any vehicle is so parked illegally as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic or interfere with the sweeping
or repair of streets or removal of snow therefrom, the Chief of Police, or any person authorized by him, is hereby authorized to cause such vehicle to be
removed from the public street and conveyed by or under the direction of a member of the Police Department to an authorized garage. The Village
shall be entitled to the fees provided in subsection (C) of this section.
(C) Fees For Redemption: Before the owner or person entitled to the possession of any impounded or removed vehicle shall be permitted to remove the
same from the custody of the Chief of Police, or person authorized by him, he shall furnish satisfactory evidence of his identity and ownership of vehicle
and right of possession thereto, shall sign a receipt for the vehicle and in addition to the fine provided for herein, shall pay the fee as established by the
annual fee ordinance for such vehicle to cover the cost of towing or removal of such vehicle, and in addition thereto, the cost of storage charged by
such authorized garage at the prevailing rate for such storage. (Ord. 79-830, 1-16-1979)
(D) Central Business District: The total maximum time limit for parking a vehicle within the Central Business District shall be two (2) hours, with the
exception of Municipal Lot G, which shall be four (4) hours. No vehicle shall be moved from one (1) parking location to another parking location within
the Central Business District such that the vehicle is parked for a combined total of more than two (2) hours for the entire area, nor shall any vehicle be
moved between a parking location within the Central Business District and Municipal Lot G such that the maximum combined time limit of four (4) hours
is exceeded. The term "Central Business District" shall refer to that portion of the Village bounded by Ogden, Garfield, Division and Center. (Ord. 2003-
3439, 1-20-2003)
10-2-5: REGULATIONS UNDER VILLAGE AGREEMENTS:
The Village, pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1-7 and 5/11-209, has hereby entered into the following agreements and shall hereafter regulate
the parking of motor vehicles and the traffic thereof within the premises named in each respective agreement:
Agreement between the Village of Lisle and:
Arboretum Lakes III (Res. 2002-2167, 1-21-2002 - 1-21-2022).
Arboretum Lakes West (Res. 2002-2166, 1-21-2002 - 1-21-2022).
Arboretum Village Apartments (Res. 2016-3586, 9-13-2016 - 9-12-2036).
Dana Automotive Systems Group, LLC (Res. 2008-2876, 04-07-2008 - 04-06-2028).
Four Lakes Village (Res. 2006-2725, 10-2-2006 - 10-1-2026).
Hatch Farm (Res. 2000-1985, 4-17-2000 - 4-16-2019).
Hatch Farm (River Bend Subdivision) (Res. 99-1828, 5-3-1999 - 5-2-2019).
Highpoint in Green Trails (Res. 2016-3583, 8-15-2016 - 8-14-2036).
Hyatt Lisle at Corporetum (Res. 2002-2177, 3-18-2002 - 3-18-2022).
Lisle Apartments, Franklin Properties, Inc. (Res. 2008-2938, 11-17-2008 - 11-16-2028).
Lisle Community School District 202 (Res. 2017-3616, 2-6-2017 - 2-5-2037).
Lisle Library District (Res. 2016-3565, 6-20-2016 - 6-19-2036).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 419/460
Main Street Complex (Res. 2010-3082, 11-15-2010 - 11-14-2030).
Main Street Market/Lisle shopping (Res. 99-1800, 3-1-1999 - 2-28-2019).
Maple Terrace Shopping Center, north of Maple Avenue and east of Route 53 (Ord. 98-1670, 3-31-1998 - 4-30-2018).
McKenzie Station (Res. 2015-3443, 4-7-2015 - 4-6-2035).
River Bend Townhomes (Ord. 2005-3922, 4-18-2005 - 4-17-2025).
(Ord. 2001-3356, 11-19-2001; amd. Ord. 2002-3374, 2-4-2002; Ord. 2002-3393, 4-15-2002; Ord. 2004-3849, 6-21-2004; Ord. 2005-3922, 5-2-2005; Ord.
2005-3942, 7-18-2005; Ord. 2006-4062, 10-2-2006; Ord. 2007-4131, 8-20-2007; Ord. 2007-4140, 9-17-2007; Ord. 2008-4171, 1-7-2008; Ord. 2008-4192,
4-7-2008; Ord. 2008-4211, 7-21-2008; Ord. 2008-4223, 9-8-2008; Ord. 2008-4232, 11-17-2008; Ord. 2009-4237, 1-12-2009; Ord. 2009-4246, 3-2-2009;
Ord. 2010-4305, 3-15-2010; Ord. 2010-4349, 11-15-2010; Ord. 2011-4373, 3-21-2011; Ord. 2011-4407, 10-17-2011; Ord. 2015-4574, 4-6-2015; Ord. 2016-
4661, 6-20-2016; Ord. 2016-4670, 8-15-2016; Ord. 2016-4675, 9-12-2016; Ord. 2016-4679, 10-3-2016; Ord. 2017-4701, 2-6-2017; Ord. 2017-4713, 3-20-
2017)
10-2-6: PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS2:
10-2-6-1: EXEMPTIONS TO PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a physically handicapped person pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-616 or to a disabled
veteran pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-609 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, effective July 1, 1970, as amended3, is hereby declared to be
exempt from any ordinance imposing time limitations on parking in a business district; but otherwise is subject to the laws which prohibit parking in "no
stopping", "no standing" zones in front of or near fire hydrants, driveways, public building entrances and exits, bus stops and loading areas, and is
prohibited from parking where the motor vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard and the motor vehicle must be moved at the instruction and request of a law
enforcement officer to a location designated by the officer. Any motor vehicle bearing registration plates specified in this section or similar registration
plates issued under the Vehicle Codes of other States, as amended, or handicapped motorist's cards issued by the Village, as evidence that the vehicle is
operated by or for a handicapped person or disabled veteran, may park, in addition to any other lawful place, in any parking place specifically reserved, by
posting of an official sign, for such vehicles. Parking privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to those persons to whom the special registration
plates or cards are issued and to qualified operators acting under such person's express direction while the disabled person is present. No person shall
use any area for parking of any motor vehicle pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, effective July 1, 1970, as
amended, or where an official sign controlling such area expressly prohibits parking at any time or during certain hours. (Ord. 80-952, 9-16-1980)
10-2-6-2: HANDICAPPED MOTORISTS CARDS:
The Business Office Manager shall issue, without charge, upon application of any handicapped person or disabled veteran, a special handicapped
motorist card furnished by the Illinois Secretary of State, pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, for the purpose of allowing said card to be
used and displayed on a vehicle being used to transport said handicapped person or disabled veteran, but not owned or displaying a special handicapped
or disabled veteran's license plate, so as to identify said vehicle and entitle it to all the parking privileges afforded to a vehicle possessing such special
handicapped or disabled veteran's license plates as hereinbefore provided. Such card shall be issued only to handicapped persons or disabled veterans
and the same shall be displayed by hanging such card from the rearview mirror of the vehicle and shall allow the vehicle to utilize special, handicapped
parking privileges when used to transport such handicapped person or disabled veteran. The Village shall issue only temporary handicapped motorist
cards. Requests for permanent cards shall be directed to the Illinois Secretary of State.
For purposes of this section, a "physically handicapped person" shall mean every natural person who is unable to walk two hundred feet (200') or more
unassisted by another person or without the aid of a walker, crutches, brace, prosthetic device, or a wheelchair or without great difficulty or discomfort due
to the following impairments: neurologic, orthopedic, respiratory, cardiac, arthritic disorder, blindness, or the loss of function or absence of a limb or limbs.
All applicants shall complete an application form as provided by the business office manager. Such form includes information which shall be completed by
the applicant and his or her physician. The physician shall designate whether the handicap is temporary or permanent. If temporary, the physician must
indicate the length of the handicap. A temporary card will be issued for the designated period not to exceed ninety (90) days. If an extension is needed, the
applicant must complete a new application and furnish proof of the reason for such extension from the attending physician. No handicapped motorist
vehicle card shall be transferable. Use of any such card by any person other than the handicapped person to whom it is issued except as provided herein,
shall be deemed a violation of this section and shall render the card void. Any abuse of the card or unauthorized use shall render any such card subject to
revocation. No handicapped motorist card shall be issued until an application form is completed and received by the business office manager. Providing
false information in the application filed with the business office manager shall be deemed a violation of this section. (Ord. 2000-3185, 2-21-2000)
10-2-6-3: PROHIBITIONS:
(A) It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing registration plates to a physically handicapped or to a disabled veteran, pursuant to
the applicable sections of the Illinois motor vehicle code, or similar registration plates duly issued under the motor vehicle code of another state, or
handicapped motorist card issued by the village or such decal, cards, or devices issued by other municipalities pursuant to the authority granted to
them under the Illinois vehicle code as the local authorities of other municipalities deem proper as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a
handicapped person or disabled veteran, in any parking place for motor vehicles bearing such registration, plates, decals, cards or devices. Violation of
this section shall carry a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
(B) The parking spaces located at or near the addresses listed below shall be designated for handicapped parking. However, said list shall not be
interpreted as being inclusive of all such spaces within the village, nor shall such designation limit the effect or enforcement of handicapped parking
prohibitions in locations other than listed below:
4710 Main Street
4739 Main Street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 420/460
(Ord. 88-1652, 3-21-1988)
10-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person convicted in a court of law of any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each
offense. The procedure set forth in section 9-4-22 of this code may be used to settle and compromise a violation. (Ord. 2003-3439, 1-20-2003)
Chapter 3
PARKING METER REGULATIONS
10-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a street or in a village owned off street parking lot, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading and unloading merchandise or in obedience
to traffic regulations, signs or signals or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle.
PARKING METER: Includes any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority
of this chapter. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established by the village, and when operated shall at all
times indicate the balance of legal parking time, and at the expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
PARKING METER SPACE: Any space within a parking meter zone adjacent to a parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking of a single
vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb, on the surface of the street or on the surface of the off street parking lot adjacent to or
adjoining the parking meters.
PARKING METER ZONE: Includes any village owned off street parking lot or any restricted street or portion thereof upon which parking meters are
installed and in operation. (Ord. 524, 8-6-1974)
10-3-2: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 524, 8-6-1974)
10-3-3: PARKING METER ZONES:
(A) Zones Established: The named and described areas, streets or portions of streets shall be established as zones and set forth in the parking meter
schedule as follows:
Zone I Front Street, north side, Spencer Avenue to Center Street.
Zone II Burlington Avenue, both sides, Spencer Avenue to Center Avenue.
Other areas, streets, portions of streets may hereafter be included in said schedule by amendment thereto.
(B) Parking Meter Zone Time Limits: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, time limits of parking meter zones shall be as follows:
Zone I 15 hours maximum per day, 9:00 A.M. to 12:00 midnight
Zone II 18 hours maximum per day, 4:30 A.M. to 12:00 midnight
(C) Parking Meter Zone Fees: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, the fees are hereby established by the annual fee ordinance and shall be
paid for use of a parking meter space. (Ord. 2005-3930, 6-6-2005)
10-3-4: DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES:
The superintendent of streets is hereby directed and authorized to mark off individual parking spaces in the parking zones designated and described in the
parking meter schedule and in such other zones as may hereafter be established, said parking spaces to be designated by lines painted or durably
marked on the curbing or surface of the street or off street parking lot. At each space so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way
that said vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated. (Ord. 524, 8-6-1974)
10-3-5: LOCATION, PLACEMENT OF METERS:
In the parking meter zones the superintendent of streets shall cause parking meters to be installed upon the street or off street parking lot surface, curb or
sidewalk immediately adjacent to the parking spaces provided for in section 10-3-4of this chapter, said installation to be placed not more than two feet (2')
from the curb nor more than four feet (4') from the front line of the parking space as indicated. Each device shall be so set as to display a signal showing
legal parking upon the deposit of the appropriate coin or coins, lawful money of the United States, for the period of time prescribed by this chapter. Each
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 421/460
device shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of the lawful time limit it will indicate by a proper visible signal that the lawful parking period has
expired and in such cases the right of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease and the operator, owner, possessor or manager thereof shall be
subject to the penalties hereinafter provided. (Ord. 524, 8-6-1974)
10-3-6: SUPERVISION OF METERS:
The chief of police shall be responsible for the regulation, control, operation, maintenance and use of parking meters within the village. (Ord. 524, 8-6-
1974)
10-3-7: OPERATION OF METERS:
Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the village police department, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic
control sign or signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in any parking space alongside or next to which a parking meter is located, the operator of such
vehicle shall, upon entering the said parking meter space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in said meter such coin of the United States as is
required for such parking meter and as is designated by proper directions on the meter, and when required by the directions on the meter, the operator of
such vehicle, after the deposit of the proper token, coin or coins, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism on such meter in accordance with
directions appearing thereon, and failure to deposit such proper token or coin, and to set the timing mechanism in operation when so required shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. Upon the deposit of such coin (and the setting of the timing mechanism in operation when so required) the parking
space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of time which has been prescribed for the part of the street or off street parking lot in
which said parking space is located; provided, that any person placing a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter which indicates that unused
time has been left in the meter by the previous occupant of the space, shall not be required to deposit a coin or token so long as his occupancy of said
space does not exceed the indicated unused parking time. If said vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time limit set
for such parking space, and if the meter shall indicate such illegal parking, then, and in that event, such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime
and beyond the period of legal parking time, and such parking shall be deemed aviolation of this chapter. (Ord. 524, 8-6-1974)
10-3-8: PARKING TIME LIMITS:
(A) No person shall park a vehicle in a parking meter space for a period of time in excess of the maximum parking time limit for said space as set forth in
subsection 10-3-3(B), "Parking Meter Zone Time Limits", of this chapter, except as additionally provided for in this section.
(B) Parking or standing a vehicle in a parking meter space shall be lawful upon the deposit in the parking meter adjacent thereto of the required coins as
referenced in subsection 10-3-3(C) of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-3931, 6-6-2005)
(C) Parking meters shall be operated and parking shall be allowed only according to the following schedule:
Zone I 9:00 A.M. to 12:00 midnight
Zone II 4:30 A.M. to 12:00 midnight, Monday through Friday
(Ord. 2006-4023, 6-5-2006)
10-3-9: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any person to1:
(A) Cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by, such person to be parked overtime, or beyond the period of legal
parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein described, or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of parking beyond
the maximum legal parking time for the particular parking meter zone.
(B) Permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while said meter is displaying a signal indicating that the
vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking space.
(C) Park any vehicle across any line or marking of any parking meter space or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area
designated by such lines or markings.
(D) Deface, injure, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this chapter.
(E) Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug device or metal substance or any other substitute for lawful coins. (Ord. 524, 8-6-1974)
10-3-10: OVERTIME PARKING NOTICES; FINES2:
Any vehicle which remains parked in parking meter space after the meter indicates illegal parking shall be considered as parking overtime, and the police
officers of the village are authorized and directed to attach to any such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked
in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 83-1136, 8-2-1983)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 422/460
10-3-11: COLLECTION OF METER MONIES:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to designate some member or members of the police department to make regular collections of the money
deposited in parking meters and it shall be the duty of such persons so designated to remove from said meters the coins so deposited in the meters and to
deliver coins to the business office manager who shall count such coins and deposit the same with the village treasurer. (Ord. 83-1136, 8-2-1983; amd.
Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
Chapter 4
MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS
10-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
MOTOR VEHICLE: A machine propelled by mechanical power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and used to
transport person(s) or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, motorized bicycles,
tractors and wagons.
PERMITTED VEHICLE: That vehicle registered in the village business office, for which a permit is issued.
In addition, only those vehicles which are validly registered, as required by the laws of the state of residence of the vehicle owner, may be permitted
vehicles under this definition.
PERMITTEE: The person to whom a permit is issued for the right to park in commuter parking lots as the parking lots have been established for municipal
purposes. (Ord. 92-2310, 9-8-1992; amd. Ord. 94-2534, 6-6-1994; Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994; Ord. 2003-3794, 11-17-2003)
10-4-2: MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS ESTABLISHED:
There are hereby established municipally owned and leased off street parking lots, as follows:
LOT
A
That property lying south of properties commonly known as 1014 and 1018 Burlington Avenue and north of the Burlington Northern right of
way and lying west of Spencer Avenue to the curb line east of Main Street.
LOT
B
That property lying south of Burlington Avenue and north of the Burlington Northern right of way and lying west of Center Avenue and east of
Spencer Avenue.
LOT
C
That property lying south of Burlington Avenue and north of the Burlington Northern right of way and lying west of a line running south of the
former Lisle depot and east of Center Avenue.
LOT
D
That property lying south of the Burlington Northern right of way north of Front Street and lying west of the village of Lisle commuter station
and west to the curb line just east of the Main Street tunnel.
LOT
E
That property lying north of the Burlington Northern right of way, east of the Burlington Northern/Lisle train station and west of the St.
Joseph's Creek culvert.
LOT
G
That property known as 4717 through 4719 Garfield Avenue, lying between Ogden Avenue and Burlington Avenue. (Ord. 2003-3461, 5-19-
2003)
10-4-3: PERMITS REQUIRED; FEES:
(A) General: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in the above described village parking lots without
first obtaining a permit. Certain spaces in certain lots may be, from time to time, designated by signs for purposes other than commuter parking or
public parking purposes. The uses for which certain spaces may be designated shall include, but not be limited to, areas for village employees,
handicapped parking, loading zones, Burlington Northern agent parking, visitors' parking, police use, or other specific uses as indicated by signs. For
regulations pertaining to bicycles, refer to chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 2005-3965, 11-7-2005)
1. Validity Of Permits; Transfer Prohibited:
(a) All permits required by this section shall be valid only for the permitted vehicle, which shall be owned or leased by the permittee and shall have a
state license number assigned thereto. Two (2) vehicles may be registered under the same permit; provided, that both vehicles are owned or
leased by the permittee and are registered in the village business office under the permittee's name. However, only one of said two (2) vehicles
shall be allowed to use the permit at any one time.
(b) The transfer of any permit required herein between vehicles other than those registered to the permittee is strictly prohibited. Any attempt to
transfer any permit required herein shall result in an automatic revocation of said permit and the imposition of a fine as hereinafter set forth.
Further, if any person violates this subsection (A)1 while he is on the permit waiting list, he shall be automatically placed at the end of the waiting
list for a parking permit in addition to paying any applicable fines.
2. Permit Issuance: The village reserves the right to issue permits based upon rules which, in the opinion of the corporate authorities, further the public
health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare of its citizens, and which, in the opinion of the corporate authorities, are in the best interests of the village.
Such rules may include giving priority to village employees, village residents or any other group of persons determined appropriate by the corporate
authorities of the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 423/460
3. Fee Increase: The village reserves the right to increase the fee due for a parking permit at any time prior to the effective date of the permit.
Notification of the increase and the effective date thereof shall be deemed given upon passage of the ordinance modifying the fee.
4. Payment Of Fee Difference Required: Holders of permits which are not yet effective at the time a fee increase ordinance is passed shall pay to the
village the difference between the new fee and amount previously paid for the permit. (Ord. 92-2310, 9-8-1992; amd. Ord. 94-2534, 6-6-1994)
(B) Categories: For purposes of issuing the parking permits prescribed herein, there shall be the following categories:
Category 1 Lots A, B, C, D and E.
Lots A, B, D, and E shall be operated as commuter parking lots for which quarterly parking permits are issued. A portion of lot C shall be operated as a
commuter parking lot for which quarterly parking permits are issued. Other portions of lot C shall be designated by signage as employee parking and
village hall visitor parking. When space is available, daily permits shall be issued for portions of lot C and lot E in a manner as determined appropriate
by the business office manager.
Category 4 Lot G.
The aforementioned lot shall be used by the owners and operators of retail and other businesses and residents of multi-family units located in the
central business district. As used in this subsection, the term central business district shall refer to that portion of the village bounded by Ogden,
Garfield, Division and Center. In the issuance of parking permits for lot G, priority shall be given to such owners and operators of businesses and
residents of multi-family units; however, if spaces remain available after being offered to business owners and operators and residents of multi-family
units, the business office manager may issue permits to others, or provide free public parking as deemed appropriate by the business office manager.
(C) Fees And Purchasing Procedure:
1. Parking permits shall be obtained from the village of Lisle business office manager. Fees shall be as established by the annual fee ordinance. (Ord.
2011-4382, 5-2-2011)
2. There is hereby established the following procedures for purchase of quarterly parking permits: (Ord. 92-2310, 9-8-1992; amd. Ord. 94-2534, 6-6-
1994)
(a) Permits shall be paid for in full and obtained from the business office manager prior to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the last village business day of
the quarter preceding the quarter for which the permit is to apply.
(b) Failure to pay for and obtain a parking permit by five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the last business day of a quarter shall be deemed to be a forfeiture of
the permittee's parking permit without further notice on the part of the village. However, if the permittee pays for and obtains the parking permit
within the first five (5) business days of the quarter to which the permit applies, the business office manager, upon the payment of a late fee in the
amount as established by the annual fee ordinance, may reinstate and reissue the permit. Further, if the permittee pays for and obtains the parking
permit within six (6) to fifteen (15) business days after the first day of the quarter to which it applies, the business office manager, upon the
payment of a late fee in the amount as established by the annual fee ordinance, may reinstate and reissue the permit. Upon the passage of fifteen
(15) days following the first day of the quarter, the permittee forfeits all rights and privileges whatsoever in the permit and must reapply for a permit
pursuant to subsection (D) of this section. (Ord. 2003-3461, 5-19-2003)
(c) Failure to pay to the village any increase in parking permit fees, as set forth in subsection (A)3 of this section, shall render the parking permit void.
(Ord. 92-2310, 9-8-1992; amd. Ord. 94-2534, 6-6-1994)
(d) Any person who has failed to pay any ticket issued pursuant to this chapter, and due pursuant to the terms of this code, by five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
on the last village business day of the quarter to which the current permit applies, shall be denied the issuance of a permit for the new quarter until
such tickets are paid in full. (Ord. 2003-3461, 5-19-2003)
(D) Permit Application: Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle desiring a permit for such vehicle, shall file a permit application with the village business
office setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the description of the vehicle for which the permit is desired, and the state license number of
the vehicle for which the permit is desired. The applicant shall furnish proof of ownership and/or registration if it is requested by the village. Upon
satisfactory completion and acceptance of the application and payment of the applicable permit fees hereinafter provided, the village may issue a
permit. Upon the issuance of a permit by the village business office, the applicant shall be permitted to park said registered vehicle in the appropriate
village parking lot until the expiration or revocation of such permit. In the event that no commuter parking permits are available for sale, the village of
Lisle may at its discretion maintain a wait list for commuter parking permits as provided for in subsection (D)1 of this section. If any applicant uses or
attempts to use a permit in connection with the parking of a vehicle not registered with the village business office; or if any applicant uses or attempts to
use a permit in connection with the parking of a vehicle not owned or leased by said applicant; or if any applicant uses or attempts to use a permit in
any manner not authorized by this chapter, the applicant shall be automatically placed at the end of the waiting list, the permit will be revoked and fines
shall be imposed as hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 2010-4357, 12-6-2010)
1. In the event that no commuter parking permits are available for sale, the village of Lisle may at its discretion maintain a wait list for commuter parking
permits. In order to be placed on the wait list an application must be submitted on a form provided by the business office and a fee paid as required
by the annual fee ordinance. The applicant must be the individual in whose name the permit will be issued. As permits are offered to those on the
wait list, forty five percent (45%) of available permits must be offered only to incorporated village of Lisle residents in chronological order, with those
residents on the list the longest being offered permits first, and the remaining fifty five percent (55%) of available permits offered without regard for
residency in chronological order, with those on the list the longest being offered permits first. (Ord. 2014-4540, 8-18-2014)
(E) Refund: Any owner or operator of a motor vehicle having secured such a permit from the business office manager as provided in subsection (D) of this
section may obtain a partial refund according to the schedule as established by the annual fee ordinance if the owner or operator desires to cancel said
permit at some time prior to its expiration. (Ord. 92-2310, 9-8-1992; amd. Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
(F) Display Of Permit: It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle in any of the above described village parking lots without displaying the permit required
by this chapter in the following manner: 1) parking permits that are required to be affixed to the windshield shall be prominently displayed in the lower
right hand corner (passenger's side) of the front windshield within a twelve inch (12") radius of said lower right hand corner; 2) parking permits that are
required to be hung from the rearview mirror shall be hung from the rearview mirror in a prominently displayed manner, and in no event shall such
permits be affixed to the rearview mirror or otherwise displayed in any manner contrary to this subsection. It shall be the permittee's obligation to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 424/460
securely affix or hang the required permit in the designated location as provided in this subsection. (Ord. 2014-4540, 8-18-2014)
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no permit need be acquired nor displayed while parking in lots B, C, D, and E for the period starting at two o'clock (2:00)
P.M. to two o'clock (2:00) A.M. each day Monday through Thursday and from two o'clock (2:00) P.M. Friday to two o'clock (2:00) A.M. Monday.
However, any vehicles parked at any location upon a municipal parking lot shall comply with all other parking restrictions and time limits as set forth in
this chapter. (Ord. 2016-4623, 1-4-2016)
(G) Revenue: All revenues derived from the sale of permits as provided under this section shall be deposited in the general corporate fund of the village.
(Ord. 92-2310, 9-8-1992; amd. Ord. 94-2534, 6-6-1994)
(H) Penalties, Fines:
1. Failure To Display Permit: Failure to display a permit on any permitted vehicle shall be determined to be a violation for which a fine as established by
the annual fee ordinance shall be assessed for each offense. (Ord. 2003-3439, 1-20-2003)
2. Failure To Secure Permit: Parking in any municipal parking lot without a valid permit shall be deemed a violation for which a fine as established by
the annual fee ordinance shall be assessed for each offense. (Ord. 2003-3461, 5-19-2003)
10-4-4: DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES:
Parking spaces shall be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the surface of the parking lot. (Ord. 92-2310, 9-8-1992)
10-4-5: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to parking upon municipal parking lots, as regulated by this chapter: (Ord. 2003-3439, 1-20-2003)
(A) It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in more than one parking space as designated by curb and striping. The fine for violating this subsection shall be
as established by the annual fee ordinance.
(B) Certain parking spaces in the aforesaid parking lots shall be designated as parking spaces for disabled persons. Qualifications for parking in aforesaid
spaces shall be secured by the ability of the permittee to obtain a disabled license plate for the vehicle for which the permit is secured from the
secretary of state. Violation of this subsection shall carry a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. A citation written for a
violation of this section may be settled and compromised according to the procedures set forth in section 9-4-22 of this code and is subject to increase
pursuant to subsection 9-4-22(F) of this code. (Ord. 2003-3461, 5-19-2003)
(C) It shall be prohibited in the aforesaid parking lots to back a vehicle into a parking space except for police emergency vehicles. Violation of this
subsection shall carry a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense.
(D) It shall be unlawful to park, stand, or stop a vehicle in a manner which blocks the progress of other vehicles through any aisle, or which blocks a
parking space. The foregoing shall not prohibit temporary stopping of a vehicle if it is done for the purpose of waiting for the immediate exit of another
vehicle from a parking space, or if the stopped vehicle's progress is impeded by traffic. The fine for violating this subsection shall be as established by
the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 2003-3439, 1-20-2003)
10-4-6: HOURS LIMITED:
The following time limits shall apply to parking upon municipal parking lots, as regulated by this chapter:
(A) It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in any of the parking lots described in section 10-4-2 of this chapter from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. until four
thirty o'clock (4:30) A.M. except in spaces that have been conspicuously marked with signs stating that overnight parking is permitted, or as provided
for in subsection (D) of this section. Overnight parking in designated spaces in lot B shall only be allowed from two o'clock (2:00) P.M. Friday through
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. Monday.
(B) No vehicle shall be parked in a space designated for overnight parking for more than twenty four (24) hours in any seventy two (72) hour period, except
that there is no such time restriction from two o'clock (2:00) P.M. Friday through two o'clock (2:00) A.M. Monday.
(C) Visitor parking in lot C shall be limited to the number of hours specified by signage prior to two o'clock (2:00) P.M. on days that the village hall is open,
except that the business office manager may issue parking permits for visitor spaces that allow for parking without such posted time limits. Time limits
specified by signage for visitor parking spaces are not in effect after two o'clock (2:00) P.M. Monday through Friday, and on days that the village hall is
not open.
(D) At the discretion of the business office manager, overnight parking permits may be issued for certain parking spaces in lot C or lot G.
(E) Certain spaces in lot G shall be designated by signage as free four (4) hour parking. (Ord. 2011-4382, 5-2-2011)
10-4-7: COLLECTION OF PERMIT FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 425/460
For purposes of collection of permit fees in designated areas, only the aforementioned provisions shall exclude the collection of permit fees for the periods
set forth in subsection 10-4-3(F) of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-3461, 5-19-2003; amd. Ord. 2003-3794, 11-17-2003)
10-4-8: APPEAL PROCESS:
Whenever the village revokes or refuses to grant a permit, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this chapter do not apply, or that the true intent and
meaning of this chapter have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant or person affected may appeal from that decision to the board of
appeals, consisting of the village manager, the chief of police and the street superintendent, by written notice filed in the office of the business office
manager within fifteen (15) days from the date of the decision appealed. The board of appeals shall call a hearing on the appeal within fifteen (15) days
after receipt of the notice of appeal. The board shall render a decision within no more than five (5) days after completing such hearing. Nothing herein shall
restrict the village from seeking immediate enforcement of the regulations of this chapter in court, where the hazard involved requires such action. This
section shall not be interpreted to grant jurisdiction to the board of appeals over claims pertaining to the validity or enforceability of pending citations issued
by the village for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 94-2563, 8-1-1994; amd. Ord. 94-2583, 9-19-1994)
10-4-9: PENALTIES:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-
1996)
Chapter 5
TRAFFIC MOVEMENT REGULATIONS
10-5-1: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The following streets and alleys are hereby designated for one-way traffic only:
(A) Columbia Avenue from Front Street to Division Street, northbound traffic only.
(B) Middleton Avenue from Schwartz Avenue to Devon, westbound traffic only. (Ord. 90-2031, 2-19-1990)
10-5-2: STOP AND YIELD SIGNS:
Stop signs and yield signs shall be erected at the following named street intersections, and any person failing to obey any of the signs erected pursuant to
this section shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
(A) Stop Signs:
Abbeywood Drive at College Road 2-way stop
Abbeywood Drive at Naper Boulevard 1-way stop
Academy Drive at Ohio Street 1-way stop
Adler Court at Pennywood Drive 1-way stop
Alley west of Main at Burlington Avenue 1-way stop
Alta Court at Sun Valley Road 2-way stop
Angel Lane at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Arborview Drive at Ogden Avenue 1-way stop
Ashley Circle (east) at Burlington Avenue 1-way stop
Ashley Circle (west) at Burlington Avenue 1-way stop
Aspen Road at Breckenridge Road 1-way stop
Aspen Road at Sun Valley Road 1-way stop
Aster Court at Meadow Lane 1-way stop
Atwater Court at Burlington Avenue 1-way stop
Auvergne Avenue at Chicago Avenue 3-way stop
Auvergne Avenue at Odgen Avenue 1-way stop
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 426/460
Barkridge Court at Pennywood Drive 1-way stop
Barnwall Court at Ohio Street 1-way stop
Basswood Drive (north) at Arborview Drive 1-way stop
Basswood Drive (south) at Arborview Drive 1-way stop
Bayside Court at Pennywood Drive 1-way stop
Beau Bien Boulevard at Burlington Avenue 2-way stop
Beau Bien Boulevard at Ogden Avenue 2-way stop
Beau Bien Boulevard at Old Tavern Road 3-way stop
Benedictine Parkway at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Berkshire Court at Valley Forge Road 1-way stop
Black Partridge Lane at Old Tavern Road 1-way stop
Blackhawk Lane at Old Tavern Road 1-way stop
Bloomfield Drive at Green Trails Drive 1-way stop
Bluebell Court at Westview Lane 1-way stop
Bonita Court at Normandy Drive 1-way stop
Bordeaux Place at Normandy Drive 1-way stop
Breckenridge Road at Green Trails Drive 1-way stop
Brighton Court at Longview Drive 1-way stop
Brittany Drive at Fender Road 1-way stop
Brittany Drive at Old Tavern Road 1-way stop
Brookwood Road at Golfview Drive 1-way stop
Burgundy Place at St. Tropez Place 1-way stop
Burlington Avenue at Center Avenue 4-way stop
Burlington Avenue at Schwartz Avenue 3-way stop
Burlington Avenue at Yackley Avenue 2-way stop
Burlington Avenue eastbound at Radcliff Road 1-way stop
Burlington Avenue westbound at Yender Avenue 1-way stop
Burnham Street at Burlington Avenue 1-way stop
Burr Oak Road at Robin Lane 1-way stop
Bush Street at Chelsea Avenue 1-way stop
Bush Street at Kingston Avenue 1-way stop
Cabot Drive at Corporate West Drive (2443 Corporate West Drive) 2-way stop
Cabot Drive at Forbes Drive 1-way stop
Camden Court at Surrey Ridge Road 1-way stop
Candlewood Court at Oak Hill Drive 1-way stop
Canterbury Lane at Leask Lane 1-way stop
Cape Cod Court at Stonebrook Road 1-way stop
Carriage Hill Road at Golfview Drive 2-way stop
Carriage Hill Road at Ridgewood Road 1-way stop
Cascade Drive at Maple Avenue 1-way stop
Cascara Lane (north) at Hatch Lane 1-way stop
Cascara Lane (south) at Hatch Lane 1-way stop
Center Avenue at Division Street 1-way stop
Center Avenue at Front Street 1-way stop
Center Avenue at Maple Avenue 1-way stop
Center Avenue at Ogden Avenue 1-way stop
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 427/460
Center Avenue at Riedy Road 1-way stop
Center Avenue at Rolling Drive 1-way stop
Center Avenue at School Street 4-way stop
Chateau Place at Old Tavern Road 1-way stop
Chatfield Lane at Golfview Drive 1-way stop
Chippewa Court at Old Tavern Road 1-way stop
Christian Lane at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Coach House Road at New Albany Road 1-way stop
Collegewood Court at Old College Road 1-way stop
Columbia Avenue at Division Street northbound 1-way stop
Columbia Avenue at Front Street northbound 1-way stop
Columbia Avenue at Riedy Road 1-way stop
Commuter train parking lot B at Center Avenue 1-way stop
Concorde Place at Old Tavern Road 1-way stop
Cypress Court at Ohio Street 2-way stop
Deerpath Court at Carriage Hill Road 1-way stop
Devon Avenue at Burlington Avenue 2-way stop
Devon Avenue at Middleton Avenue 1-way stop
Devon Avenue at Ogden Avenue 2-way stop
Division Street at Kingston Avenue 1-way stop
Division Street at Main Street 1-way stop
Driftwood Court at Oak Hill Drive 1-way stop
Dumoulin Avenue at Burlington Avenue 1-way stop
Edgebrooke Drive at Leask Lane 1-way stop
Eisenhower Lane at Burr Oak Road 1-way stop
Eisenhower Lane at Patton Drive 2-way stop
Fender Avenue at Burlington Avenue 1-way stop
Fender Road at Ogden Avenue 2-way stop
Fender Road at Ridgeland Avenue 3-way stop
Fernwood Drive at Breckenridge Road 2-way stop
Fernwood Drive at Green Trails Drive 1-way stop
Forbes Drive at Warrenville Road 1-way stop
Four Lakes Drive at Lakeshore Drive northbound 1-way stop
Front Street at Kingston Avenue westbound 1-way stop
Front Street at Main Street 2-way stop
Gamble Drive at Center Avenue 1-way stop
Gamble Drive at Westview Lane 1-way stop
Garden Drive at Fernwood Drive 1-way stop
Garden Drive at Green Trails Drive 1-way stop
Garfield Avenue at Burlington Avenue 1-way stop
Garfield Avenue at Route 53 1-way stop
Glenbrook Court at Coach House Road 1-way stop
Green Trails Drive at Carriage Hill Road southbound, eastbound, westbound 3-way stop
Green Trails Drive at Golfview Road 1-way stop
Grenoble Court at Breckenridge Road 1-way stop
Hampshire Court at Surrey Ridge Road 1-way stop
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 428/460
Handley Court at Handley Drive 1-way stop
Handley Drive at Burnham Street 1-way stop
Hanover Court at Valley Forge Road 1-way stop
Hasting Lane at Lexington Road 1-way stop
Hasting Lane at Valley Forge Road 1-way stop
Hatch Lane at Spruce Lane 1-way stop
Hatch Lane at Warrenville Road 1-way stop
Hawthorne Lane at Main Street 1-way stop
Heritage Lane at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Heritage Lane at Golfview Drive 1-way stop
Hickory Drive at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Hitchcock Avenue at Center Avenue 1-way stop
Hitchcock Avenue at Yackley Avenue 1-way stop
Illinois Avenue at Ohio Street 2-way stop
Indiana Avenue at Ohio Street 2-way stop
Innsbrook Court at Breckenridge Road 1-way stop
Inverness Road at Center Avenue 1-way stop
Inverness Road at Kingston Avenue 2-way stop
Inverness Road at Larkspur Lane 2-way stop
Ivanhoe Avenue at Ogden Avenue 1-way stop
Ivy Drive at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Jonquil Avenue at Main Street 1-way stop
Karns Road at Ogden Avenue 1-way stop
Keller Street at Burlington Avenue 1-way stop
Keller Street at Ogden Avenue 1-way stop
Kingston Avenue at Gamble Drive 4-way stop
Kingston Avenue at Hitchcock Avenue 4-way stop
Kingston Avenue at Maple Avenue 1-way stop
Kingston Avenue at Ogden Avenue 1-way stop
Kingston Avenue at Riedy Road 4-way stop
Kingston Avenue at Rolling Drive 4-way stop
Knollwood Court at Surrey Ridge Road 1-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Center Avenue 3-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Devon Avenue 2-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Main Street 2-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Odgen Avenue 2-way stop
Lacey Avenue at River Drive 2-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Route 53 1-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Schwartz Avenue 2-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Winchester Avenue 2-way stop
Lacey Avenue at Yackley Avenue 1-way stop
Lakewood Drive at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Larkspur Lane at Maple Avenue 1-way stop
Leask Lane at Warrenville Road 1-way stop
Lexington Road at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Lexington Road at Green Trails Drive 1-way stop
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 429/460
Lillian Court at Leask Lane 1-way stop
Lincoln Place at Middleton Avenue 1-way stop
Lisle Place at Main Street 1-way stop
Lisle Place at Route 53 1-way stop
Lisle police station at Route 53 (5040 Lincoln Avenue) 1-way stop
Lisle police station east parking lot at Short Street 1-way stop
Lisle police station west parking lot at Short Street 1-way stop
Longview Drive (east) at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Longview Drive (west) at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Maple Court at Maple Avenue 1-way stop
Mark Carre Court at Beau Bien Boulevard 1-way stop
McKenzie Station Drive at Lacey Avenue 1-way stop
McKenzie Station Drive at School Street 1-way stop
McKinley Avenue at Burlington Avenue 1-way stop
Meadow Lane at Inverness Road 1-way stop
Meadow Lane at Meyer Drive 2-way stop
Meyer Drive at Gamble Drive 1-way stop
Middleton Avenue at Center Avenue 1-way stop
Middleton Avenue at Main Street 1-way stop
Middleton Avenue at Route 53 2-way stop
Middleton Avenue at Yackley Avenue 2-way stop
Middleton Place at Main Street 1-way stop
Mill Bridge Lane at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
New Albany Road at Green Trails Drive 1-way stop
New Albany Road at Surrey Ridge Road 1-way stop
Newport Drive at Robin Lane 1-way stop
Normandy Drive at Old Tavern Road 1-way stop
Oak Hill Drive at Yackley Avenue 1-way stop
Oakview Drive at Jonquil Lane 1-way stop
Oakview Drive at Rolling Drive 1-way stop
Ohio Court at Ohio Street 1-way stop
Ohio Court at Short Street 3-way stop
Ohio Street at Kingston Avenue 1-way stop
Ohio Street at Pennywood Drive 1-way stop
Old College Road at Tanglewood Drive 1-way stop
Old Tavern Road at Fender Road 1-way stop
Parking lot at Short Street (by baseball field) 1-way stop
Patton Drive at Maple Avenue 1-way stop
Pebblecreek Drive at Leask Lane 1-way stop
Peppertree Court at Timbertrails Road 2-way stop
Pine Hill Road at Warrenville Road 1-way stop
Plank Road at Ogden Avenue 1-way stop
Pleasant Hill Lane at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Portsmouth Drive at Robin Lane 1-way stop
Radcliff Road at Odgen Avenue 1-way stop
Raintree Court at Carriage Hill Road 1-way stop
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 430/460
Redwood Lane at Hatch Lane 2-way stop
Regency Woods Drive at Leask Lane 1-way stop
Ridgeland Avenue at Karns Road 4-way stop
Ridgewood Road at Green Trails Drive 1-way stop
Riedy Road at Main Street 1-way stop
Rielly Place at Lisle Place 1-way stop
River Bend Drive at Four Lakes Avenue 3-way stop
River Drive at Burlington Avenue 2-way stop
River Drive at Ogden Avenue 2-way stop
Riverview Drive at Short Street 1-way stop
Riverview parking lot at Riverview Drive 1-way stop
Robin Lane at Yackley Avenue 1-way stop
Rolling Drive at Route 53 1-way stop
St. Anton Court at Breckenridge Road 1-way stop
St. Tropez Place at Normandy Drive 1-way stop
Scarlet Oak Lane at Trinity Drive 1-way stop
Scott Circle (east) at Handley Drive 1-way stop
Scott Circle (west) at Handley Drive 1-way stop
Shabbona Lane at Old Tavern Road 1-way stop
Shagbark Court at Carriage Hill Road 1-way stop
Shorewood Court at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Short Street at high school park district driveways 4-way stop
Short Street at Lisle park district administrative building (east exit) 1-way stop
Short Street at Lisle park district administrative building (west exit) 1-way stop
Short Street at Main Street 1-way stop
Sleepy Hollow Lane at Brookwood Road 1-way stop
Sleepy Hollow Lane at Golfview Drive 1-way stop
Southport Avenue at Main Street 2-way stop
Spencer Avenue at Burlington Avenue 3-way stop
Spencer Avenue at Division Street 1-way stop
Spencer Avenue at Front Street (includes exit drive at parking lot D) 2-way stop
Spencer Avenue at Ogden Avenue 1-way stop
Spencer Avenue at School Street 4-way stop
Spruce Lane at Arborview Drive 1-way stop
Stonebrook Road at New Albany Road 1-way stop
Stonehaven Way at Trinity Drive 1-way stop
Stowe Court at Breckenridge Road 1-way stop
Sun Valley Road at Breckenridge Road 3-way stop
Sun Valley Road at College Road 2-way stop
Sun Valley Road at Old College Road 1-way stop
Sunnydale Lane at Golfview Drive 1-way stop
Surrey Ridge Road at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Tall Tree Court at Oak Hill Drive 1-way stop
Tangley Oaks Trail at Fender Road 1-way stop
Taos Court at Sun Valley Drive 1-way stop
Tealwood Drive at Green Trails Drive 1-way stop
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 431/460
Telluride Court at Sun Valley Road 1-way stop
Timbertrails Road (east) at Green Trails Drive 1-way stop
Timbertrails Road (west) at Green Trails Drive 2-way stop
Timberview Drive at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Trinity Drive at Abbeywood Drive 2-way stop
Trinity Drive at Golfview Drive 1-way stop
Trowbridge Way at Trinity Drive 1-way stop
Twin Oak Lane at White Oak Lane 1-way stop
Tyrnbury Drive at Abbeywood Drive 1-way stop
Vail Court at Breckenridge Road 1-way stop
Valley Forge Road at Lexington Road 1-way stop
Valley Forge Road at New Albany Road 1-way stop
Valley Forge Road at Surrey Ridge Road 1-way stop
Varsity Drive at University Lane 1-way stop
Waubansie Lane at Old Tavern Road 1-way stop
Wedgewood Court at Old Tavern Road 1-way stop
Weeping Willow Drive at Benedictine Parkway 1-way stop
Wellington Avenue at Keller Street 2-way stop
Westerhoff Drive at Warrenville Road 1-way stop
Western Court at Yender Avenue 1-way stop
Westview Lane at Hitchcock Avenue 1-way stop
Westview Lane at Maple Avenue 1-way stop
White Birch Drive at Warrenville Road 1-way stop
White Oak Lane at Lexington Road 1-way stop
Willow Glen Court westbound at Radcliff Road 1-way stop
Winchester Avenue at Burlington Avenue 1-way stop
Winchester Avenue at Middleton Avenue 1-way stop
Winchester Avenue at Ogden Avenue 2-way stop
Woodcliff Court at Lexington Avenue 1-way stop
Yender Avenue at Ogden Avenue 2-way stop
Yender Avenue at Warrenville Road 1-way stop
Yender Avenue southbound at Burlington Avenue 1-way stop
(Ord. 2005-3920, 4-4-2005; amd. Ord. 2010-4334, 7-19-2010; Ord. 2010-4335, 7-19-2010; Ord. 2016-4666, 7-18-2016)
(B)Yield Signs:
Acorn Hill Court at White Oak Lane 1-way yield
Arborview Drive opposite lots 138 and 139 (4363 Arborview Drive) 1-way yield
Arborview Drive opposite lots 203 and 204 (4525 Arborview Drive) 1-way yield
Bentley Court at Hasting Lane 1-way yield
Briarcliff Court at Woodcliff Court 1-way yield
Brunswick Court at Hasting Lane 1-way yield
Burning Tree Court at White Birch Drive 1-way yield
Colton Court at Keller Street 1-way yield
Hatch Lane between lots 146 and 149 (4338 Hatch Lane) 1-way yield
Hatch Lane opposite lots 177 and 178 (4587 Hatch Lane) 1-way yield
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 432/460
Inverness Road at Larkspur Lane 2-way yield
Inverness Road at Westview Lane 1-way yield
Kingston Avenue at Middleton Avenue 1-way yield
Kirkwood Court at Fernwood Drive 1-way yield
Lakeshore Drive eastbound at River Bend Drive 1-way yield
Meadow Lane at Clover Drive 2-way yield
Meadow Lane at Westview Lane 1-way yield
Muirwood Court at Timbertrails Road 1-way yield
Oakton Court at Lakewood Drive 1-way yield
Ohio Street at Larkspur Lane 1-way yield
Ory Bridge Court at Chatfield Lane 1-way yield
Paxton Court at Keller Street 1-way yield
Pine Tree Court at White Birch Drive 1-way yield
Pinehurst Court at Timbertrails Road 1-way yield
Redwood Lane at Arborview Drive 1-way yield
Rehm Court at Sleepy Hollow Lane 1-way yield
Rolling Drive at Larkspur Lane 1-way yield
Royal Glen Court at Carriage Hill Road 1-way yield
Southbury Court at Stonebrook Road 1-way yield
Tanglewood Drive at Timbertrails Road 1-way yield
Wildwood Court at Tanglewood Drive 1-way yield
Winkler Court at Sleepy Hollow Lane 1-way yield
(Ord. 2005-3920, 4-4-2005; amd. Ord. 2016-4666, 7-18-2016)
10-5-3: RIGHT TURNS ON RED LIGHTS:
Right turns shall be and they are hereby prohibited on red lights at the following intersections, and any person violating the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense:
Northbound Indiana Avenue at Ogden Avenue, between the hours of four o'clock (4:00) to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
Northbound Main Street at School Street.
Northbound Route 53 at Main Street, between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. to seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M.
Southbound Route 53 at Short Street, on school days when children are present.
Westbound Short Street at Route 53, on school days when children are present. (Ord. 2005-3921, 4-4-2005; amd. Ord. 2015-4591, 7-20-2015)
10-5-4: OTHER TURNING MOVEMENTS RESTRICTED:
(A) No vehicle shall be driven so as to cross the centerline of Main Street between Ogden and Burlington Avenues, except when an obstruction makes it
necessary or when making a left turn into or from any alley, private road or driveway. The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to
proceed in the opposite direction on Main Street between Ogden and Burlington Avenues, nor to enter a parking space located across the centerline.
(Ord. 90-2087, 9-4-1990)
(B) Operators of motor vehicles are hereby prohibited from turning left when exiting the parking lot of Jewel Foods at Route 53 and Maple Avenue via the
southernmost of the two (2) driveways providing access from said parking lot onto Route 53. This prohibition shall not apply to the northernmost
driveway of the two (2) driveways providing access from said parking lot onto Route 53. Anyone found to have violated any provision of this subsection
shall be fined as established by the annual fee ordinance for each violation. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
(C) Reserved.
(D) Reserved.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 433/460
(E) Reserved.
(F) Operators of motor vehicles are hereby restricted to making right hand turns only from the right hand lane when traveling north on College Road at the
intersection of Abbeywood; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to RTA and other common carrier buses transporting members of the
public. (Ord. 90-2087, 9-4-1990)
(G) Operators of motor vehicles are hereby allowed only to turn right from the driveways located on the north property line of the Amoco station at 1101
Warrenville Road, Lisle, Illinois. (Ord. 94-2579, 9-19-1994)
(H) Operators of motor vehicles are hereby prohibited from making U-turns, when traveling east on Warrenville Road, from Route 53 easterly to the village
corporate limits. (Ord. 90-2087, 9-4-1990)
10-5-5: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS:
Operators of nonemergency motor vehicles are hereby prohibited from driving upon, prohibited from allowing any nonemergency vehicle to occupy, and
are prohibited from in any way causing any nonemergency motor vehicle to traverse, stop, back or stand in the driveway located immediately north of the
village hall/police station building from Main Street to Spencer Avenue. Anyone found to have violated any provision of this section shall be fined as
established by the annual fee ordinance for each violation. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
10-5-6: PENALTIES:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person found violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as established by the annual fee
ordinance for each offense. (Ord. 96-2776, 5-20-1996)
Chapter 6
BICYCLES
10-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
BICYCLE: Shall mean and include, a vehicle with two (2) tandem wheels, neither of which are less than twenty inches (20") in diameter, with solid or
pneumatic tires, having a steering bar or wheel, a saddle seat and propelled by human power.
OPERATE: The word to "operate" or any form or tense thereof, shall mean and refer to the use, putting into action or causing to function of a bicycle by a
person mounted thereon.
In addition to the above definitions, any applicable definitions of the traffic code shall be deemed to be included therein. (Ord. 173, 9-15-1964)
10-6-2: RULES FOR RIDING AND OPERATING:
(A) Riding Abreast: When more than two (2) persons in a group are operating bicycles upon a roadway, they shall ride single file.
(B) Clinging To Vehicles: No person operating a bicycle shall cling or attach himself or the bicycle to any other moving vehicle.
(C) Extra Passenger: No person operating a bicycle shall carry another person on the handlebars of said bicycle.
(D) Emerging From Alley, Driveways And Garages: The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, garage or private sidewalk shall stop the
bicycle immediately prior to driving onto or across a public sidewalk or onto or across a public sidewalk line projected across an alley, and shall
exercise extreme care in making such movements.
(E) Intoxication; Drugs; Physical Inability: No person shall operate a bicycle while under the influence of liquor or drugs or while physically or mentally unfit
to safely operate the same. (Ord. 173, 9-15-1964)
(F) Operating On Sidewalks: Except as hereinafter provided, bicycles may be operated on sidewalks in public parks and in residence and nonresidence
districts, but in single file only. Under all circumstances, the rider shall yield the right of way to pedestrians using the sidewalk, and due and proper care
shall at all times be exercised by the rider for the pedestrians. When approaching a pedestrian on the sidewalk, the speed of a bicycle shall be reduced
to a speed which is no greater than necessary to continue the operation of the bicycle without the rider dismounting, and shall not be increased until the
pedestrian has passed. No bicycle shall be operated upon the following described public walks1:
1. That public walk extending from Meyer Drive to Bluebell Court and lying between lots 38 and 39 and 57 and 58 in the subdivision known as Oakview
unit 4.
2. That public walk extending from the southeast edge of the Schiesher School grounds to Larkspur Lane and from Larkspur Lane to Meadow Lane
and lying between lots 19 and 20, 30 and 31 and 45 and 46 in the subdivision known as Oakview unit 1. (Ord. 2009-4241, 1-12-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 434/460
(G) Parking Bicycles: It shall be unlawful to park any bicycle in the business district along buildings in such a manner as to interfere with pedestrians, or
along roadways where they may interfere with traffic, or with persons getting into or out of motor vehicles. No person other than the owner or operator
shall move, or in any manner interfere with any bicycle properly parked, nor shall any person interfere or in any manner hinder any person from
properly parking a bicycle, except that members of the police department and fire department may move, or in proper cases, prevent the parking of the
bicycle when, in the judgment of the policemen and firemen, his action is necessary in order to properly safeguard persons or property.
(H) Keep To Right: All bicycles when operated on roadways shall be kept to the right and shall be operated as near as practicable to the right hand edge of
the roadway.
(I) Speed: No bicycle shall be operated at any time faster than is reasonable or proper, and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the
safety of the rider and of other persons and property.
(J) Trick Riding: No person shall, while operating a bicycle, indulge or engage in any kind of trick or unsafe riding.
(K) Turns; Starting; Stopping: The operator of a bicycle on a roadway, when making a right turn shall follow the right hand edge of the roadway, and the
operator of a bicycle on a roadway when making a left turn shall approach the point of turning in the traffic lane nearest the center of the roadway. No
operator of a bicycle shall start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn without first indicating such movement as provided by law. (Ord. 173, 9-15-1964;
amd. Ord. 83-1136, 8-2-1983)
(L) Chaining Of Bicycles To Public Property; Use Of Bike Racks: No bicycle shall be chained, tied, or otherwise attached to any public property, other than
designated bike racks, including, but not limited to, fences, utility poles, sign poles, parking meters, newspaper vending boxes, or handrails. Bicycles
chained, tied, or otherwise attached to any public property other than designated bike racks may be removed and disposed of by the police department
without notice and without liability to the village.
(M) Time Restriction: Bicycles attached to public bike racks in excess of twenty four (24) hours, other than those bicycles attached to public bike racks
located in commuter parking lots C and D and displaying a current village permit as provided for in section 10-6-5 of this chapter, may be removed and
disposed of by the police department without notice and without liability to the village. (Ord. 2005-3965, 11-7-2005)
10-6-3: EQUIPMENT:
(A) Lights: No bicycle shall be operated within the period from sunset to sunrise without having a properly lighted headlight attached to the front of the
bicycle, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from the front thereof for a distance of not less than five hundred feet (500') nor without having a
red light attached to the rear of the bicycle which is clearly visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') from the rear.
(B) Mechanical Condition: No person shall operate a bicycle which is not in such mechanical condition so that it can be safely operated.
(C) Signaling Devices: Each bicycle shall be equipped with a mechanical or electrical signaling device in good working order and audible at a distance of
fifty feet (50') when sounded. (Ord. 173, 9-15-1964; amd. Ord. 83-1136, 8-2-1983)
10-6-4: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
Every person operating a bicycle shall strictly observe all traffic signs and signals and all other traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto, and shall
obey the orders and directions of every officer of the village authorized to direct or regulate traffic. (Ord. 173, 9-15-1964; amd. Ord. 83-1136, 8-2-1983)
10-6-5: PERMITS REQUIRED:
(A) General: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to attach a bicycle to a public bike rack in village commuter parking lots C
and D in excess of twenty four (24) hours without first obtaining a permit.
(B) Permit Issuance: Permits are issued for twelve (12) month periods beginning January 1 through December 31.
(C) Permit Application: Every owner or operator of a bicycle desiring a permit for such bicycle, shall file a permit application with the village business office
setting forth the name, address, and phone number of the applicant, and the description and serial number of the bicycle for which the permit is
desired. The applicant shall furnish proof of ownership if it is requested by the village. Upon satisfactory completion and acceptance of the application,
the village may issue a permit. Upon the issuance of a permit by the village business office, the applicant shall be permitted to park said registered
bicycle in the appropriate village parking lot until the expiration or revocation of such permit.
(D) Display Of Permit: It shall be unlawful to attach any bicycle to any public bike rack in commuter lots C and D in excess of twenty four (24) hours without
displaying a current permit as required by this chapter in the following manner: 1) permits must be affixed on top of the top tube in front of the seat, 2)
the permit must not be wrapped around the tube. (Ord. 2005-3965, 11-7-2005)
10-6-6: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the fines and penalties as set forth in the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 2005-3965, 11-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 435/460
7-2005)
Title 11
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of this title is to:
(A) Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and services;
(B) Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of telecommunications
providers and services;
(C) Promote competition in telecommunications;
(D) Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers and services;
(E) Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and
residents of the village;
(F) Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the village for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
(G) Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in public trust by the village;
(H) Assure that the village's current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the persons
seeking such access and causing such costs;
(I) Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the village and the residents of the village for permitting private use of the public ways;
(J) Assure that all telecommunications carriers providingfacilities or services within the village comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the
village;
(K) Assure that the village can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare; and
(L) Enable the village to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and
technological development. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the
context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
AFFILIATE: A person that, directly or indirectly, owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person,
and including any person owning, controlling or holding power to vote five percent (5%) or more of the outstanding voting securities of such other person.
AS BUILT DRAWINGS: See definition of Record Drawing.
CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984, 47 USC section 532 et seq., as now and hereafter amended.
CABLE OPERATOR: A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to provide "cable service" within the village as that term is defined in the cable act.
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and board of trustees of the village.
EXCESS CAPACITY: The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole, hand hole or other utility facility within the public way that is
or will be available for use for additional telecommunications facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 436/460
FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: The federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.
FRANCHISE COSTS: Direct and indirect fees, costs and expenses incurred by the village in connection with the enforcement and administration of this
title, as now or hereafter amended, which are to be reimbursed or paid to the village, including, but not limited to, the application and review fees provided
in section11-6-2 of this title, the construction permit fees provided in section 11-6-6 of this title, the annual license fee provided in section 11-6-7 of this title,
and such other costs as may be incurred by the village in connection with a license or franchise granted under this title.
FRANCHISE FEE: With respect to cable television franchises granted by the village, the franchise fee provided in section 11-5-20 of this title.
With respect to open video systems, the franchise fee provided in section 11-6-9 of this title.
With respect to other telecommunications systems, the compensation provided for in a license or franchise agreement pursuant to this title for the
right and privilege granted by the village to use, cross and occupy public ways of the village for the installation, operation, maintenance, repair and
replacement of telecommunications facilities of the grantee, but does not include franchise costs.
GRANTEE: Any person receiving a telecommunications license, a telecommunications franchise or a cable television franchise from the village pursuant
to this title.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received for the
operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the village.
(A) Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service;
2. Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges;
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment;
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges;
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service termination
charges;
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficientfunds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments;
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the grantee or holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the operator's network to provide cable service or video service
within the village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to
the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement;
8. Compensation received by the grantee or holder that is derived from the operation of its network to provide cable service or video service with
respect to commissions that are received by the grantee or holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on its
network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection (A)9 of this definition;
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion
of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the grantee or
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business;
and
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) and the franchise fee collected under any franchise issued
under chapter 5 of this title.
(B) Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi);
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the grantee or holder to the extent the
refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service;
3. Regardless of whether the services arebundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received
from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services,
information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic
publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the grantee's or holder's
books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders;
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay a service provider fee or franchise
fee with respect to the service;
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the grantee or holder and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes;
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers; and
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of
the cable service or video service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 437/460
(C) Revenue of an affiliate of a grantee or holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the grantee or holder has the effect of evading the payment of the service provider fee or franchise fee which
would otherwise be paid on the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC OR ILLINOIS COMMERCE COMMISSION: The state administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers in the stateof Illinois.
INCUMBENT CABLE OPERATOR: A person or entity that provided cable services or video services in the village of Lisle under a franchise agreement
with the village pursuant to chapter 5 of this title on January 1, 2007.
OVS OR OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: A video platform operated by a local exchange telephone carrier or cable operator providing common carriage to
programming distributors unaffiliated with the OVS operator and certified by the FCC as an open video system in accordance with section 653 of the
telecommunications act of 1996, subject to village telecommunications franchise requirements and the payment of fees to the village based on the annual
gross revenues of the OVS operator, but not to exceed the rate at which cable television franchise fees are imposed on cable operators franchised by the
village.
OTHER WAYS: The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights of way within the village, but under the jurisdiction and control of a
governmental entity other than the village.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES: Utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the
underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
PERSON: Means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability
companies and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
PUBLIC STREET: Any highway, street, alley or other public right of way for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the village which has
been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as those terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the village, but
only to the extent of the village's right, title, interest or authority to grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for
telecommunications facilities.
RECORD DRAWING: A document certified to the village that accurately locates all aspects of construction horizontally and vertically (depth and/or height).
The final record drawing document shall be exactly the same as the approved construction plan, except for any modifications that revised items of
construction proposed or implied in the approved construction plan, all of which shall be depicted on the final record drawing document.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" tosubscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
SURPLUS SPACE: That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders
and regulations of the Illinois commerce commission, to allow its use by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER: Means and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or
property within the village, used or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
antennas, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Means and includes every person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities
without any ownership or management control of the facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice,
data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: See definition of Telecommunications Facilities.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES: Utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or
supports for overhead facilities.
USABLE SPACE: The total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical
clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois commerce commission.
UTILITY EASEMENT: Any easement owned by the village and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with
telecommunications facilities.
UTILITY FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including, but not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and
equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public ways of the village andused or to be used for the purpose of providing
utility or telecommunications services.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and
which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or
any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 438/460
offered over the public internet.
VILLAGE: The village of Lisle.
VILLAGE PROPERTY: Means and includes all real property owned by the village, other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are
defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the village, which are not subject to right of way licensing and franchising as provided in
this title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996; amd. Ord. 2007-4149, 11-5-2007)
11-1-3: REGISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications carriers and providers engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications originating or terminating in the village shall register with the village pursuant to chapter 2 of this title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-1-4: LICENSE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the village for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to
persons and areas outside the village shall first obtain a license granting the use of such public ways from the village pursuant to chapter 3 of this title.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-1-5: AUTHORIZATION TO PROVIDE CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICES:
A person or entity, including a telecommunications carrier, seeking to provide cable service or video service pursuant to this title shall not use the public
rights of way for the installation or construction of facilities for the provision of cable service or video service or offer cable service or video service until it
has obtained either: a) a state issued authorization from the commission to offer or provide cable orvideo service under section 401 of the cable and video
competition law of 20071; or b) a cable franchise from the village under chapter 5 of this title and section 11-42-11 of the Illinois municipal code2. An
operator providing cable or video service under a state issued authorization shall operate subject to chapter 5A of this title. An operation providing cable
service under a village issued franchise shall operate subject to chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 2007-4149, 11-5-2007)
11-1-6: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or locate telecommunications
facilities in any public way of the village for the purpose of providing cable service to persons in the village shall first obtain a cable franchise from the
village as provided in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-1-7: APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS:
This title shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or franchise agreement until:
(A) The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement;
(B) An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date not
later than the present expiration date. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-1-8: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this title shall be fined as
established by the annual fee ordinance for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation
occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-1-9: OTHER REMEDIES:
Nothing in this title shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this title. (Ord. 96-
2800, 7-15-1996)
11-1-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this title, or its application to any person, is, for any reason, declared invalid, in
whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, said decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 96-2800,
7-15-1996)
Chapter 2
REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 439/460
11-2-1: REQUIRED:
Except as provided in section 11-2-4 of this chapter, all telecommunications carriers having telecommunications facilities within the corporate limits of the
village, and all telecommunications carriers or providers that offer or provide telecommunications service to customer premises within the village, shall
register with the village pursuant to this chapter on forms to be provided by the village clerk, which shall include the following:
(A) The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.
(B) The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.
(C) A description of registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the village.
(D) A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms,
businesses or institutions within the village.
(E) Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to public way licensing or franchising under this title.
(F) Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be provided by the
registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation tax imposed
by the village.
(G) Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the Illinois commerce
commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the village.
(H) Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals
required by the federal communicationscommission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the village.
(I) Such other information as the village clerk may reasonably require. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-2-2: FEE:
Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or provider shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the annual fee ordinance.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-2-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of registration under this chapter is to:
(A) Provide the village with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the village, or that own or operate telecommunication facilities within the village.
(B) Assist the village in enforcement of this title.
(C) Assist the village in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the village.
(D) Assist the village in monitoring compliance with local, state and federal laws. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-2-4: EXCEPTIONS:
The following telecommunications carriers and providers are exempt from registration under this chapter:
(A) Telecommunications carriers that are owned and operated by any political subdivision of this state for its own use.
(B) A company or person which provides telecommunications services solely to itself, its affiliates or members between points in the same building, or
between closely located buildings under common ownership or control, provided that such company or person does not use or occupy any public ways
of the village or other ways within the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 440/460
Chapter 3
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE
11-3-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE:
A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of the village for the sole
purpose of providing telecommunications services to persons or areas outside the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-2: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the village which shall include the following
information:
(A) The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
(B) A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by licensee over its telecommunications facilities.
(C) A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
(D) Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The location and route requested for applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities.
2. The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public way
along the proposed route.
3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
4. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or
relocate.
(E) If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing
utility poles along the proposed route.
(F) If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
(G) If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
(H) A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
(I) A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
(J) Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct,
operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
(K) Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities
and services described in the application.
(L) Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer
or provide the telecommunications services.
(M) All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to chapter 6 of this title.
(N) Such other and further information as may be required by the village manager. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-3: DETERMINATION BY THE VILLAGE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 441/460
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving a complete application under section 11-3-2 of this chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.
(A) The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
(B) The legal ability of the applicant.
(C) The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities.
(D) The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.
(E) The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
(F) The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways.
(G) The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
(H) The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the license is granted.
(I) The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
(J) Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
(K) Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-4: AGREEMENT:
No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and
provisions under which thelicense to occupy and use public ways of the village will be granted. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-5: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No license granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the village for
delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-6: RIGHTS GRANTED:
(A) No license granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy
the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant.
(B) No license granted under this chapter shall authorize or excuse a licensee from securing such further easements, leases, licenses, permits or other
approvals as may be required to lawfully occupy and use a public way, excess capacity in an underground facility or surplus space in an overhead
facility.
(C) No license granted under this chapter shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-7: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five (5) years. (Ord. 96-
2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-8: LICENSE ROUTE:
A telecommunications license granted under this chapter shall be limited to a grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-
15-1996)
11-3-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 442/460
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the terms and conditions set
forth in title 7, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-3-10: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in title 7, chapter 1 of this code, provided, however,
that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the village and a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a license
agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-
1996; amd. Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-3-11: COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE:
Each license granted under this chapter is subject to the village's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to
be paid for the property rights granted to the licensee; provided, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the village and a licensee from agreeing to the
compensation to be paid. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-12: SERVICES TO VILLAGE USERS:
A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide telecommunications services to persons or areas within thevillage upon submitting an application for
approval pursuant to chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-13: AMENDMENT OF GRANT:
(A) A new license application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications
facilities in public ways of the village which are not included in a license previously granted under this title.
(B) If ordered by the village to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted license, the village
shall grant a license amendment without further application. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-14: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
A grantee that desires to renew its license under this chapter shall, not more than one hundred eighty (180) days nor less than ninety (90) days before
expiration of the current license, file an application with the village for renewal of its license which shall include the following information:
(A) The information required pursuant to section 11-3-2 of this chapter.
(B) Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between the village and the grantee. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-15: RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS:
Within ninety (90) days after receiving a complete application under section 11-3-14 of this chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the
written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
(A) The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
(B) The legal ability of the applicant.
(C) The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities.
(D) The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this title and the license agreement.
(E) Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.
(F) Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continuedgrant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-3-16: OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL:
No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the licensee's performance of the license agreement, or of the requirements of this
title, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 443/460
Chapter 4
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
11-4-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE:
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public ways of the village and to provide
telecommunications services to any person or area in the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-2: FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the village which shall include the following
information:
(A) The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
(B) A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed facilities.
(C) A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the franchisee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
(D) Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The location and route requested for applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities.
2. The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public way
along the proposed route.
3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
4. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or
relocate.
(E) If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing
utility poles along the proposed route.
(F) If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
(G) If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
(H) A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
(I) A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
(J) Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct,
operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
(K) Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities
and services described in the application.
(L) Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer
or provide the telecommunications services.
(M) Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, an open video system (OVS) or other video programming service, and sufficient information to
determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising.
(N) An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the village that applicant intends to use or lease.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 444/460
(O) A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the village and other public, educational and governmental
institutions.
(P) A description of applicant's policies for line extensions and for customer access to applicant's services, facilities and/or network.
(Q) The area or areas of the village the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build out to the entire franchise area.
(R) All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to chapter 6 of this title.
(S) Such other and further information as may be requested by the village manager. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-3: DETERMINATION BY THE VILLAGE:
Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application under section 11-4-2 of this chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.
(A) The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
(B) The legal ability of the applicant.
(C) The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities.
(D) The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.
(E) The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.
(F) The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways.
(G) The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
(H) The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise requested is granted.
(I) The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
(J) Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
(K) Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-4: AGREEMENT:
No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and
provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use public ways of the village will be granted. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-5: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the village for
delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-6: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of ten (10) years. (Ord.
96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-7: RIGHTS GRANTED:
(A) No franchise granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 445/460
(B) No franchise granted under this chapter shall authorize or excuse a franchisee from securing such further easements, leases, franchises, permits or
other approvals as may be required to lawfully occupy and use a public way, excess capacity in an underground facility or surplus space in an
overhead facility.
(C) No franchise granted under this chapter shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-8: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
A telecommunications franchise granted under this chapter shall be limited to the specific geographic area of the village to be served by the franchise
grantee, and the specific public ways necessary to serve such areas. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the terms and conditions
set forth in title 7, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-4-10: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in title 7, chapter 1 of this code, provided, however,
that nothing in this chaptershall prohibit the village and a franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a
franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. (Ord. 96-
2800, 7-15-1996; amd. Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-4-11: COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE:
Each franchise granted under this chapter is subject to the village's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation
to be paid for the property rights granted to the franchisee; provided, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the village and a franchisee from agreeing to the
compensation to be paid. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-12: NONDISCRIMINATION:
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without
discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee's services; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a franchisee
from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-13: SERVICES TO VILLAGE:
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to the village at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless otherwise
provided in a license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-14: AMENDMENT OF GRANT:
(A) A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or to locate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways of the village which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this title.
(B) If ordered by the village to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted franchise, the village
shall grant a franchise amendment without further application. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-15: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this chapter shall, not more than two hundred forty (240) days nor less than one hundred fifty (150)
days before expiration of the currentfranchise, file an application with the village for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:
(A) The information required pursuant to section 11-4-2 of this chapter.
(B) Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the village and the grantee. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-16: RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS:
Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application under section 11-4-15 of this chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 446/460
written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied,
the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
(A) The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
(B) The legal ability of the applicant.
(C) The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities.
(D) The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this title and the franchise agreement.
(E) Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.
(F) Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-4-17: OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL:
No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee's performance of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of
this title, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
Chapter 5
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
11-5-1: FRANCHISE:
A cable television franchise shall be required of any person who desires to construct a cable system in public streets and ways of the village and to provide
or offer cable service to any person or area within the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-2: FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a cable franchise authorizing the use of the public ways of the village shall file an application with the village pursuant to this
chapter which shall include the following information:
(A) The identity of the cable television franchise applicant and, if different, the identity of the affiliate that will be the cable operator if a franchise is granted.
(B) The identity and relationship of all other affiliates of the applicant not disclosed pursuant to subsection (A) of this section.
(C) The design and performance characteristics of the subscriber network that will be constructed and/or provided by the applicant.
(D) The design and performance characteristics of the institutional network that will be constructed and/or provided by the applicant.
(E) A network map of all existing facilities owned or used by the applicant in the village, if any, together with preliminary engineering plans, specifications
and a network map of the facilities proposed to be located within the village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The location and route requested for applicant's proposed cable television facilities.
2. The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public way
along the proposed route.
3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other cable operators or telecommunications carriers.
4. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or
relocate.
(F) If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its cable facilities on existing utility poles
along the proposed route.
(G) If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's cable facilities.
2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's cable facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 447/460
(H) If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's cable facilities.
(I) A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
(J) A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
(K) Financial statements and pro formas prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial
ability, over the life of the franchise, to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the cablesystem and facilities.
(L) Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the cable television and
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
(M) If the applicant is proposing to use its cable system to provide or offer a telecommunications service, sufficient information to determine whether a
telecommunications franchise or license is required under chapter 3 or 4 of this title.
(N) An accurate map showing the location of any existing cable or telecommunications facilities in the village that applicant intends to use or lease.
(O) A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will provide or make available to the village and other local public, educational and
governmental institutions.
(P) A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will provide or make available for local origination cable programming.
(Q) A description of applicant's access and line extension policies.
(R) The franchise area or areas of the village the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build out to the entire proposed franchise area.
(S) All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to chapter 6 of this title.
(T) Such other and further information as may be requested by the village manager or required by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-3: OVERBUILD APPLICATION:
To the extent required by the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-42-11, an applicant requesting a new cable franchise from the
village to provide cable services within all or any portion of the geographic territory of the village served by another cable operator with a cable franchise
granted by the village shall, in addition to the information otherwise required by this chapter, provide sufficient information to demonstrate that it will provide
cable service upon franchise terms and conditions that will equal or exceed those terms and conditions required under the existing cable television
franchise which pertain to:
(A) The territorial extent of the franchise.
(B) System design.
(C) Technical performance standards.
(D) Construction schedules.
(E) Performance and surety bonds.
(F) Standards for construction and installation of cable television facilities.
(G) Service to subscribers.
(H) Public, educational and governmental (PEG) access channels and programming.
(I) Production assistance for PEG access channels and programming.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 448/460
(J) Liability protection and indemnification.
(K) Franchise fees. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-4: RESPONSE TO COMMUNITY NEEDS:
In addition to the information otherwise required by this chapter, the applicant shall present sufficient information to demonstrate that its cable franchise
proposal will, if approved by the village, meet the future cable related needs and interests of the community as identified by the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-
15-1996)
11-5-5: DUTY TO SUPPLEMENT APPLICATION:
Applicants and their affiliates are responsible for the continuing accuracy and completeness of all information and supporting materials submitted or
required to be submitted in support of their cable franchise application, or related application for a telecommunications license or franchise to use a cable
system to provide other telecommunications services. Information and supporting materials submitted must be current and updated as necessary and in a
timely manner at any time and all times before a decision is rendered on the application. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-6: RENEWAL PROPOSALS:
(A) Upon completion of proceedings by the village under section 626 of the cable act to review the performance of the cable operator under the expiring
franchise and to identify the future cable related community needs and interests of the village, the village shall issue its request for a renewal proposal
and shall establish a date by which such proposal shall be submitted.
(B) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of thissection or the provisions of section 626(a) through (g) of the cable act, the village may agree to
consider a cable operator's proposal for renewal of its franchise pursuant to the alternative renewal procedures authorized by section 626(h) of the
cable act, and shall have discretion to grant or deny such renewal proposal after first giving the public adequate notice and an opportunity to comment
on the renewal proposal. The denial of a renewal proposal submitted pursuant to this alternative procedure shall not affect the action on any
subsequent renewal proposal pursuant to subsection (A) of this section.
(C) Cable franchise renewal proposals submitted to the village under subsection (A) or (B) of this section shall contain the materials required by the village
including the information required by sections 11-5-2, 11-5-3 and 11-5-4 of this chapter.
(D) In the event that any or all of the above referenced provisions of the cable act are repealed, proceedings for franchise renewal shall be conducted in
accordance with sections 11-5-9 and 11-5-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-7: DETERMINATION OF FORMAL RENEWAL PROPOSALS:
Proceedings to consider proposals for renewal of a cable franchise pursuant to subsection 11-5-6(B) of this chapter and section 626(a) through (g) of the
cable act shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of section 626 and with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-8: DETERMINATION OF ALTERNATIVE RENEWAL PROPOSALS:
Proceedings to consider alternative proposals for renewal of a cable franchise submitted pursuant to subsection 11-5-6(B) of this chapter and section
626(h) of the cable act shall be conducted and determined in the discretion of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-9: NONCABLE ACT RENEWAL APPLICATION:
A grantee that desires to renew its franchise pursuant to subsection 11-5-6(D) of this chapter shall, not more than two hundred forty (240) days nor less
than one hundred fifty (150) days before expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the village for renewal of its franchise which shall
include the following information:
(A) The information required pursuant to sections 11-5-2, 11-5-3 and 11-5-4 of this chapter.
(B) Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the village and the grantee. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-10: DETERMINATION OF NONCABLE ACT RENEWAL:
Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application under section 11-5-9 of this chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied,
the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
(A) The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 449/460
(B) The legal ability of the applicant.
(C) The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities.
(D) The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this title and the franchise agreement.
(E) Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.
(F) Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-11: OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL:
No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee's performance of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of
this title, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-12: DETERMINATION OF OVERBUILD FRANCHISE PROPOSALS:
Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete cable franchise application proposal pursuant to section 11-5-3 of this chapter, the corporate
authorities shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is
denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial.
(A) The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
(B) The legal ability of the applicant.
(C) The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities.
(D) The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.
(E) The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.
(F) The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways.
(G) The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
(H) The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise requested is granted.
(I) The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
(J) Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
(K) Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-13: FRANCHISE AGREEMENT:
The approval of any cable franchise granted hereunder shall be preliminary until the applicant and the village have executed a written franchise agreement
setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use public ways of the village will be granted. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-
15-1996)
11-5-14: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to construct, maintain and operate a cable system
within the public ways of the village for the delivery of video programming or other telecommunications services. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-15: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a cable television franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of ten (10) years. (Ord. 96-
2800, 7-15-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 450/460
11-5-16: RIGHTS GRANTED:
(A) No franchise granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant.
(B) No franchise granted under this chapter shall authorize or excuse a franchisee from securing such further easements, leases, franchises, permits or
other approvals as may be required to lawfully occupy and use a public way, excess capacity in an underground facility or surplus space in an
overhead facility.
(C) No franchise granted under this chapter shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-17: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
A cable franchise granted under this chapter shall be limited to the specific geographic area of the village to be served by the franchise grantee. Unless
otherwise stated in the franchise agreement, the franchise territory shall be all territory within the corporate limits of the village during the term of the
franchise. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-18: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all cable facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms
and conditions:
(A) If technically feasible, grantee's cable facilities should be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists
within such utility facility.
(B) A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only,
and then only if surplus space is available.
(C) Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of the village, a
cable franchisee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its cable facilities underground.
(D) Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way
of the village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its existing cable facilities underground within a reasonable period of
time, which shall not be later than the end of the franchise term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the village
engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
(E) Whenever new cable facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future telecommunications
carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and otherfacilities for nondiscriminatory access to future carriers.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-19: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All cable franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for cable facilities as required in chapter 7 of this title; provided, however, that nothing in
this chapter shall prohibit the village and a cable franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a franchise
agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-
1996)
11-5-20: FRANCHISE FEE:
(A) Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, every cable operator shall pay a franchise fee to the village, as established by the annual fee
ordinance, equal to an amount in relation to the cable franchisee's annual gross revenues derived from the provision of cable service within the village.
(B) Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, franchise fee payments shall be payable quarterly within thirty (30) days after the end of each
calendar quarter. Each quarterly franchise fee payment shall be accompanied by a verified financial statement which shall accurately present the cable
operator's gross revenues derived from the provision of cable service within the village for any such calendar quarter.
(C) In addition to the quarterly financial statements provided herein, the cable franchisee shall also submit a verified annual financial statement within
ninety (90) days after the end of the twelve (12) month franchise fee period which shall accurately present the cable operator's annual gross revenues
for the twelve (12) month period. Any recomputed amounts due the village as a franchise fee shall be paid to the village at that time, together with
interest at the rate as established by the annual fee ordinance. Any recomputed amounts overpaid to the village as a franchise fee shall be credited
against the franchise fee payment due for the next calendar quarter.
(D) The franchise grantee shall permit the village to inspect the cable operator's books and records for the purpose of auditing the operator's annual gross
revenues derived from the provision of cable service within the village. Any additional amount determined to be due the village as a result of an audit
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 451/460
shall be paid to the village within thirty (30) days, together with interest at the rate as established by the annual fee ordinance and the audit expenses
incurred by the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-21: NONDISCRIMINATION:
A cable operator shall make its cable services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without discrimination as
to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee's services; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a cable operator from making
any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-5-22: SERVICES TO THE VILLAGE:
A franchisee shall make its cable services available to the village and to governmental entities within the village at its most favorable rate for similarly
situated users, unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
Chapter 5A
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICES UNDER STATE ISSUED AUTHORIZATION
11-5A-1: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
(A) Fee Imposed: A service provider fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village. (Ord. 2007-4149, 11-19-
2007)
(B) Amount Of Fee: The amount of the service provider fee imposed hereby shall be as established in the village of Lisle annual fee ordinance. (Ord.
2007-4152, 11-19-2007)
(C) Notice To The Village: Unless the holder has earlier sent notice to the village pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(a), the holder shall
notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the village.
(D) Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the
first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the village. Together with this ordinance the village shall send the holder instructions for remitting the payment and statement required
hereby.
(E) Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the
fee.
(F) Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the
village, under chapter 5 of this title and 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-42-11, in which a fee is paid.
(G) Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection (B) of this section.
(H) Applicable Principles: All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
(I) No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later
be imposed by the village, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video
service. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal
telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telecommunications service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not
affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of government's 9-1-1 or E9-1-1 fees, taxes or charges.
(J) Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider:
1. Audit Requirement: The holder shall comply with the same requirements the village imposes under section 11-5-20 of this title on other cable service
or video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under
the requirements of this section. If all local franchises between the village and cable operators terminate, the audit requirements shall be those
applicable under the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted
should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
2. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the municipality's submission of an invoice
for the sum.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 452/460
(K) Late Fees/Payments: All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 45/1. (Ord. 2007-4149, 11-5-2007)
11-5A-2: PEG ACCESS CARRIAGE REQUIREMENTS:
On the date set forth in subsection 11-5A-1(D) of this chapter, but not earlier than ninety (90) days after a holder sends notice to the village under 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(a), a holder shall: a) designate the same amount of capacity on its network to provide for public, education, and
government access use, as the incumbent cable operator is required to designate under its franchise terms in effect with a local unit of government on
January 1, 2007; and b) retransmit to its subscribers the same number of public, education, and government access channels as the incumbent cable
operator was retransmitting to subscribers on January 1, 2007. (Ord. 2007-4149, 11-5-2007)
Chapter 6
FEES AND COMPENSATION
11-6-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the village related to the
enforcement and administration of this title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-6-2: APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE:
(A) Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to chapter 3 or 4 of this title shall pay a flat fee or a percentage, as established by the annual fee
ordinance, of the estimated cost of the applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities, as certified by the applicant's professional engineer,
whichever is greater.
(B) The application and review fee shall be deposited with the village as part of the application filed pursuant to chapter 3 or 4 of this title.
(C) An applicant whose license or franchise application has been withdrawn, abandoned or denied shall, within sixty (60) days of its application and review
fee written request, be refunded an amount as established by the annual fee ordinance. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-6-3: OTHER VILLAGE COSTS:
All license or franchise grantees shall, within thirty (30) days after written demand therefor, reimburse the village as established by the annual fee
ordinance in relation to direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the village in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer
of the license or franchise or any license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-6-4: RESERVED COMPENSATION FOR PUBLIC WAYS:
The village reserves its right to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to a telecommunications license
or franchise grantee. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the village and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid for the granted property
rights. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-6-5: COMPENSATION FOR VILLAGE PROPERTY:
If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy village property for the installation of telecommunications facilities,
the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-6-6: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall pay a permit fee as established by the annual fee ordinance equal to a flat fee or a
percentage of the estimated cost of constructing the telecommunications facilities, whichever is greater, as certified by the applicant's engineer and
approved by the village engineer. (Ord. 97-2887, 6-2-1997)
11-6-7: ANNUAL FEES:
Unless otherwise agreed in a license or franchise grant agreement, each license or franchise grantee shall pay an annual license fee to the village as
established by the annual fee ordinance as reimbursement for the village's costs in connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and
occupancy of the public ways in behalf of the public and existing or future users. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-6-8: CABLE FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 453/460
Cable television franchisees shall be subject to the franchise fees, payments and costs provided in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-6-9: OVS FEES:
Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, all OVS systems and franchise grantees shall pay a fee to the village in relation to annual gross
revenues, as established by the annual fee ordinance, subject to the same regulations contained in section 11-5-20 of this title for franchise fees paid to
the village by cable operators franchised to provide cable service within the village and for payment of any franchise costs, if applicable. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-
15-1996)
11-6-10: REGULATORY FEES AND COMPENSATION; NOT A TAX:
The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for the public ways provided for in section 11-6-4 of
this chapter, are separate from, and additional to, any and all federal, state, local and village taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a
telecommunications carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications
services. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
Chapter 7
CONDITIONS OF GRANT
11-7-1: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in title 7, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 2008-
4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-2: GENERAL DUTIES:
(A) All license or franchise grantees shall, before commencing any construction in the public ways, comply with all requirements of JULIE.
(B) All license or franchise grantees shall, on written request from the village manager, provide written confirmation sufficient for customary land survey
and land title insurance purposes concerning the location of its facilities in public ways, and disclaiming any interest in public ways where it has no
license or franchise to construct or operate its facilities. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-3: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All license or franchise grantees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in title 7, chapter 1 of this code.
However, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the village and a grantee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a
license or franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices.
(Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996; amd. Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-4: INTERFERENCE WITH THE PUBLIC WAYS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-5: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
No license or franchise grantee nor any person acting on a grantee's behalf shall take any action or permit any action to be done which may impair or
damage any village property, public ways of the village, other ways or other property located in, on or adjacent thereto. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-6: NOTICE OF WORK:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-7: REPAIR AND EMERGENCY WORK:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-8: MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 454/460
Each license or franchise grantee shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state and
local requirements. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-9: RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-10: REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED FACILITIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-11: EMERGENCY REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-12: DAMAGE TO GRANTEE'S FACILITIES:
Unless directly and proximately caused by the wilful, intentional or malicious acts by the village, the village shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of
any telecommunications facility within the public ways of the village as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements,
construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the village. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-13: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS, OTHER WAYS AND VILLAGE PROPERTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-14: FACILITIES MAPS:
Each license or franchise grantee shall provide the village with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities within
the public ways. Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-15: DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION:
Within ten (10) days of a written request from the village manager, each license or franchise grantee shall furnish the village with information sufficient to
demonstrate:
(A) Grantee has complied with all requirements of this title.
(B) All municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes due the village in connection with the telecommunications services and facilities
provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the grantee.
(C) All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be made available for
inspection by the village at reasonable times and intervals. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-16: LEASED CAPACITY:
A license or franchise grantee shall have the right, without prior village approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided:
(A) Grantee shall furnish the village with a copy of any such lease or agreement.
(B) The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-17: GRANTEE INSURANCE:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-18: GENERAL INDEMNIFICATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 455/460
11-7-19: PERFORMANCE AND CONSTRUCTION SURETY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-20: SECURITY FUND:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-21: CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION BOND:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-22: COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES:
All grantees are required to cooperate with the village and with each other.
(A) By February 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the village with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may affect the
public ways.
(B) Each grantee shall meet with the village, other grantees and users of the public ways annually or as determined by the villageto schedule and
coordinate construction in the public ways.
(C) All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the village engineer, to minimize public inconvenience,
disruption or damages. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-23: ASSIGNMENTS OR TRANSFERS OF GRANT:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-24: TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING CONTROL OF GRANT:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
11-7-25: REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF GRANT:
A license or franchise granted by the village to use or occupy public ways of the village may be revoked for the following reasons:
(A) Construction or operation in the village or in the public ways of the village without a license or franchise grant of authorization.
(B) Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
(C) Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee.
(D) Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise.
(E) Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee's franchise or license assets, or a substantial interest therein.
(F) Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the village.
(G) Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways.
(H) Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this title.
(I) Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the village.
(J) Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 456/460
(K) Violation of material provisions of this title.
(L) Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-26: NOTICE AND DUTY TO CURE:
In the event that the village manager believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license or franchise, he shall give the grantee written notice of the
apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and
providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days to furnish evidence:
(A) That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.
(B) That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
(C) That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-27: HEARING:
In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the village manager as provided in section 11-7-26 of this chapter, the
manager shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the corporate authorities. The corporate authorities shall provide the grantee with notice
and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
11-7-28: STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION OR LESSER SANCTIONS:
If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this title, or of a franchise or license agreement, the corporate
authorities shall determine whether to revoke the license or franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature,
circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:
(A) Whether the misconduct was egregious.
(B) Whether substantial harm resulted.
(C) Whether the violation was intentional.
(D) Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.
(E) Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
(F) Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured. (Ord. 96-2800, 7-15-1996)
Chapter 8
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-4185, 3-17-2008)
Chapter 9
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
11-9-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
(A) Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village's boundaries.
(B) Amendments: Any mandatory amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter
shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's
boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 2007-4148, 11-5-2007)
11-9-2: ENFORCEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 457/460
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law. (Ord. 2007-4148, 11-5-2007)
11-9-3: PENALTIES:
The village, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby declare that for any material breach of the standards and requirements
of the cable and video customer protection law, as incorporated by reference in this chapter, a cable or video provider shall be subject to monetary
penalties as established in the village of Lisle annual fee ordinance. Such penalties shall be in addition to the penalties provided in the law and shall not
represent the village's exclusive remedy for any material breach. All monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis.
(A) "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
(B) The village shall give the cable or video provider writtennotice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty (30)
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
(C) A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the
cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection (B) of this section.
(D) The board of trustees hereby delegates authority to levy penalties to the village manager.
(E) Any decision of the village manager to levy penalties may be appealed to the board of trustees, which shall conduct a hearing on the alleged material
breach and penalties levied therefor within twenty one (21) days following receipt of the cable or video providers request for an appeal. (Ord. 2007-
4151, 11-19-2007)
11-9-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the schedule of customer credits for violations of the law provided for in the provisions of 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(s). Those credits shall be applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the
violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for proactively providing the credits and the customer is
under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. 2007-4148, 11-5-2007)
Chapter 10
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
11-10-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE REPEALED:
Effective January 1, 2003, there is enacted the simplified municipal telecommunications tax act. If public act 92-0526, entitled the simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act, is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, or if chapter 11 of this title is repealed or becomes ineffective for any
reason, then ordinance 98-2947, passed January 5, 1998, shall be deemed in full force and effect as of the date public act 92-0526 or chapter 11 of this
title is repealed or becomes ineffective. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
Chapter 11
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
11-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when
paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within this municipality, charges for the channel mileage
between each channel point within this municipality, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel provided within Illinois. However,
"gross charge" shall not include:
(A) Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this chapter, 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added to
customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to
customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce commission for the purpose of recovering any ofthe tax
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 458/460
liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
(B) Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such municipality;
(C) Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
(D) Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
(E) Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the
period of time specified by the department of commerce and community affairs;
(F) Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this chapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to
the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service;
(G) Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is
made);
(H) Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication devices; or
(I) Amounts paid by telecommunications retailersunder the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a
receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities created
by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to
the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a
permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in
this state in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state. The permit may be
revoked by the department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term): Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this
state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent
or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In theevent this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems,
and maritime systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act.
For air to ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as
defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer
exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any other form of
mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between
or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, "private line" means a dedicated
nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels,
from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added
services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component
part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications. Carrier
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 459/460
as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling
arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, "prepaid
telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section 2-27 of the retailers' occupations tax act. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
11-11-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
(A) The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent
(6%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer.
(B) The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent
(6%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate taxation of the act or privilege that
is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a
credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other
state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this state.
(C) The tax imposed by this section is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution and statutes
of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the municipality. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
11-11-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
(A) The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be remitted
by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use in the manner
prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and if unpaid, is
recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the manner provided by the department.
(B) Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for
telecommunications. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
11-11-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
On or before the last day of February, and on or before the last day of every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this chapter on telecommunication
retailers shall be returned with appropriateforms and information as required by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement the act.
(Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
11-11-5: RESELLERS:
(A) If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized
by this chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the department may reasonably require.
(B) Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax free
when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued the making of resales.
(C) Except as provided in this chapter, the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax free on the
grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in
connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
11-11-6: REBATES:
The village may rebate some or all of the amount of the tax authorized by this chapter paid by persons sixty five (65) years of age or older. Any tax related
to such rebate shall be rebated from the village directly to persons qualified for the rebate as determined by chapter 12 of this title of the village of Lisle,
which shall not be filed with the department. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
11-11-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of this chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not
affect other provisions of this chapter, or their application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its application. Each
unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=339 460/460
11-11-8: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval and publication as required by law, provided, however, that: a)
sections 11-11-2 and 11-11-3 of this chapter shall take effect for all bills issued on or after January 1, 2003, b) the tax provided for herein shall take effect
for all bills issued on or after January 1, 2003, and c) any amounts due or payable to the municipality for any tax periods ending prior to January 1, 2003,
shall nevertheless remain payable as if this chapter had not been adopted. (Ord. 2002-3412, 9-3-2002)