
Lake Forest, IL Code of Ordinances


CITY OF LAKE FOREST, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-3 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2017-74, passed 12-18-2017



 



Editor’s note:
As one of the city’s historical documents, the city’s Charter represents
the city’s fundamental or constitutional law.  Therefore, in codification,
changes are not made to the Charter.
All ACT to amend an Act entitled “An Act to incorporate the City of Lake
Forest,” approved February 21, 1861.



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF LAKE FOREST, ILLINOIS




Honorable Mayor, Robert Lansing




 



Prudence R. Beidler
 
Alderman First Ward


James E. Morris
 
Alderman First Ward


Melanie Rummel
 
Alderman Second Ward


Timothy Newman
 
Alderman Second Ward


Stanford Tack
 
Alderman Third Ward


Jack Reisenberg
 
Alderman Third Ward


Michelle Moreno
 
Alderman Fourth Ward


Raymond Buschmann
 
Alderman Fourth Ward


 
 
 


City Treasurer
 
Elizabeth A. Holleb


City Supervisor
 
Robert R. Kiely, Jr.


City Attorney
 
Victor Filippini


City Clerk
 
Margaret Boyer


Deputy City Clerk
 
Joyce Reda


City Surveyor and Engineer
 
Gewalt Hamilton and Associates






 



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



2015-14



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF LAKE FOREST,
ILLINOIS, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY



   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of The City of
Lake Forest (the “City”) are set forth in “The City Code of Lake
Forest, 1971,” which code has been amended from time-to-time (the “1971
Code”); and



   WHEREAS, the City would benefit from a more modern and user friendly
arrangement and form of the 1971 Code; and



   WHEREAS, in addition, the 1971 Code substantively has become outdated,
as various ordinances as adopted by the City Council have not been fully or
correctly incorporated into the 1971 Code; and



   WHEREAS, in order to better serve, promote, and preserve the public
peace, health, safety and general welfare of the City and advance the proper
conduct of its affairs, the City Council, pursuant to its home rule
authority, has determined that it is desirable and appropriate to revise,
amend, restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances and all new
ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such
ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and



   WHEREAS, the corporate authorities of the City have authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of
such ordinance in book form; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the City and for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the City to update the 1971 Code with a new compilation of
the City ordinances to be known as the “Code of Ordinances of the City of
Lake Forest, Illinois”;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE
CITY OF LAKE FOREST, COUNTY OF LAKE, STATE OF ILLINOIS, as follows:



   SECTION ONE:  Recitals. The foregoing recitals are hereby incorporated
into and made a part of this Ordinance.



   SECTION TWO:  Adoption of New Code. The general ordinances of the City
as revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby
adopted as and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Lake
Forest, Illinois,” which shall consist of the following Titles, and may
hereafter be referred to as the “Lake Forest City Code”:



      City of Lake Forest, Illinois Code of Ordinances



      City Charter



      Title I: General Provisions



      Title III: Administration



      Title V: Public Works



      Title VII: Traffic Code



      Title IX: General Regulations



      Title XI: Business Regulations



      Title XIII: General Offenses



      Title XV: Land Use and Development



      PARALLEL REFERENCES



      TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   SECTION THREE:  Supersedence. The Code of Ordinances of the City of
Lake Forest, Illinois as approved in Section Two of this Ordinance shall
supersede the 1971 Code, and all prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects
treated in such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after
the effective date of this ordinance except as they are included and
re-ordained in whole or in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not
affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect
the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or
detaching territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to
certain persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of
bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or
personal property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of
land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other
public places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a
temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or
covered by the Code.



   SECTION FOUR:  Savings Clause. Notwithstanding Section Three of this
Ordinance, to the extent that the City finds or determines that the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Lake Forest, Illinois inadvertently omitted or
erroneously incorporated the terms of specific ordinances adopted by the City
Council, the City Council may re-adopt any such ordinance inadvertently
omitted or erroneously incorporated, and upon such re-adoption the specific
ordinance as originally approved will relate back to its original adoption.



   SECTION FIVE:  Effective Date. The Code of Ordinances of the City of
Lake Forest, Illinois shall be in full force and effect upon the passage,
approval, and publication in pamphlet form of this Ordinance, after which
time the City Clerk shall cause the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lake
Forest, Illinois in its entirety to be made available to the public through
the City website and other means.



PASSED this 20th day of January, 2015.



AYES: Alderman Waldeck, Beidler, Pandaleon, Tack, Reisenberg, Adelman and
Moreno



NAYS: 0



ABSENT: Alderman Moore



ABSTAIN: 0



APPROVED this 20th day of January, 2015.



                           Donald Schoenheider 
    /s/     



                           Mayor



ATTEST:



Margaret Boyer    /s/                       



Deputy City Clerk



2016-33



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF LAKE FOREST, ILLINOIS



   WHEREAS, On January 20, 2015, City Council granted final approval of an
Ordinance adopting an updated Code of Ordinances of the City of Lake Forest,
Illinois (the “Lake Forest City Code”); and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed a supplement (the “S-1 Supplement”) to the Lake Forest City
Code, which contains the ordinances approved by the corporate authorities of
the City Council through April 20, 2015, and includes Ordinance 2015-25; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Lake Forest City Code which
are based on or make reference to sections of law of the State of Illinois;
and



   WHEREAS, the corporate authorities of the City have authorized an
update to these sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the
State of Illinois; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the City and for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the City that this ordinance adopting the S-1 Supplement
be approved;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE
CITY OF LAKE FOREST, COUNTY OF LAKE, STATE OF ILLINOIS, as follows:



   SECTION ONE:  Recitals. The foregoing recitals are hereby incorporated
into and made a part of this Ordinance.



   SECTION TWO:  Adoption of the S-1 Supplement. The S-1 Supplement to
the Lake Forest City Code as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.



   SECTION THREE:  Savings Clause. To the extent that the City finds or
determines that the S-1 Supplement inadvertently omitted or erroneously
incorporated the terms of specific ordinances adopted by the City Council,
the City Council may re-adopt any such ordinance inadvertently omitted or
erroneously incorporated, and upon such re-adoption the specific ordinance as
originally approved will relate back to its original adoption.



   SECTION FIVE:  Effective Date. The S-1 Supplement shall be in full
force and effect upon the passage, approval, and publication in pamphlet form
of this Ordinance, after which time the City Clerk shall cause the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Lake Forest, Illinois in its entirety to be made
available to the public through the City website and other means.



PASSED this 16th day of May, 2016.



AYES: Alderman Waldeck, Beidler, Pandaleon, Newmand, Tack, Reisenberg,
Adelman and Moreno



NAYS: 0



ABSENT: 0



ABSTAIN: 0



APPROVED this 16th day of May, 2016.



                           Donald Schoenheider 
    /s/     



                           Mayor



ATTEST:



Margaret Boyer    /s/   



Deputy City Clerk



2017-70



THE CITY OF LAKE FOREST



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF LAKE FOREST, ILLINOIS



   WHEREAS, On January 20, 2015, City Council granted final approval of an
Ordinance adopting an updated Code of Ordinances of the City of Lake Forest,
Illinois (the “Lake Forest City Code”); and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed a supplement (the “S-2 Supplement”) to the Lake Forest City
Code, which contains the ordinances approved by the corporate authorities of
the City Council through December 5, 2016, and includes Ordinance 2016-76; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Lake Forest City Code which
are based on or make reference to sections of law of the State of Illinois;
and



   WHEREAS, the corporate authorities of the City have authorized an
update to these sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the
State of Illinois; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the City and for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the City that this ordinance adopting the S-2 Supplement
be approved;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE
CITY OF LAKE FOREST, COUNTY OF LAKE, STATE OF ILLINOIS, as follows:



   SECTION ONE:  Recitals. The foregoing recitals are hereby incorporated
into and made a part of this Ordinance.



   SECTION TWO:  Adoption of the S-2 Supplement. The S-2 Supplement to
the Lake Forest City Code as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.



   SECTION THREE:  Savings Clause. To the extent that the City finds or
determines that the S-2 Supplement inadvertently omitted or erroneously
incorporated the terms of specific ordinances adopted by the City Council,
the City Council may re-adopt any such ordinance inadvertently omitted or
erroneously incorporated, and upon such re-adoption the specific ordinance as
originally approved will relate back to its original adoption.



   SECTION FIVE:  Effective Date. The S-2 Supplement shall be in full
force and effect upon the passage, approval, and publication in pamphlet form
of this Ordinance, after which time the City Clerk shall cause the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Lake Forest, Illinois in its entirety to be made
available to the public through the City website and other means.



PASSED this 4th day of December, 2016.



AYES: Alderman Beidler, Morris, Newman, Rummel, Tack, Reisenberg, Moreno and
Buschmann



NAYS: 0



ABSENT: 0



ABSTAIN: 0



APPROVED this 4th day of December, 2017.



                           RTE Lansing     
/s/     



                           Mayor



ATTEST:



Margaret Boyer    /s/   



City Clerk



CITY CHARTER



Editor’s note:



   As one of the city’s historical documents, the city’s Charter
represents the city’s fundamental or constitutional law.  Therefore, in
codification, changes are not made to the Charter. Instances of
typographical, grammatical and punctuation errors are maintained in this
Charter but are indicated by highlighting the occurrence.



All ACT to amend an Act entitled “An Act to incorporate the City of Lake
Forest,” approved February 21, 1861.



Article



   I.   Boundaries, General Powers and Formation of Wards



   II.   Officers—Their Election And Appointment



   III.   Elections



   IV.



   V.   Mayor’s Court



   V.   Powers Of The City Council And Duties



   VII.   Of Taxation



   VIII.   Public Improvements And Assessments Therefore



   IX.   Collection of Taxes And Assessments



   X.   Public Schools



   XI.   Miscellaneous Provisions



ARTICLE I
BOUNDARIES, GENERAL POWERS AND FORMATION OF WARDS



   SECTION 1. Be it enacted by the people of the State of Illinois,
represented in the General Assembly, that the inhabitants in the City of Lake
Forest, in the County of Lake, and state of Illinois, be and they are hereby
constituted a body politic and corporate, by the name and style of “The
City of Lake Forest”; and by that name shall have perpetual succession and
may have and use a common seal, which they may change and alter at pleasure.



   SECTION 2. The boundaries of said City shall include within their
limits all of the original plat of Lake Forest, as platted and recorded by
the Lake Forest Association; the western addition to Lake Forest; all the
west half of the north-west quarter of section thirty-three (33), township
forty-four (44) north, of range twelve (12) east; also all of said section
thirty-three (33), and all of the north-east quarter of section four (4),
township forty-three (43), range aforesaid, that lies east of the eastern
line or boundary of the public road or highway known as the Chicago and Green
Bay road, or Chicago and Lake Shore road, so called; but no tract or lot thus
included, and not embraced in either of the aforesaid plats, and exceeding
thirty (30) acres in area, shall be taxed for general city purposes, but the
same shall bear a proportionate share of taxes for school purposes, and
shall, also, be liable for special assessments for improvements of streets
and highways adjacent thereto.



   SECTION 3. The inhabitants of said City, by the name and style
aforesaid, shall have power to sue and be sued, to implead and be impleaded,
defend and be defended in all courts of law and equity and in all actions
whatsoever; to purchase, preserve and hold property, both real and personal,
within or beyond the City, for burial grounds, or for other public purposes,
for the uses of the inhabitants of said City; to sell lease and convey or
dispose of property, real and personal, for the benefit of the City, and to
improve and protect such property and to do all other things thereto as
natural persons.



   SECTION 4. The City of Lake Forest shall be divided into three (3)
wards, the boundaries of which shall be fixed by the City Council and shall
be, by the City Council, changed from time to time, as they shall see fit,
having regard to the number of inhabitants. The City Council may create
additional wards, as occasion may require, and fix the boundaries thereof.



ARTICLE II
OFFICERS—THEIR ELECTION AND APPOINTMENT



   SECTION 1.  Repealed by Ordinance 02-11 passed and approved April 18,
2002.



   SECTION 2. The several wards of the City shall be represented in the
City Council by two Aldermen from each ward who shall be bona fide residents
thereof, and hold their offices for two years from and after their election,
and until the election and qualification of their successors.



   SECTION 3. A majority of the City Council shall constitute a quorum to
do business but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day and compel the
attendance of absent members, under such penalties as may be prescribed by
ordinance.



   SECTION 4. All officers elected or appointed under this act, except
Aldermen shall hold their offices for one year and until the election or
appointment and qualification of their successors, respectively. All other
officers mentioned in this act, and not otherwise officially provided for,
shall be appointed by the City Council, by ballot, on the second Monday of
April, in each year, or as soon thereafter as may be; but the City Council
may specially authorize the appointment of watchmen and policemen by the
Mayor, to continue in office during the pleasure of the City Council:
Provided, the Mayor or marshal may be authorized to remove them from office
for good cause. All officers elected or appointed to fill vacancies shall
hold for the unexpired term, only, and until the election or appointment and
qualification of their successors.



   SECTION 5. No person shall be eligible to the office of Mayor who shall
not, after the first election held under this charter, have been a resident
of the City for one year next preceding his election, or who shall be under
twenty-one (21) years of age, or who shall not at the time of his election be
a citizen of the United States, and shall be a freeholder of property located
within the bounds of said City.



   SECTION 6. No person shall be an Alderman unless he shall be, at the
time of his election twenty-one (21) years of age, a citizen of the United
States, a resident of the ward for which he is elected, and shall be a
freeholder of property located within the bounds of said City, and, after the
first election under this charter, shall have resided one year within the
limits of said City.



   SECTION 7. If, from any causes there shall not be a quorum of Aldermen,
the Clerk shall appoint the time and place of holding a special election to
supply such vacancies, and appoint judges thereof, if necessary, if any
Alderman shall remove from the ward represented by him, his office shall
thereby become vacant. If, from any cause, the officers herein named shall
not be appointed on the second Monday of April, in each year, the City
Council may adjourn from time to time until such appointments are made. If
there should be a failure by the people to elect any officers herein required
to be elected, the City Council may forthwith order a new election.



   SECTION 8. Any officer elected or appointed to any office, may be
removed from such office, by a vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the Aldermen
authorized by law to be elected; but no officer shall be removed except for
good cause, nor unless first furnished with the charges against him, and
heard in his defense. And the City Council shall have power to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of papers, when necessary for the
purpose of such trial; and shall proceed within ten (10) days, to hear and
determine upon the merits of such case; and if such officer shall neglect to
appear and answer such charge, then the City Council may declare such office
vacated: Provided, this section shall not be deemed to apply to any officer
appointed by the City Council, such officer may be removed at any time by a
vote of three-fourths (3/4) as aforesaid, in their discretion; but any
officer may be suspended until the disposition of the charges when preferred.



   SECTION 9. Whenever any vacancy shall occur in the office of Mayor or
Alderman, such vacancy shall be filled by a new election; and the City
Council shall order such special election within ten (10) days after the
happening of such vacancy. Any vacancy occurring in any other office may be
filled by appointment of the City Council; but no special election shall be
held to fill vacancies if more than nine (9) months of the time has expired.



   SECTION 10. All citizens of the United States, resident in said City,
and qualified to vote at any election held under this act, shall be qualified
to hold any office created by this act, except as herein otherwise provided;
but no person shall be eligible to any office under this or any other act in
relation to said City, who is now or may hereafter be a defaulter to said
City, or the state of Illinois; and any person shall be considered a
defaulter who has refused or neglected, or may hereafter refuse or neglect,
for thirty days after demand made, to account for and pay over to the party
authorized to receive the same, any public money which may have come into his
possession. And if any person holding any such office or place within the
City shall become a defaulter while in office, the office or place may
thereupon be declared vacant by the City Council.



   SECTION 11. When two or more candidates for any elective office shall
have an equal number of votes for such office, the election shall be
determined by the casting of lots, in the presence of the City Council.



ARTICLE III
ELECTIONS



   SECTION 1. A general election of all the officers of the corporation,
required to be elected by this act, or any ordinance of the City, shall be
held in the City on the second Tuesday of April, in each year, at such place
as the City Council may appoint, and of which six days, public notice shall
previously be given, by written or printed notices, in three (3) public
places in the City, or by publication in the newspaper publishing the
ordinances of the City, by the City Clerk.



   SECTION 2. The manner of conducting and voting at the elections held
under this act, and contesting the same, the keeping the poll lists,
canvassing of the votes, and certifying the returns, shall be the same, as
nearly as may be, as is now or may be hereafter provided by law at general
state elections: Provided, the City Council shall have power to regulate
elections and the appointment of judges thereof. The voting shall be by
ballot, and the judges of election shall take the same oath and shall have
the same powers and authority as the judges of general elections. After the
closing of the polls, the ballots shall be counted in the manner provided by
law, and the returns shall be returned, sealed, to the City Clerk, within
three (3) days after the election; and thereupon the City Council shall meet
and canvass the same, and declare the result of the election. The person
having the highest number of votes for any office shall be declared elected,
it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to notify all persons elected or
appointed to office of their election or appointment; and unless such persons
shall qualify within twenty (20) days thereafter, the office shall become
vacant.



   SECTION 3. No person shall be entitled to vote at any City or ward
election who is not entitled to vote at state elections and has not been a
resident of said City at least two (2) months next preceding said election.
He shall have been, moreover, an actual resident of the ward in which he
proposes to vote for ten (10) days previous to such election, and, if
required by any judge or qualified voter, shall take the following oath,
before he is permitted to vote: “I swear (or affirm) that I am of the age
of twenty-one (21) years, that I am a citizen of the United States (or was a
resident of this state at the time of the adoption of the constitution), and
have been a resident of this state one year and a resident of this City two
(2) months immediately preceding this election, and am now and have been for
the last ten (10) days past a resident of this ward, and have not voted at
this election,” provided, that the voter shall be deemed a resident of the
ward in which he is accustomed to lodge.



   SECTION 4. The persons entitled to vote at any election held under this
act, shall not be arrested on civil process within said City, upon the day on
which said election is held; and all persons illegally voting at any election
held under this act, or the ordinances of the City in pursuance thereof,
shall be punishable according to the laws of the state.



ARTICLE IV



   SECTION 1. Every person chosen or appointed to an executive, judicial
or administrative office under this act shall, before he enters upon the
duties of his office, take and subscribe the oath of office prescribed in the
constitution of this state, and file the same, duly certified by the officer
before whom it was taken, with the City Clerk.



   SECTION 2. The Mayor shall, before he enters upon the duties of his
office, in addition to the usual oath, swear or affirm that he will devote so
much of his time to the duties of his office, as an efficient and faithful
discharge thereof may require. He shall preside over the meetings of the City
Council, and shall take care that the laws of this state and the ordinances
of this City are duly enforced, respected and observed within the City, and
that all other officers of the City discharge their respective duties, he
shall cause negligence and positive violation of duty to be prosecuted and
punished, he shall, from time to time, give the City Council such
information, and recommend such measures as he may deem advantageous to the
City.



   SECTION 3. He is hereby authorized to call upon any and all white male
inhabitants of the City or county, over the age of eighteen (18) years, to
aid in the enforcing the laws of the state or the ordinances of the City;
and, in case of a riot, to call out the militia, or any available force, to
aid in suppressing the same; and any person who shall not obey such calls
shall forfeit to the City a fine of not less than five (5) dollars.



   SECTION 4. He shall have power, whenever he may deem it necessary, to
require of any of the officers of the City an exhibit of his books and
papers; and he shall have power to execute all acts that may be required of
him by this act, or any ordinance made in pursuance thereof.



   SECTION 5. He shall be liable to indictment in the Circuit Court of
Lake County for palpable omission of duty, willful oppression, malconduct or
partiality in the discharge of the duties of his office, and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one hundred (100)
dollars; and the court shall have power, upon recommendation of the jury, to
add, as a part of the judgment, that he be removed from office.



   SECTION 6. He shall receive such salary as may be fixed by ordinance.



   SECTION 7. All ordinances and resolutions shall, before they take
effect, be placed in the office of the City Clerk; and if the Mayor approve
thereof, he shall sign the same; and such as he shall not approve, he shall
return to the City Council, with his objections thereto. Upon the return of
any ordinance or resolution by the Mayor, the vote by which the same was
passed shall be reconsidered; and if, after such reconsideration, a majority
of the members elected to the City Council shall agree (by the ayes and noes,
which shall be entered upon the journals), to pass the same, it shall go into
effect; and if the Mayor shall neglect to approve or object to any such
proceedings for a longer period than three (3) days after the same shall be
placed in the Clerk’s office, as aforesaid, the same shall go into effect.
He shall, ex-officio, have power to administer any oath required to be taken
by this or any law of the state, to take depositions, the acknowledgment of
deeds, mortgages and all other instruments of writing, and certify the same,
under the seal of the City, which shall be good and valid in law.



   SECTION 8. In case of vacancy in the office of Mayor, or of his being
unable to perform the duties of his office, by reason of temporary or
continued absence or sickness, the City Council shall appoint one of its
members, by ballot, to preside over its meetings, whose official designation
shall be “Acting Mayor,” and the Alderman so appointed shall be vested
with all the powers and perform all the duties of Mayor, until he shall
resume his office, or the vacancy shall be filled by a new election.



   SECTION 9. The members of the City Council shall be, ex-officio, fire
wardens and conservators of the peace within the City, and shall be exempt
from jury duty and street labor, (or the payment of street taxes, during
their term of office.)



   SECTION 10. The clerk shall keep the corporate seal, and all papers and
books belonging to the City. He shall attend all meetings of the City
Council, and keep a full record of their proceedings on the journals; and
copies of all papers, duly filed in his office, and transcripts of the
journals of the proceedings of the City Council, certified by him, under the
corporate seal shall be evidence in all courts, in like manner as if the
originals were produced. He shall likewise draw all warrants on the treasury,
and countersign the same, and keep an accurate account thereof in a book
provided for that purpose. He shall also keep an accurate account of all
receipts and expenditures, in such manner as the City Council shall direct.



   SECTION 11. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to perform all
professional services incident to his office, and, when required, to furnish
written opinions upon questions and subjects submitted to him by the Mayor,
or City Council or its committee.



   SECTION 12. The City Treasurer shall receive all moneys belonging to
the City, and shall keep an accurate account of all receipts and
expenditures, in such manner as the City Council shall direct. All moneys
shall be drawn from the treasury, in pursuance of an order of the City
Council, by a treasury warrant, signed by the Mayor or the presiding officer
of the City Council, and countersigned by the City Clerk. Such warrant shall
specify for what purpose and from, what fund the amount therein named is to
be paid. The Treasurer shall exhibit to the City Council, at least twenty
(20) days before the annual election of each year, and oftener if required, a
full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures since the date of
the last annual report, and also the state of the treasury; which account
shall be filed in the office of the Clerk.



   SECTION 13. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the City
Treasurer shall give a bond, in a sum at least twice as large as the probable
amount of moneys to be received or held by said treasurer. The amount of the
same to be fixed by the City Council, with two (2) sureties to be approved by
the City Council.



   SECTION 14. The City Marshal shall perform such duties as shall be
prescribed by the City Council for the preservation of the public peace, the
collection of license moneys, fines or otherwise, he shall possess the powers
and authority of a constable of Lake County, at common law and under the
statutes of this state, and receive like fees, but shall not serve civil
process without first entering into bond as such constable to be approved by
the County Court of Lake County, as in other cases. He shall execute and
return all process, issued by any proper officer, under this act, or any
ordinance in pursuance thereof, he shall be, ex-officio, City Collector.



   SECTION 15. The City Engineer or Surveyor shall have the sole power,
under the direction and control of the City Council, to survey within the
City limits, and he shall be governed by such rules and ordinances, and
receive such fees and emoluments for his services, as the City Council shall
direct and prescribe, he shall possess the same power, in making plats and
surveys within the City, as is given by law to county surveyors, and the like
effect and validity shall be given to his acts and to all plats and surveys
made by him as are or may be given by law to the acts, plats and surveys of
the County Surveyor, he shall, when required, superintend the construction of
all public works ordered by the City, make out the plans and estimates
thereof, and contract for the erection of the same, he shall perform all
surveying and engineering ordered by the City Council, and shall, under their
direction, establish the grades and boundaries of streets and alleys; but
such plans, estimates and contracts, grades and boundaries, shall be first
reported to the City Council, and approved by them, or they shall not be
valid.



   SECTION 16. The Assessor shall perform all duties in relation to the
assessing of property, for the purpose of levying the taxes imposed by the
City Council. In the performance of his duties, he shall have the same powers
as are or may be given by law to county or town assessors, and be subject to
the same liabilities. On completing the assessment rolls for City purposes,
and having revised and corrected the same, he shall sign and return them to
the city council. The City Collector shall collect all taxes and assessments
which may be levied by the City Council, and perform such other duties as may
be herein prescribed, or ordained by the City Council.



   SECTION 17. The Supervisor shall superintend all public works and local
improvements in the City; and carry into effect all orders of the City
Council in relation thereto. It shall also be his duty to superintend and
supervise the opening of streets and alleys, and the grading, improving and
repairing thereof, and the construction and repairing of bridges, culverts
and sewers; to order the laying, relaying and repairing of sidewalks; to give
notice to persons owning property, adjoining such sidewalks when required;
and upon the failure of any person to comply with such notice, to cause the
same to be laid, relaid or repaired, and apportion the costs thereof among
the persons or lots properly chargeable therewith, and deliver the account
thereof to the city clerk, to be laid before the City Council; to make plans
and estimates of any work ordered in relation to streets and alleys, bridges,
culverts and sewers; to keep full and accurate accounts, in appropriate
books, of all appropriations made for work pertaining to his office, and of
all disbursements thereof, specifying to whom made and on what account; and
he shall render monthly accounts thereof to the City Council. It shall be
lawful for the Supervisor to appoint and have an assistant or deputy in each
ward of the City, to be approved by the City Council, who shall, under the
control and direction of the supervisor, exercise the powers and duties of
the supervisor within such ward, respectively; and the official acts of all
such deputies shall have the same force and authority as those of the
supervisor; but the Supervisor shall in all cases be responsible for the acts
of such deputies.



   SECTION 18. The City Council shall have power, from time to time, to
require further and other duties of all officers elected or appointed to any
office under this act, whose duties are or are not herein specifically
mentioned, and fix their compensation. They may also require all officers,
severally, before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, to
execute a bond to the City of Lake Forest, in such sums and with such
securities as they may approve, conditioned that they shall faithfully
execute the duties of their respective offices, and account for and pay over
and deliver all moneys and other property received by then; which bond, with
the approval of the City Council certified thereon by the City Clerk, shall
be filed in his office.



   SECTION 19. If any person having been an officer of said City, shall
not, within ten (10) days after notification and request, deliver to his
successor in office all the property, books, papers and effects, of every
description, in his possession, belonging to said City or appertaining to his
said office, he shall forfeit and pay, for the use of the City, fifty (50)
dollars, besides all damages caused by his refusal or neglect so to deliver;
and such successor may recover possession of the books, papers and effects
belonging to his office, in the manner prescribed by the laws of the state.



   SECTION 20. All officers except the Mayor, elected or appointed under
this act, shall be commissioned by warrant, under the corporate seal, signed
by the Mayor or presiding officer of the City Council, and Clerk.



ARTICLE V
MAYOR’S COURT



Repealed by act of the legislature approved March 11, 1869.



ARTICLE V.
POWERS OF THE CITY COUNCIL AND DUTIES.



   SECTION 1. The Mayor and Aldermen shall constitute the City Council of
the City. The City Council shall meet at such time and place as they shall,
by resolution, direct. The Mayor, when present, shall preside at all meetings
of the City Council, and shall have only a casting vote. In his absence, any
one of the Aldermen may be appointed to preside.



   SECTION 2. No member of the City Council shall be appointed to or be
competent to hold any office of which the emoluments are paid from the City
treasury or paid by fees directed to be paid by any act or ordinance of the
City Council, or be directly or indirectly interested in any contract, the
expense or consideration whereof, is to be paid under any ordinance of the
City Council, or be allowed to vote in any matter in which he is directly
interested, personally or pecuniarly.



   SECTION 3. The City Council shall hold twelve (12) stated meetings, one
in each month, during the year; and the Mayor or any two (2) Aldermen may
call special meetings, by-notice to each of the members of the City Council,
served personally or left at their usual place of abode. The said City of
Lake Forest shall not at any time issue City bonds for a greater amount than
five thousand (5,000) dollars, or for any sum, if the indebtedness of said
City amounts to five thousand dollars, without submitting the question of
issuing such bonds to a vote of the legal voters of said City; which vote or
election shall be held as elections are now held under this charter for the
election of such officers of the corporation as by this act are required to
be elected by a vote of the people. If there is a majority in favor of
issuing bonds, then it shall he lawful for the corporation, acting through
the proper officer, to issue bonds. Petitions and remonstrances may be
presented to the City Council, and they shall determine the rule of their own
proceedings, and be the judges of the election and qualification of their own
members, and shall have power to compel the attendance of absent members.



   SECTION 4. The City Council shall have control of the finances and of
all the property, real, personal and mixed, belonging to the corporation, and
shall, likewise, have power, within the jurisdiction of the City, by
ordinance–



   First–To borrow money on the credit of the City, and issue the bonds
of the City therefor; but no sum of money shall be borrowed at a higher rate
of interest than the rate allowed by law; nor shall a greater sum or sums be
borrowed, or at any time outstanding the interest upon the aggregate of which
shall exceed the one-half of the City revenue arising from the ordinary taxes
within the City for the year immediately preceding; and no bonds shall be
issued or negotiated at more than ten (10) per cent below par value; and,
when so issued and negotiated, the interest on the same shall not exceed
eight per cent per annum.



   Second–To appropriate money and provide for the payment of the debts
and expenses of the City. To provide for the payment of all proper expenses
incurred by officers of the City in discharge of any duties imposed upon them
by their respective offices; and in all cases when offenders against the law
are apprehended, by the officers of said City or by other person by said
officers employed, it shall be the duty of the City Council to provide for
the payment of the reasonable expenses incurred in said service, including
the compensation of the persons so employed.



   Third–To make regulations to prevent the introduction of contagious
diseases into the City; to make quarantine laws for that purpose, and to
enforce them within the City.



   Fourth–To make regulations to secure the general health and comfort
of the inhabitants; to prevent, abate and remove nuisances, and punish the
authors thereof by penalties, fines and imprisonment; to define and declare
what shall be deemed nuisances, and authorize and direct the summary
abatement thereof; to prevent indecencies within the corporation, and on Lake
Michigan within one mile of the shore thereof and to license and authorize
the erection of piers or wharves extending into said lake.



   Fifth–To provide the City with water; to maker regulate and establish
public wells, pumps and cisterns, hydrants and reservoirs, in the streets,
within the City, or beyond the limits thereof, for the extinguishment of
fires and the convenience of the inhabitants, and to prevent the unnecessary
waste of water.



   Sixth–To have the exclusive jurisdiction, control and power over the
streets, alleys and highways of the City, and to abate and remove any
encroachments or obstructions thereon; to open, alter, abolish, widen,
extend, straighten, establish, regulate grade, clean or otherwise improve the
same; to put drains and sewers therein, and prevent the encumbering thereof,
in any manner, and protect the same from any encroachment or injury.



   Seventh–To establish, erect, construct, regulate and keep in repair
bridges, culverts and sewers, sidewalks and crossings, and regulate the
construction and use of the same, and abate any obstructions or encroachments
thereof; to establish, alter, change and straighten the channels of the water
courses and natural drains in the streets and avenues of the City, and to
sewer the same or to wall them up and cover them over.



   Eighth–To provide for lighting the streets and erecting lamp posts
and lamps therein, and regulate the lighting thereof, and, from time to time,
create, alter or extend lamp districts; to exclusively regulate, direct and
control the laying and repairing the gas pipes and gas fixtures in the
streets, alleys and sidewalks.



   Ninth–To establish markets and public buildings of the City, and
provide for the government and regulation thereof, and their erection and
location.



   Tenth–To provide for the enclosing, regulating and improving all
public grounds and cemeteries belonging to the City; and to direct and
regulate the planting of and preserving of ornamental and shade trees, in the
streets or public grounds, and the preservation of the same from injury an
private grounds or property.



   Eleventh–To erect and establish one or more hospitals and
dispensaries, and control and regulate the same; to purchase and procure, for
the use of the city, fire engines, and to organize and equip a fire
department, and to make such rules, regulations and provisions concerning the
sane and for the prevention of fires, generally, within said City, as said
City Council may deem proper; and may require of the inhabitants of said
City, in and about their dwellings and on their lands, such precautions as
will tend to avert loss or injury by fire.



   Twelfth-To prevent the encumbering of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds, with carriages, wagons, carts, wheelbarrows, boxes, lumber,
timber, firewood, posts, awnings, signs, or any other substance or material
whatever; to compel all persons to keep the snow, ice, dirt and other rubbish
from the sidewalks and street gutters in front of premises occupied by them.



   Thirteenth–To license, tax and regulate merchants, commission
merchants, inn-keepers, brokers, money-brokers, insurance brokers and
auctioneers, and to impose duties on the sale of goods at auction; to
license, tax, regulate, suppress and prohibit hawkers, peddlers, pawnbrokers,
grocery keepers, and keepers of ordinaries, theatrical or other exhibitions,
shows and amusements.



   Fourteenth–To licenses tax, regulate and suppress hackmen, draymen,
omnibus drivers, porters and all others pursuing like occupations with or
without vehicles, and prescribe their compensation; and to regulate and
restrain runners for stages, cars and public houses.



   Fifteenth–To license, tax, regulate, prohibit and suppress billiard
tables, pin alleys; to suppress and restrain disorderly houses, tippling
shops and saloons, bawdy houses, gaming and gambling houses, lotteries and
all fraudulent devices and practices, and all playing of cards, dice and
other games of chance, with or without betting, and to authorize the
destruction of all instruments and devices used for the purpose of gaming.



   Sixteenth–To authorize the proper officer of the City to grant and
issue licenses for all proper purposes, and to direct the manner of issuing
and registering thereof, and the fees and charges to be paid therefor. No
license shall be granted for more than one year; and not less than three (3)
dollars nor more than five hundred (500) dollars shall be charged for any
license under this act, and the fees for issuing the same shall not exceed
one dollar.



   Seventeenth–To license, restrain regulate and prohibit the selling or
giving away of any intoxicating or malt liquors, by any person, within the
City; to forbid and punish the selling or giving away of any intoxicating or
malt liquors to any child, minor, apprentice, servant or Indian.



   Eighteenth–To prevent, restrain and punish forestalling and
regrating; to regulate the inspecting and vending of fresh meats, poultry and
vegetables, of butter, lard and other provisions, and the place and manner of
selling fish and inspecting the same.



   Nineteenth–To regulate, license and prohibit butchers, and to revoke
their licenses for malconduct in the course of trade.



   Twentieth–To regulate the keeping and conveying of gunpowder and
other combustible and dangerous materials, and the use of candles and lights
in barns, stables and outhouses.



   Twenty-first–To establish standard weights and measures, and regulate
the weights and measures to be used within the City, in all cases not
otherwise provided by law; to require all traders and dealers in merchandise
or properly, of any description, which is sold by measure or weight, to cause
their measures and weights to be tested and sealed by the City sealer, and to
be subject to his inspection. The standard of such weights and measures shall
be conformable to those established by law of this state.



   Twenty-second–To regulate and provide for the inspecting and
measuring of lumber, shingles, timber, posts, staves, heading and all kinds
of building materials, and for the measuring of all kinds of mechanical work,
and to appoint one or more inspectors or measurers.



   Twenty-third–To provide for the inspection and weighing of hay, lime
and stone-coal, and the place and manner of selling the same; to regulate the
measurement of firewood, charcoal and other fuel, to be sold or used within
the City, and the place and manner of selling the same.



   Twenty-fourth–To regulate the inspection of beef, pork, flour, meal
and other provisions, salt, whiskey and other liquors, to be sold in barrels,
hogsheads and other vessels or packages; to appoint weighers, gaugers and
inspectors, and prescribe their duties, and regulate their fees: provided,
that nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to require the
inspection of any articles enumerated herein, which are to be shipped beyond
the limits of the state, except at the request of the owner thereof or his
agent.



   Twenty-fifth–To regulate the weight and quality of bread, to be sold
or used within the City.



   Twenty-sixth–To regulate the size and quality of bricks to be sold or
used within the City, and the inspection thereof.



   Twenty-seventh–To prevent and suppress any riot, rout, affray, noise,
disturbance or disorderly assembly, in any public or private place within the
City.



   Twenty-eighth–To create, establish and regulate the police of the
City; to appoint watchmen and policemen, and prescribe their duties and
powers.



   Twenty-ninth–To prohibit, prevent and suppress horse-racing,
immoderate riding or driving in the streets, and to authorize persons
immoderately riding or driving, as aforesaid, to be stopped by any person; to
prohibit and punish the abuse of animals; to compel persons to fasten their
horses or other animals, attached to vehicles, or otherwise, while standing
or remaining in the streets.



   Thirtieth–To restrain and punish vagrants, mendicants, street beggars
and prostitutes.



   Thirty-first–To regulate restrain or prohibit the running at large of
horses, cattle, swine, sheep, goats and geese, and to authorize the
distraining, impounding and sale of the same, for the costs of the
proceedings, and the penalty incurred, and to impose penalties on the owners
thereof.



   Thirty-second–To prohibit and restrain the rolling of hoops, flying
of kites, or any other amusements or practices tending to annoy persons
passing on the streets or sidewalks, or to frighten horses or teams; to
restrain and prohibit the ringing of bells, blowing of horns or bugles,
crying of goods, and all other noises, performances and practices tending to
the collecting of persons on the streets and sidewalks, by auctioneers and
others, for the purpose of business, amusement or otherwise.



   Thirty-third–To do all acts and make all regulations which may be
necessary or expedient for the promotion of health and suppression of disease.



   Thirty-fourth–To compel the owner or occupant of any grocery, cellar,
soap or tallow chandler, or blacksmith shop, tannery, stable, privy, sewer or
other unwholesome or nauseous house or place, to cleanse, remove or abate the
same, as may be necessary for the health, comfort and convenience of the
inhabitants.



   Thirty-fifth–To direct the location and regulate the management and
construction of breweries, tanneries, blacksmith shops, foundries, livery
stables and packing houses; to direct the location and regulate the
management and construction of, and restrain, abate and prohibit, within the
city and to the distance of one mile from the limits thereof, distilleries,
slaughtering establishments, establishments for steaming or rendering lard,
tallow, offal and such other substances as may be rendered, and all other
establishments or places where any nauseous, offensive or unwholesome
business may be carried on.



   Thirty-sixth–To regulate the burial of the dead; to establish or
regulate one or more cemeteries; to regulate the registration of births and
deaths; to direct the returning and keeping of bills of mortality, and to
impose penalties on physicians and sextons and others for any default in the
premises.



   Thirty-seventh–To provide for the taking of an enumeration of the
inhabitants of the City.



   Thirty-eighth–To erect and establish a workhouse or house of
correction make all necessary regulations therefor, and appoint all necessary
keepers or assistants, in such workhouse, or house of correction, may be
confined all vagrants, stragglers, idle and disorderly persons, who may be
committed thereto by any proper officer; and all persons sentenced by any
criminal court or magistrate in and for the City or for the County of Lake,
for any assault and battery, petit larceny, or other misdemeanor punishable
by imprisonment in any county jail, and any person who shall fail or neglect
to pay any fine, penalty or costs imposed by any ordinance of the City for
any misdemeanor, breach of any ordinance of the City, may instead of being
committed to the County Jail of Lake County, be kept therein, subject to
labor and confinement.



   Thirty-ninth–To authorize and direct the taking up and providing for
the safe keeping and education, for such periods of time as may be deemed
expedient, of all children who are destitute of proper parental care,
wandering about the streets, committing mischief, and growing up in
mendicancy, ignorance, idleness and vice.



   Fortieth–To fill up, drain, cleanse, alter, relay, repair and
regulate private drains, sinks and privies; direct and regulate their
construction, and cause the expense thereof to be assessed and collected in
the same manner as sidewalk assessments,



   Forty-first–To have exclusive right and power to direct and control
the laying and construction of horse railways, railroad tracks, switches
bridges, turn-outs in the streets and alleys, and the location of depot
grounds within the City; to require that railroad tracks, bridges, turn-outs,
and switches shall be so constructed and laid as to interfere as little as
possible with the ordinary travel and use of the streets and alleys, and that
sufficient space shall be left on either side of said tracks, for the safe
and convenient passage of teams and persons; to require railroad companies to
keep in repair the streets through which their track may run, and to
construct and keep in repair suitable crossings at the intersection of
streets and alleys and ditches, sewers and culverts, when the City Council
shall deem necessary; to direct and prohibit the use and regulate the speed
of locomotive engines within the inhabited parts of the City; to prohibit and
restrain railroad companies from doing storage or warehouse business, or
collecting pay for storage; and no railroad or horse railroad shall run or
pass through any part of said City, without the consent of the City Council
of said City.



   Forty-second–To provide for the erection of a pier or piers on the
shore of Lake Michigan, and a break-water or other means of preventing the
encroachments on said shore by the water of the lake; and shall have the
further power to charter or incorporate a pier or dock company, granting to
said company all proper franchise relating to the construction and use of a
dock or docks upon said shore of said Lake.



   Forty-third–The City Council shall have power to pass, publish, amend
and repeal all ordinances, rules and police regulations, not contrary to the
constitution of the United States or this states for the good government
peace and order of the City and the trade and commerce thereof, that may be
necessary or proper, to carry into effect the powers vested by this act in
the corporation, the City government or any department or officer thereof; to
enforce the observance of all such rules, ordinances and police regulations,
and to punish violations thereof by fines, penalties, and imprisonment in the
county jail, City prison or workhouse, or both, in the discretion of the
court or magistrate before whom conviction may be had; but no fine or penalty
shall exceed five hundred (500) dollars, nor the imprisonment six (6) months,
for any offense, and such fine or penalty may be recovered with costs, in an
action of debt, in the name or for the use of the City, before any court
having jurisdiction and punishment inflicted; and any person upon whom any
fine or penalty is imposed shall stand committed until the payment of the
same and costs, and, in default thereof, may be imprisoned in the County
Jail, City prison or workhouse or required to labor on the streets or other
public works of the City, for such time and in such manner as may be provided
by ordinance.



ARTICLE VII
OF TAXATION



   SECTION 1. The City Council shall have power within the City, by
ordinance–



   First–To levy and collect, annually, taxes on the assessed value of
all real and personal estate and property within the City, and all personal
property of the inhabitants thereof made taxable by the laws of the state for
state purposes, to defray the general, special and contingent expenses of the
City and all other appropriations not otherwise provided for.



   Second–To require, and it is hereby made the duty, of every male
resident of the City, over the age of twenty-one (21) years, to labor three
days in each year upon the streets and alleys of the City; but any person
may, at his option, pay, in lieu thereof, such sum as the City Council shall
designate as the price or value of such labor: provided, the same shall be
paid within ten (10) days after notification by the supervisor, and provided,
further, that ten (10) hours of labor shall be required to constitute a
day’s work under this section. In default of payment, as aforesaid, the sum
aforesaid and twenty-five (25) per cent added thereto and costs may be
collected; and no set-off shall be allowed in any suit brought to collect the
same; provided, that any person who shall make said City his place of abode
for the space of sixty (60) days shall be deemed a resident of said City for
the purposes of this section.



   SECTION 2. All personal property of the inhabitants of said City,
within said City, made taxable by the laws of the states and all other
personal property therein, shall be assessed and taxable within said City;
and said inhabitants shall, as in other cases required by law, render and
state unto the City assessor a full and accurate statement, when called upon,
of all moneys, rights, credits, bank stock, railroad and other stock, in any
corporate company, wherever the same may be and all personal property and
effects of every name and nature, as aforesaid.



ARTICLE VIII
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND ASSESSMENTS THEREFOR.



   SECTION 1. The City Council shall have power to open and lay out public
grounds or squares, parks, streets, alleys, and highways, and to alter,
widen, contract, straighten and discontinue the same; but no street, alley or
highway, or any part thereof, shall be discontinued or contracted without the
consent, in writing, of the owners of three-fourths of the land or lots
adjoining said street, alley or highway. They shall cause all streets, alleys
and highways, or public squares or parks or grounds, laid out by there, to be
surveyed, described and recorded in a book to be kept by the Clerk, showing,
accurately and particularly, the proposed improvements and the real estate
required to be taken; and the same, when opened and made, shall be public
highways and grounds.



   SECTION 2. Whenever any street, alley or highway, park or public
ground, is proposed to be laid out, opened, altered, widened or straightened,
by virtue hereof, and the amount of compensation cannot be agreed upon, the
City Council shall give notice of their intention to appropriate and take the
land necessary for the same, to the owner thereof, by publishing said notice
for ten (10) days in the corporation newspaper, or by posting the same in the
manner to be provided by ordinance; at the expiration of which time they
shall choose, by ballot, three (3) disinterested freeholders, residing in the
City, as commissioners to ascertain and assess the damages and recompense due
the owners of said real estate respectively. A majority of all the Aldermen
authorized by law to be elected shall be necessary to a choice of such
commissioners.



   SECTION 3. The commissioners shall be sworn faithfully and impartially
to execute their duties to the best of their abilities, before entering upon
their duties. They shall have at least five (5) days’ notice to all persons
interested, of the time and place of their meeting, for the purpose of
viewing the premises and making their assessments which notice shall be given
personally, if the owners are residents and known, or by publication, if
non-residents or unknown. They shall view the premises and in their
discretion receive any legal evidence, and may, if necessary, adjourn from
day to day.



   SECTION 4. If there should be any building standing, in whole or in
part, upon the land to be taken, the commissioners, before proceeding to make
their assessments, shall first estimate and determine the whole value of such
building to the owner, aside from the value of the lands and the actual
injury to him, in having such building taken from him, and secondly, the
value of such building to him to remove.



   SECTION 5. At least five (5) days’ notice shall be given to the
owner, when known and a resident of the City, which may be given personally,
or in writing, left at his usual place of abode. If a non-resident, or
unknown, like notice to all persons interested shall be given by publication.
Such notice shall specify the buildings and the award of the commissioners
and shall be signed by them. It shall also require the persons interested to
appear by a day to be named therein, or give notice of their election to the
City Council either to accept the award of the commissioners, and allow such
building to be taken, with the land condemned or appropriated, or if their
intention to receive such building at the value set thereon by the
commissioners to remove. If the owner shall agree to remove such building, he
shall have such reasonable time for that purpose as the City Council may
direct.



   SECTION 6. If the owner refuses to take the building at its appraised
value to remove, or fails to give notice of his intention as aforesaid,
within the time prescribed, the City Council shall have power to direct the
sale of such building at public auction, for cash or on credit, giving five
(5) days’ public notice of the sale. The proceeds of the sale shall be paid
to the owner, or deposited to his use.



   SECTION 7. The commissioners shall thereupon proceed to make their
assessment, and determine and appraise to the owner the value of the estate
appropriated, and the injury arising from the condemnation thereof, which
shall be awarded to such owner as damages. In the estimate of damages to the
land, the commissioners shall include the value of the buildings, if the
property of the owner of the land, as estimated by them, as aforesaid, less
the proceeds of the sale thereof, or if taken by the owner, at the value to
remove, in that case they shall only include the difference between such
value and the whole estimated value of such building.



   SECTION 8. If the lands and buildings belong to different persons, or
if the land be subject to lease or mortgage, the injury done to such persons,
respectively, may be awarded to then by the commissioners, less the benefits
resulting to then respectively from the improvements.



   SECTION 9. The Clerk shall give ten (10) days’ notice, by
publication, that such assessment has been returned, and, on a day to be
specified therein, will be confirmed by the City Council, unless objections
to the same are made by some persons interested. Objections shall be heard
before the City Council, and the hearing may be adjourned from day to day.
The Council shall have power, in their discretion, to confirm or annul the
assessment, or refer the sane back to the commissioners, if annulled, all the
proceedings shall be void. If confirmed, an order of confirmation shall be
entered. If referred back to the sane or other commissioners, they shall
proceed to make their assessments and return the same, in like manner, and
give like notice, as herein required in relation to the first; and all
persons in interest shall have the like notice and rights, and the City
Council shall perform like duties and have like powers, in relation to any
subsequent determination, as are herein given in relation to the first.



   SECTION 10. The City Council shall have power to remove commissioners,
and from time to time appoint others in place of such as may be removed, or
refuse, neglect, or are unable from any cause to serve.



   SECTION 11. The land required to be taken for the making, opening,
widening, straightening or altering any street, alley or other highway, or
public ground or square, shall not be appropriated until the damages awarded
therefor to any owner thereof, under this act, shall be paid or tendered to
such owner or his agent, or in case such owner or his agent cannot be found
within the City, deposited to his or their credit, in some safe place of
deposit, other than the hands of treasurer; and then, and not before, such
lands may be taken and appropriated for the purposes required in making such
improvements; and such streets, alleys or other highways, or public grounds
may be made and opened.



   SECTION 12. When the whole of any lot or parcel of land or other
premises, under lease or other contract, shall be taken for any of the
purposes aforesaid, by virtue of this act, all the covenants, contracts and
engagements between landlord and tenant, or any other contracting parties,
touching the same or any part thereof, shall, upon the confirmation of the
report of the commissioners, respectively cease, and be absolutely discharged.



   SECTION 13. When part only of any lot, parcel of land or other premises
so under lease or contract, shall be taken for any of the purposes aforesaid,
by virtue of this act, all the covenants, contracts, agreements and
engagements respecting the same, upon the confirmation of the report of the
commissioners, shall be absolutely discharged, as to that part thereof so
taken, but shall remain valid as to the residue thereof, and the rents,
considerations, and payment received, payable and to be paid for, in respect
to the same, shall be so proportioned, as that the part thereof justly and
equitably payable for such residue thereof, and no more, shall be paid or
recoverable in any respect of the same.



   SECTION 14. Any person interested may appeal from any order of the City
Council for opening, altering, widening or straightening any street, alley or
other highway or public ground, to the Circuit Court of Lake County, by
notice, in writing, to the Mayor, at any time before the expiration of twenty
(20) days after the passage of said final order. In case of appeal the City
Council shall make return within thirty (30) days after notice thereof, and
the court shall, at the next term after return filed in the office of the
Clerk thereof, hear and determine such appeals and confirm or annul the
proceedings, from which judgment no appeal or writ of error shall lie. Upon
trial of an appeal, all questions involved in said proceedings, including the
amount of damages, shall be opened to investigation by affidavit or oral
testimony adduced to the court, or upon application of the city or any party,
the amount of damages may be assessed by a jury of said court, without formal
pleading, and judgment rendered accordingly; and the burden of proof shall,
in all cases be upon the City, to show that the proceedings are in conformity
with this act.



   SECTION 15. The City Council may, by ordinance, make any changes they
may deem advisable in the proceedings herein prescribed, for ascertaining the
damages and injury occasioned to any person or real estates by reason of the
condemnation of such real estate, or any real estate upon which any buildings
may be situated, in whole or in part, in all such other respects as
experience may suggest.



   SECTION 16. When any known owner, or other person having an interest in
any real estate, residing in the City or elsewhere, shall be an infant, and
any proceedings shall be had under this act, the judge of the Circuit Court
of the County of Lake, or the county judge of said court, or any judge of the
Supreme Court, may upon the application of such infant or his next friend,
appoint a guardian for such infant, taking security from such guardian, by
bond to the county court, for the faithful execution of such trust; and all
notices and summons required by this act shall be served on such guardian.



   SECTION 17. The City Council shall have power from time to time to
cause any street, alley or other highway to be graded, regraded, leveled,
paved or planked and keep the same in repair and alter and change the same.



   Second–To cause cross and sidewalks, main drains and sewers and
provide drains to be constructed and laid, relaid, cleansed and repaired and
regulate the same.



   SECTION 18. To grade, improve, protect and ornament any park, square or
other public grounds now or hereafter laid out.



   SECTION 19. For the purpose of establishing a system of sewerage and
drainage the City Council shall have power, in their discretion, but may
provide for the same otherwise, to cause the City to be laid off into
districts, to be drained by principal and lateral or tributary sewers and
drains constructed through the streets of the City, having reference to a
general plan of drainage by sewers and drains for the whole City, and number
and record the same.



   SECTION 20. In all cases where expenses may be incurred in the removal
of any nuisance, the City Council may cause the same to be assessed against
the real estate chargeable therewith, in the sane manner prescribed in the
foregoing sections. Such expenses may be likewise collected of the owner or
occupant of such premises, in a suit for money expended to his or their use.
And in case the same should not be chargeable to any real estate, suit may in
like manner be brought for such expense against the author of such nuisance,
if known, or any person whose duty it may be to remove or abate the same.



   SECTION 21. The City Council shall have the power to compel the owners
of lots or ground fronting or adjoining any private or public alley, to keep
the same clean, and if necessary, to direct the same to be paved, planked or
otherwise, and the costs thereof to be assessed and collected in the same
manner as sidewalk assessments.



ARTICLE IX
COLLECTION OF TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS



   SECTION 1. The City Council shall have power, by ordinance, to
prescribe the form of assessment lists, and prescribe the duties and define
the powers of assessors. They may also make such rules and give such
directions in relation to revising, altering, or adding to the lists, as they
may deem proper and expedient.



   SECTION 2. The annual lists shall be returned by the assessor on or
before the first Monday in August, in each year; but the time may be extended
by order of the City Council, on the return thereof, the City Council shall
fix a day for hearing objections thereto; and the Clerk shall give notice of
the time and place of such hearing, by publication in the newspaper
publishing the ordinances of the City; and any person feeling aggrieved by
the assessment of his property, may appear at the tine specified and make his
objections. The City Council shall have power to supply omissions in said
assessment lists, and for the purpose of equalizing the same, to alter, to
add, to take from, and otherwise correct and revise the same, or refer the
same back to the assessor, with instructions to revise and correct the same.



   SECTION 3. When the assessment lists have been corrected and revised,
the same shall be filed, and an order confirming the same, and directing the
warrant to be issued for the collection thereof, shall be entered by the
Clerk. The City Council shall thereupon, by an ordinance or resolution, levy
such sum or sums of money as may be sufficient for the several purposes for
which taxes are herein authorized to be levied, not exceeding the authorized
percentage.



   SECTION 4. All taxes and assessments, levied or assessed by the City
Council under this act or any ordinance in pursuance thereof, shall be a lien
upon the real estate upon which the same may be imposed, voted or assessed,
for two (2) years from and after the corrected assessment lists shall be
confirmed or the passage of the order for assessment, and on personal estate
from and after the delivery of the warrant for the collection thereof, until
paid, and no sale or transfer shall affect the lien. Any personal property
belonging to the debtor may be taken and sold for the payment of taxes on
real or personal estate; and the real estate shall be liable for the taxes on
personal estate in case of removal or when the tax cannot be made out of the
personal estate, in the same manner as is prescribed by the laws of the
state: Provided, that in case the collection of any assessment shall be
delayed by injunction or other judicial proceeding, the same shall continue a
lien upon the real estate for the period of two (2) years from and after the
final disposition of such injunction or other judicial proceeding.



   SECTION 5. The Clerk shall issue a warrant or warrants for the taxes,
and rule therein separate columns, in which the taxes levied shall be
separately set down opposite the name of the person or such real estate
subject thereto. Each column shall be headed with the name of the tax therein
set down.



   SECTION 6. All warrants issued for the collection of taxes or
assessments shall be signed by the Mayor and Clerk, with the corporate seal
thereto attached, and shall contain true and perfect copies of the corrected
assessment lists, upon which the same may be issued. They shall be delivered
to the collector for collection within thirty (30) days after the filing of
the corrected lists, unless further time shall be given for this purpose by
the City Council. If not otherwise paid, the collector shall have power to
collect said taxes, with interest and costs, by suit, in the corporate name,
or by distress and sale of personal property as aforesaid, after a demand and
a refusal to pay the same: provided, a notice, published by the collector for
ten (10) days, shall be deemed a demand; and a neglect to pay taxes, for
twenty days thereafter, shall be deemed a refusal. The assessor’s lists
shall, in all cases, be evidence on the part of the City.



   SECTION 7. All taxes and assessments shall be collected by the
collector in the same manner and with the same power and authority as is
given by law to collectors of county and state taxes, He shall pay the same
as fast as collected into the City Treasury, and his duty in regard to
returning warrants and settling with the City, and his liability in case of
default or misconduct shall be the same as prescribed by law in case of other
collectors of taxes; Provided, the City Council shall have power to prescribe
the powers, duties and liabilities of collectors by ordinance.



   SECTION 8. In case of the nonpayment of any taxes or assessments,
levied or assessed under this act, the premises nay be sold for the payment
thereof at any time within two (2) years after the confirmation of the
assessment by the City Council. Before any such sale an order shall be made
by the City Council, which shall be entered at large in the journal or record
kept by the Clerk, directing the collector to sell, particularly describing
the delinquent premises to be sold and the assessment for which the sale
shall be made; a certified copy of which order, under the corporate seal,
signed by the Mayor or presiding officer, and Clerk, shall be delivered to
the collector, which, together with the warrant, shall constitute the process
upon which such sale may be made.



   SECTION 9. The collector shall then advertise such premises in the
corporate newspaper, or by posting notices in three public places within said
City, for sale, at least twenty (20) days from, and after the first
publication or posting of such notice, describing the premises by numbers,
figures or otherwise, with the name of the owner, when known, and the several
amounts of the taxes and assessments thereon and costs. Said notice shall
also contain the tine and place of sale, and shall be published at each
regular issue of said paper (if published therein) from the first insertion
thereof unto the day of the sale. The proceedings may be stopped at any time
on the payment of the taxes or assessments and interest, with expenses of
advertising and other costs to such time incurred.



   SECTION 10. All sales shall be conducted in the manner required by law,
but the City Council shall have power to prescribe the manner of conducting
the same. The sale shall be made for the smallest portion of ground to be
taken from the east side of the premises for which any person will take the
same and pay the taxes or assessments thereon with the interests and costs of
sale. Duplicate certificates of sale shall be made and subscribed by the
collector, one of which shall be delivered to the purchaser, and the other
filed in the office of the Clerks in a book to be kept by the Clerk for such
purpose, and may be in the form of an ordinary letter file. The said
certificate shall contain the name of the purchaser, a description of the
premises sold, the amount of taxes or assessments, with the interest and
expenses for which the same was sold, and the time when the right to redeem
will expire. The collector shall be allowed the same fees for selling as are
allowed for similar services by Jai,:, or his fees may be regulated by
ordinance. The Clerk shall keep a record of such sales, which shall be open
to public inspection at all reasonable times.



   SECTION 11. The right of redemption in all cases of sales (for) taxes
or assessments, shall exist to the owner, his heirs, creditors or assignees,
to the same extent as is allowed by law, in case of sales of real estate for
taxes, on the payment, in legal tender funds, of double the amount for which
the same was  sold, and all taxes accruing subsequent to the sale, at the
rate of ten (10) per cent per annum. If the real estate of any infant, femme
covert, or lunatic, be sold under this act, the same may be redeemed at any
time before or within one year after such disability is removed. In case of
redemption, the money may be paid to the purchaser, or for him to the City
Clerk, who shall make a special deposit thereof with the treasurer, taking
his receipt therefore. If not redeemed according to law, upon return of the
certificate or proof of its loss, the legal holder thereof shall be entitled
to a deed conveying to said purchaser or his assignee the premises so sold
and unredeemed, which deed shall be under the corporate seal and signed by
the Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk. An abstract of all deeds so
made and delivered shall be entered by the Clerk in the book wherein tax
sales are recorded. A fee of one dollar may be charged by the Clerk for any
deed so issued.



   SECTION 12. The assignee of any tax certificate of any premises sold
for taxes or assessments under the authority of the City, shall be entitled
to receive a deed of such premises in his own name, and with the sane effect
as though he had been the original purchaser.



   SECTION 13. If, at any sale of real or personal property, for taxes or
general assessments, no bid shall be made for any parcel of the land or goods
and chattels, the same shall be struck off and sold to the City, in like
manner as other purchasers.



   SECTION 14. All deeds made to the purchasers of lots sold for taxes or
assessments by order of the City Council, shall be prima facie evidence, in
all controversies and suits in relation to the rights of the purchaser, his
heirs or assignees, to the premises thereby conveyed, of the following facts:



   First–That the land or lot conveyed was subject to taxation or
assessment at the time the same was advertised for sale, and had been duly
listed and assessed.



   Second–That the taxes or assessments had not been paid at any time
before the sale.



   Third–That the land conveyed had not been redeemed from sale at the
date of the deed.



   And shall be conclusive evidence of the following facts:



   First–That the land or lot was advertised for sale for the length of
time and in the manner required by law, and was sold at a time and in a
manner authorized by law.



   Second–That the land or lot was sold for the taxes or assessments, as
stated in the deed.



   Third–That the grantee in the deed was the purchaser. And of the
regularity of all other proceedings or acts, pertaining to the said listing,
assessment (and) sale, and not herein specified, and in all controversies and
suits involving the title to land claimed and held under or by virtue of such
deed, the person or person claiming title adverse to the title conveyed by
such creed shall be required to prove, in order to defeat the said title,
either that the land was not subject to taxation or assessment at the date of
the sale, that take said land has never been listed or assessed for taxation
or assessment, that the taxes or assessments had been paid, or that the same
had been redeemed according to law, and that such redemption was made for the
use and benefit of the. person having the right of redemption under the laws
of this state.



   SECTION 15. In all matters and proceedings relating to the assessment
and collection of redeemed or special assessments, not herein and hereby
particularly otherwise provided for, the general law of this state, as far as
applicable thereto, shall govern in all things thereunto appertaining.



ARTICLE X
PUBLIC SCHOOLS



   SECTION 1. The care and superintendence of the common or public
schools, within the City of Lake Forest, together with the funds and estates
both real and personal, belonging to the districts embraced within the limits
of said City, shall devolve upon the City Council; and they shall have power
to appoint, at any meeting after their annual election in each year, a
superintendent of public schools for said city, whose term of office shall be
for one year, and until his successor shall be duly elected and qualified;
and his duties and the amount of his salary shall be defined by the City
Council. And the said City Council shall have power to make all laws and
ordinances necessary and proper for the management of said schools, not
inconsistent with the laws and constitution of this state.



   SECTION 2. It shall be the duty of said superintendent to furnish to
the school commissioner of Lake County an abstract of the whole number of
children under the age of twenty-one (21) years, residing in the said City,
within ten (10) days after the same shall be ascertained; and the said school
commissioner shall, annually, pay to the Clerk of the City of Lake Forest the
proportion of the school, college and seminary fund to which the said City
may be entitled, according to the area of said City, and the number of
children under the age aforesaid residing in said city taking his receipt for
the same. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, on the receipt of such
money, to pay the same over to the Treasurer of said City, taking his receipt
for the same. The abstract of the number of children, as aforesaid, shall be
taken once in two (2) years, in such manner as the City Council shall direct.



   SECTION 3. All common or public school houses and school property
within the limits of said city, shall belong to the City; and the City
Council shall have power, and it shall be their duty, to divide said City
into proper school districts, and erect substantial and comfortable school
houses (in) each of the same.



   SECTION 4. The township funds, and the estate, real and personal,
belonging to township forty-three (43) and forty-four (44), range twelve (12)
east, in the County of Lake shall be divided between the City of Lake Forest
and the portions of said townships lying without the City of Lake Forest, as
follows: The City Clerk of said City shall be required to give notice, in
writing, to the trustees of schools of the said townships, respectively,
either by delivering a copy of said notice to each of said trustees,
personally, or by leaving the same at the residence of each of said trustees,
respectively; which notice shall be so served at least ten (10) days before
the term of court to which application shall be made, and shall notify said
trustees that, at the then next ensuing term of the Circuit Court of the
County of Lake an application will be made to the said court to divide the
funds and the estate of the said townships, respectively, between said
townships, respectively, and the said City of Lake Forest; and the said
trustees, respectively, and the said City Clerk, shall each be required to
appear before the said court, and give full and true statements so far as
they and each of them, may be able, of the number of persons under the age of
twenty one (21) years residing within said City and the portions of said
townships respectively without said City, and the amount of funds and estate
now belonging to each of said townships, and the amount of the same
heretofore transferred by either of said townships to said City, and the said
court, giving credit and allowance for all that may have been so transferred,
shall fairly and equitably divide and apportion said funds and estate, giving
to each its fair and equitable share of the same; and the trustees of each of
the said townships, respectively, shall thereupon convey, transfer and
deliver unto the said City of Lake Forest such shares or portions of said
funds and estate as may be so awarded by said court; and said court shall
have power to compel and enforce its orders in such behalf.



ARTICLE XI
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



   SECTION 1. It shall not be lawful for any person to make or sell, or
keep for sale, any spirituous or intoxicating liquors, anywhere within the
corporate township within which the said City of Lake Forest is situated; and
any person or persons found violating this section shall be liable, for each
offense, to a fine in any sum not exceeding one hundred dollars, and may be
prosecuted for such offense before any police or other magistrate in the
County of Lake jurisdiction of such offenses, whenever committed in said
township, being hereby given to the aforesaid officers, who, in addition to
the said fine, shall have power to commit the offender to the jail of said
county until the fine and costs of the prosecution are fully paid.



   SECTION 2. The City Council shall, at least ten (10) days before the
annual election in each year, cause to be published in the corporation
newspaper, or by postings a correct and full statement of the receipts and
expenditures from the date of the last annual report, together with the
sources from whence the former are derived, and the mode of disbursement, and
also a distinct statement of the whole amount assessed, received and expended
in the respective wards and divisions of the City, for making and repairing
streets, highways and, bridges for the same period, together with such
information as may be necessary to a full understanding of the financial
concerns of the City.



   SECTION 3. The inhabitants of the City of Lake Forest are hereby
exempted from, working upon any road or highway beyond the limits of the
City, and from paying the tax in lieu thereof without said limits.



   SECTION 4. The Supervisor shall demand the services of all persons who
are required to labor on the streets, alleys and highways of the City, at
such time and place, and in such manner, as the City council may direct, or
the Supervisor shall deem necessary. He shall deliver or cause to be
delivered, or left at the usual place of abode or business of any persons so
required to labor, as aforesaid, a written or printed notice or partly
written or partly printed notice in such form as the City Council shall
prescribe; which notice shall be given at least five (5) days previous to the
first day on which he or they are required to labor, requiring such person to
appear at such time and place as may be designated, for the purpose of
laboring upon the streets, alleys or highways. Upon neglect of any person to
appear and labor, as aforesaid, or to pay the sum designated by the city
council as an equivalent for such labor, the collector shall collect from
such person, in the same manner as other taxes, the sum assessed against such
person, and twenty-five (25) per cent added thereto; with his commission for
collecting the same added thereto; or the same may be recovered by suit, with
costs, as in other cases.



   SECTION 5. The City Council shall have power to establish, make and
declare the boundaries and names of streets, alleys and highways, and to
change the same at pleasure.



   SECTION 6. All fines, forfeitures and penalties collected for offenses
committed within said City shall be paid into the treasury of said City by
the officer collecting the same. All fines and forfeitures collected for any
conviction in the Circuit Court, for any offense committed in said City,
shall be paid over in like manner.



   SECTION 7. All licenses, either county or state, which are or may be
required to be taken out by state or city law within said City, shall be
taken from the City Clerk of said City, in like manner as City licenses, any
state law to the contrary notwithstanding: and the fee or charge therefor
shall be paid into the City Treasury.



   SECTION 8. The City Council shall have power to require that all
additions or subdivisions of land within the limits of said City shall be so
laid out or platted as to correspond and conform to the regular blocks,
streets, alleys and highways already laid out and established within said
City, and shall have the further power to direct in what manner lots and
blocks shall be numbered or designated in such subdivisions hereafter to be
made, and re-number the lots and blocks in said City, and make a map thereof
and such map, certified by the City Clerk, shall be admitted to record in the
County of Lake, and copies thereof, purporting to be published by authority
of said City, shall be received in evidence, in all courts and places, as
prima facie correct.



   SECTION 9. The Lake Forest Cemetery, and public parks belonging to said
City, shall be managed under the control and direction of the City Council;
and said Council may, for such purpose, appoint one or more superintendents
and agents to conduct and manage the same.



   SECTION 10. The Supervisor, in addition to the penalties prescribed by
ordinance, shall, for willful neglect of duty, be liable to indictment and
fine, in the same manner as supervisors under the laws of this state.



   SECTION 11. Neither the City Council nor Mayor shall remit any fine or
penalty imposed upon any person for a violation of any laws or ordinances of
said City, or release from confinement, unless two-thirds of all the Aldermen
elected shall vote for such release or remission nor shall anything in this
act be so construed as to oust any court of jurisdiction to abate and remove
nuisances within its jurisdiction, by indictment or otherwise.



   SECTION 12. No vote of the City Council shall be reconsidered or
rescinded at a special meeting, unless the meeting be called, in whole or in
part, for that purpose, and the Aldermen so notified, and unless, at such
special meeting, there shall be present as large a number of Aldermen as was
present when such vote was taken.



   SECTION 13. The publication of ordinances, notices, and other matter in
this act required, may be by publishing the same in the corporation
newspaper, or by posting copies thereof in three public places in the City by
the City Clerk; and the certificate of the City Clerk, endorsed in the
original, setting forth the fact of such publication or posting, shall be
evidence of the same.



   SECTION 14. All actions brought to recover any penalty or forfeiture
incurred under this act, or any ordinance, by law or police regulation made
in pursuance thereof, shall be brought in the corporate name. It shall be
lawful to declare, generally, in debt for such penalty, fine or forfeiture,
stating the clause of this act, or the by-law or ordinance, under which the
penalty or forfeiture is claimed, and to give the special (matter) in
evidence under it.



   SECTION 15. In all prosecutions for the violation of an ordinance,
by-law or other regulation, the first process shall be a summons, unless oath
or affirmation be made for a warrant, as in other cases.



   SECTION 16. Execution may issue immediately on rendition of judgment.
If the defendant has no goods or chattels or real estate within the County of
Lake, whereof the judgment can be collected, the execution shall require the
defendant to be confined in the county jail or work house, or City prison,
for a term not exceeding six months, in the discretion of the court rendering
judgment; and all persons who may be committed under this section shall he
confined one day for each one dollar of such judgment and costs. All expenses
incurred in any execution for recovery of any fine, penalty or forfeiture,
when collected, shall be paid into the City Treasury.



   SECTION 17. No person shall be an incompetent judge, justice, witness
or juror, by reason of his being an inhabitant or a freeholder in the City of
Lake Forest, in any action or proceeding in which said city may be a party in
interest.



   SECTION 18. All ordinances regulations and resolutions now in force in
the City of Lake Forest, and not inconsistent with this act, shall remain in
force under this act, until altered, modified or repealed by the City
Council, after this act shall take effect; and all said ordinances,
regulations and resolutions, and all acts, proceedings, matters and things,
of any and every name and nature whatsoever, done or provided to be done
throughout the limits of said City, as herein and hereby extended by the City
Council of the City of Lake Forest, before their successors shall have been
elected under this act, and hereby made and declared to be valid.



   SECTION 19. The offices of the Aldermen now acting as such in said City
shall become vacant at the first annual election after the passage of this
act; and there shall be elected, at said election, six Aldermen, two of whom
shall be chosen from that division of the City east of the railway and north
of Deerpath avenue, two others from that part east of the railway and south
of Deerpath avenue and two others fron that part West of the railway; and
such Aldermen so chosen shall constitute the first board of aldermen for said
City; and said divisions shall, respectively, comprise the firsts second and
third wards of the City, in the order above designated until changed by the
City Council.



   SECTION 20. All rights, actions, fines, penalties and forfeitures, in
suit or otherwise which have heretofore accrued to the City at any times
shall be vested in and prosecuted by the corporation hereby created.



   SECTION 21. All property, real, personal or mixed, belonging to the
City of Lake Forest, is hereby vested in the corporation created by this act;
and the officers of said corporation now in office shall, respectively,
continue in the same until superseded in conformity to the provisions hereof,
but shall be governed by this act, which shall take effect from and after its
passage,



   SECTION 22. The style of all ordinances shall be: “Be it enacted by
the City Council of the City of Lake Forest.”



   SECTION 23. All ordinances of the City may be proven by the seal of the
corporation, and the certificate of the City Clerk; and when printed and
published in a book or pamphlet form, and purporting to be printed and
published by authority of the City, the same shall be received in evidence in
all courts and places without further proof.



   SECTION 24. This act shall not invalidate any legal act done by the
City Council of the City of Lake Forest, or by its officers, nor divest their
successors, under this act, of any rights of property or otherwise, or
liability which may have accrued to or been created by said corporation prior
to the passage of this act.



   SECTION 25. All officers of the City created conservators of the peace,
by this act, or authorized by any ordinance, shall have power to arrest, or
cause to be arrested, with or without warrant or process, all persons who
shall break the peace, or threaten to break the peace, or be found violating
any ordinance of the City, commit for examination, and if necessary, detain
such persons in custody over night or the Sabbath, in the watch house or
other safe place, until they can be brought before a magistrate; and shall
have and exercise such other powers as conservators of the peace as the City
Council may prescribe.



   SECTION 26. There shall be a digest of the ordinances of the city,
which are of a public nature, published within five (5) years after the
passage of this act, and a like digest within every period of five years
thereafter.



   SECTION 27. The present act of incorporation of said City, approved
February 21, 1861, shall be, and the same is hereby repealed.



   SECTION 28. This act shall be a public act, and shall take effect from
and after its passage. APPROVED March 11, 1869.



   AN ACT supplemental to an act to amend an act entitled: “An act to
incorporate the City of Lake Forest,” approved February 21, 1861.



   SECTION 1. Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
represented in the General Assembly, That article V of this act, to which
this is a supplement, be and the same is hereby repealed.



   SECTION 2. This act shall be a public act, and shall take effect from
and after its passage. APPROVED March 11, 1869.



   AN ACT supplemental to an act to amend an act entitled: “An act to
incorporate the City of Lake Forest,” approved February 21,1861.



   SECTION 1. Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
represented in the General Assembly, that there be and is hereby added to
section nineteen of article eleven of the act to which this is a supplement,
the following: “Provided, that the term of office of one of said Aldermen,
so to be elected in each of said wards, respectively, shall expire in one
year from said election and the same shall be filled at said time; and,
thereafter, the term of office of one Alderman in each ward shall expire
annually; and in all cases when on account of vacancy or otherwise, two
Aldermen shall be chosen at the same election for the same ward, the one who
shall receive the highest number of votes shall be entitled to the full term.



   SECTION 2. That the words “second Monday of April,” in section four
(4) and section seven (7). of article two (2), of the act to which this is a
supplement, shall be and are hereby made to read “Monday after the second
Tuesday in April.”



   SECTION 3. This act shall be in force and take effect from and after
its passage.



APPROVED April 17, 1869.



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      11.   CITY ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING SYSTEM



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Code, how designated and cited



   10.02   Rules of construction



   10.03   When rules of construction shall not apply



   10.04   Catchlines; references to chapters or sections



   10.05   Effect of repeal of ordinances



   10.06   Severability of parts



   10.07   Amendments to code



   10.08   Altering code



   10.09   Presentation of copies



   10.10   Distribution of copies



   10.11   Ordinance repealed



   10.12   Ordinances unaffected



   10.13   Special application fees



   10.14   Official address



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  CODE, HOW DESIGNATED AND CITED.



   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated the City Code of Lake Forest, 2013, and may be
so cited.



(Prior Code, § 1-1)



§ 10.02  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In the construction of this code, the following rules shall be observed
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the provisions.



   (A)   General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and
understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar
and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood
according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.



   (B)   Acts by agents.  When any provision of this code requires an
act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the
principal, such requisition shall be construed to include all such acts when
done by an authorized agent.



   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY. The words “the city” or “this city” shall be
construed as if the words “of Lake Forest” followed the word CITY, and
shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees.



      CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Lake Forest.



      COUNTY. The words “the county” or “this county” shall
mean Lake County, Illinois,



      OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmative may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words
“swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and
“affirmed.”



      OTHER CITY OFFICIALS OR OFFICERS. Whenever reference is made to
officials, boards, commissions, departments and the like, by title only, they
shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions, departments
of the City of Lake Forest.



      OWNER. When applied to a building or land, shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or
tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of part of such building or land.



      PERSON. Shall extend and be applied to firms, corporations or
voluntary associations, as well as to individuals, unless plainly
inapplicable.



      SHALL HAVE BEEN. Includes past and future cases.



      STATE. The words “the state” or “this state” shall mean
the State of Illinois.



      WEEK. Shall be construed to mean seven days; but publication in a
newspaper or any notice or other matter indicated to be for a stated number
of weeks shall be construed to mean one insertion in each week, unless
specifically stated to be for each day of the week or for more than one day
in each week.



   (D)   Gender. Any word importing the masculine gender shall extend
to and be applied to females as well as to males.



   (E)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any
provision, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare. Where any provision imposes greater restrictions upon the subject
matter than the general provisions imposed by the code, the provision
imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be controlling.



   (F)   Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint
authority to three or more city officers or other persons shall be construed
as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons
unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the provisions giving the
authority.



   (G)   May. “May” is always directory and not mandatory.



   (H)   Number. Every word importing the singular number only shall
extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person
or thing, and every word importing the plural number only shall extend and be
applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things.



   (I)   Or, and. “Or” may be read “and” and “and” may be
read “or” if the sense requires it.



   (J)   Personal property. Personal property shall extend and be
applied to every species of property except real property.



   (K)   Reasonable time. In all cases where any provisions shall
require an act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be
given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only
as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance
with such notice.



   (L)   Shall. “Shall” is always mandatory and not directory.



   (M)   Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense shall include
the future when applicable.



   (N)   Time; how computed. The time within which any act is to be
done, as provided in any provision of this code or in any other issued
pursuant to any provision of this code, when expressed in days, shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if
the last day be Sunday it shall be excluded; and when any such time is
expressed in hours the whole of Sunday, from midnight to midnight, shall be
excluded.



(Prior Code, § 1-2)



§ 10.03  WHEN RULES OF CONSTRUCTION SHALL NOT APPLY.



   The rules of construction set forth in § 10.02 shall not be applied to
any chapter or subchapter of this code which shall contain any express
provision excluding such construction, or when the subject matter or context
of such chapter or subchapter may be repugnant thereto.



(Prior Code, § 1-3)



§ 10.04  CATCHLINES; REFERENCES TO CHAPTERS OR SECTIONS.



   In addition to the rules of construction set out in § 10.02, the
following rules shall be observed in the construction of this code.



   (A)   Catchlines. The catchlines of the several sections of this
code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section
and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any
part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any such sections, including the catchlines are amended or
re-enacted.



   (B)   References to chapters or sections. All references to chapters
or sections are to the chapter and sections of this code unless otherwise
specified.



(Prior Code, § 1-4)



§ 10.05  EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, division or
provision of this code, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be
construed to revive such former ordinance, division or provision of this
code, unless it shall be expressly so provided.



   (B)   The repeal of an ordinance, division or section of this code,
shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took
effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the
repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance, clause or section of
this code repealed.



(Prior Code, § 1-5)



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY OF PARTS.



   If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or division of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases,
clauses, sentences, paragraphs, sections or divisions of this code.



(Prior Code, § 1-6)



§ 10.07  AMENDMENTS TO CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend,
repeal or in any way affect any section or division of this code, shall be
numbered consecutively, but shall refer specifically to the section or
division affected, and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent
ordinances repeal any chapter, section or division or any portion thereof,
such repealed portions shall be excluded from said code by omission from
reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or
omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such
subsequent ordinances until such time as this code and subsequent ordinances
numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code by the City Council.



   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made
by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of
this code in the following language:



      “That Section     of the City Code of Lake Forest, 2014, is
hereby amended to read as follows: .......” The new provisions shall then
be set out in full.



   (C)   In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code
is to be added, the following language shall be used:



      “That the City Code of Lake Forest, 2014, is hereby amended by
adding a new section to be numbered Section     , which said Section shall
read as follows: .......” The new section shall then be set out in full.



   (D)   All sections, subchapters, chapters or provisions desired to
be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, subchapter or chapter
number in the following language:



      “That Section (Chapter of Title)     of the City Code of Lake
Forest, 2014, is hereby repealed.”



(Prior Code, § 1-7)



§ 10.08  ALTERING CODE.



   No person in the city shall change or amend by additions or deletions,
any part or portion of this code, or insert or delete pages, or portions
thereof, or alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever which
will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby.



(Prior Code, § 1-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 10.09  PRESENTATION OF COPIES.



   The Mayor shall have the power to extend to or reciprocate courtesies
of other cities by presenting to them a copy of this code, bound at the
expense of the city as to him or her may seem suitable; and he or she shall
have the power to present two copies of this code to the Illinois Municipal
League.



(Prior Code, § 1-10)



§ 10.10  DISTRIBUTION OF COPIES.



   All copies of this code belonging to the city shall be deposited with
the City Clerk. He or she shall deliver one copy thereof to the Mayor, one to
each member of the City Council, and copies to such other persons as the City
Council may direct.



(Prior Code, § 1-11)



§ 10.11  ORDINANCE REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature of the city pertaining to the subjects herein
enumerated and  embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects
treated by this code, and adopted prior to the adoption of this code, shall
be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances; provided, however, that:



   (A)   Nothing contained herein shall affect any rights, actions or
causes of action which shall have accrued to the city prior to the effective
date of this code;



   (B)   All prior ordinances adopted after the adoption of this code,
but prior to the effective date of this code shall not be deemed repealed by
the adoption of this code, and shall be construed and take effect as
amendments of this code; and



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, to the
extent that the city finds or determines that the City Code of Lake Forest
(2013) inadvertently omitted or erroneously incorporated the terms of
specific ordinances previously adopted by the City Council, the City Council
may re-adopt any such ordinance inadvertently omitted or erroneously
incorporated, and upon such re-adoption the specific ordinance as originally
approved will relate back to its original adoption.



(Prior Code, § 1-12) (Ord. 2015-64, passed 10-19-2015)



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature shall remain in full
force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication, and all ordinances pertaining to subjects not treated by this
code but for which title, chapter, section or other designations have been
reserved herein, shall not be deemed repealed hereby but shall remain and
continue in full force and effect until incorporated in this code by
amendments hereto.



(Prior Code, § 1-13)



§ 10.13  SPECIAL APPLICATION FEES.



   (A)   Purpose. In order to ensure that every applicant pays the full
cost of processing an application filed with the city pursuant to this code
or any ordinance or enactment of the city, a special application fee is
hereby established as set forth in this section.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      APPLICANT. A person who files an application with the city.



      APPLICATION. Any request for a permit, license, authorization or
other type of approval from the city, whether pursuant to the provisions of
this code, any ordinance of the city or any enactment, program or service of
the city authorized by law.



      PROCESSING. Services or activities relating to the review,
analysis, evaluation, testing, completion, preparation for approval,
documentation, implementation or otherwise assisting in the consideration of
an application, including materials submitted in connection with an
application or regarding an application, or consequences arising from or
relating to an application. PROCESSING also includes any activities or
services required in the administrative handling of an application, including
recordation, registration or similar activities or actions.



      RECOVERABLE COSTS. The costs incurred by the city in processing
an application shall be deemed to consist of the following items of direct
and indirect expense: legal publications; recording secretarial services;
court reporter; document preparation and review; professional and technical
consultant service; legal review, consultation and advice; copy reproduction;
document recordation; and inspection fees.



      SPECIAL APPLICATION FEE. A fee in addition to the standard fee or
charge customarily imposed in connection with an application, which fee shall
be the actual recoverable costs incurred by the city relating to or arising
from the application.



   (C)   Applicability. Where the nature of an application requires the
city to publish or mail legal notices or to employ the services of planners,
engineers, attorneys or other persons not regularly on the city payroll for
the purposes of processing an application, a special application fee equal to
the actual recoverable cost incurred by the city in giving such notice or
securing such services shall be charged to and paid by the applicant.



   (D)   Escrow deposits. If the City Manager or the Manager’s
designee determines that the nature of an application will result in the city
incurring substantial recoverable costs, the City Manager or the Manager’s
designee may, in his or her discretion, require the applicant to deposit
funds in escrow to defray the recoverable costs prior to the processing of
the application. If such an escrow is established, the city shall be
authorized to draw funds from the escrow to pay for recoverable costs as they
are incurred, provided that the city maintains an accounting of such
recoverable costs and periodically delivers to the applicant a copy of such
accounting and actual bills relating to such recoverable costs (except to the
extent such bills are privileged). Should the city at any time determine that
the escrow account established in connection with any application is, or is
likely to become, insufficient to pay the actual recoverable costs relating
to the processing of an application, the city shall inform the applicant of
that fact in writing and demand an additional deposit in an amount deemed to
be sufficient to cover foreseeable additional recoverable costs. Unless and
until such additional amount is deposited by the applicant, the city may
direct that processing of the application be suspended or terminated. Any
such termination shall be deemed a withdrawal of the application by the
applicant.



   (E)   Final settlement. As soon as reasonably feasible following
final action on an application, the city shall cause a final accounting to be
made of the escrow deposits made in connection with such application and the
actual recoverable costs of processing such application and shall make a
final charge of such costs against such escrow deposit. A copy of the
accounting shall be provided to the applicant. If the amount in the escrow is
insufficient to pay the total actual recoverable costs, a written demand for
payment of the balance due shall be mailed to the applicant, if any unused
balance remains in the escrow account after paying the total actual
recoverable costs, that amount shall be returned to the applicant. If no
escrow was established pursuant to division (D) above, the city shall deliver
to the applicant a written demand for payment of a special application fee in
the amount of any recoverable costs, along with an accounting of such
recoverable costs.



   (F)   Liability; lien. Where real property is the subject of an
application, the owner of the property, and if different, the applicant,
shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of all special
application fees. By signing the application, the owner (and applicant, if
different) shall be deemed to have agreed to pay such special application
fees and to consent to the filing and foreclosure of a lien on the subject
property to ensure collection of any such fees, plus the costs of collection,
which have not been paid within 30 days following the mailing of a written
demand for such payment (as provided for in division (E) above) to the owner
(and applicant, if different) at the address shown on the application. Any
lien filed pursuant to this section may be foreclosed in the manner provided
by statute for mortgages or mechanics’ liens.



   (G)   Condition of approvals and permits. No application shall be
considered complete unless and until all special application fees pursuant to
this section have been paid. Every application approved pursuant to this
code, whether or not expressly so conditioned, shall be deemed to be
conditioned upon payment of any special application fees as required by this
section.



   (H)   Failure to pay. The failure to fully pay any such special
application fee when due shall be grounds for refusing to process an
application and for denying or revoking any approval of an application to
which the unpaid special application fee relates.



   (I)   Waiver. The provisions of this section may be waived by the
City Council for special application fees applicable to any application filed
by any public body, or any agency deriving the majority of its revenues from
taxes levied within the city, or any charitable or eleemosynary organization.



   (J)   Fee review. In the event that an applicant disputes the
imposition of or amount of a special application fee, a written request for
review of the special application fee shall be filed with the City Manager
within 30 days after the mailing of any demand for the special application
fee. The request for review shall set forth in detail the basis for an
applicant’s dispute of the special application fee. The City Manager shall
thereafter consider the request for review, determine whether the special
application fee should be waived or reduced, and provide the applicant with a
written determination thereof. If the applicant seeks further review of the
special application fee, the applicant shall file a request to appeal the
determination of the City Manager with the City Clerk within 30 days after
mailing of the determination by the City Manager; such appeal shall be
considered by the Personnel, Compensation and Administration Committee of the
City Council based on the relevant facts available regarding the application,
the special application fee and materials presented in connection with the
fee review provided under this section. The determination of the Personnel,
Compensation and Administration Committee shall be final.



(Ord. 2006-02, passed 2-6-2006)



§ 10.14  OFFICIAL ADDRESS.



   With respect to all official business of the city, the city’s address
is 220 East Deerpath, Lake Forest, Illinois 60045 (the “official city
address”). Whenever the city, or any of its subordinate boards,
commissions, or other public bodies, is to be provided notice or is to be
served with documents in any legal proceeding or pursuant to state or federal
statute, unless the city has otherwise expressly agreed in writing, such
notice of service may only be accomplished by delivery to the official city
address. Whenever any officer, official, or employee of the city is to be
provided notice or is to be served with documents in any legal proceeding or
pursuant to state or federal statute relating to the official duties of such
officer, official, or employee, such notice or service may only be
accomplished by delivery to the official city address.



(Ord. 2015-64, passed 10-19-2015)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever in this code any act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do so any act is declared to be unlawful, where no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $750 or imprisonment for
a term not exceeding six months, or by both fine and imprisonment.



   (B)   Whenever any fine, charge or payment (including without
limitation tax payments) is due pursuant to any provision in this code and is
not paid within 30 days after the city delivers notice (unless a different
period is stated elsewhere in this code) to the person responsible for such
fine, charge or payment (the “responsible person”), the city may transfer
such fine, charge or payment to a collection agency of the city’s choosing.
Such collection agency shall, for purposes of collection of such fine, charge
or payment, be deemed an agent of the city. All costs incurred by the city
for the collection of any fines, charges or payments transferred to any such
collection agency shall be assessed against the responsible person as an
additional fine, charge or payment, subject to any applicable statutory
limits.



   (C)   Whenever any person shall make a payment to the city by check,
draft or other negotiable instrument for an amount due pursuant to this code,
or for an amount due as a result of any activities, services or products made
available in accordance with this code, and such payment is dishonored or
otherwise returned to the city for lack of funds or any other reason, the
amount due to the city shall be increased by the amount as set out in the fee
schedule or the amount of any charges assessed upon the city as a result of
the dishonor of such payment.



(Prior Code, § 1-9)  (Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)



Cross-reference:



   City administrative hearing system, see Ch. 11



CHAPTER 11:  CITY ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING SYSTEM



Section



   11.01   Purpose



   11.02   Establishment of administrative hearing system



   11.03   Hearing procedures non-exclusive



   11.04   Administrative composition



   11.05   Hearing Officer



   11.06   Code Enforcement Administrator



   11.07   Violation notice



   11.08   Service



   11.09   Hearings



   11.10   Liability for failure to appear at hearing



   11.11   Nonresident procedures



   11.12   Certified report and contesting certified report



   11.13   Judicial review



   11.14   Debt to city



   11.15   Enforcement of judgments



   11.16   Schedule of fines/penalties



   11.17   Administrative costs and interest charges



Cross-reference:



   General penalty, see § 10.99



§ 11.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the fair and efficient
enforcement of the city ordinances delineated in this chapter through an
administrative adjudication process and by establishing a schedule of fines
and penalties.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008)



§ 11.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING SYSTEM.



   There is hereby established and created within the city a Code Hearing
Unit (as more fully described in § 11.04) that will administer an
administrative hearing system to enforce and adjudicate violations
(“violations”) of the following chapters of the city code, as amended
from time to time (the “code”), and all subchapters within such chapters,
as the same have been, and may from time to time hereafter be, amended:



   (A)   Title VII, Traffic (except for moving violations under this
chapter);



   (B)   Chapter 75, Bicycles;



   (C)   Chapter 91 , Animals and Fowl;



   (D)   Chapter 94 , Fire Prevention;



   (E)   Sections 95.001 , 95.110 through 95.112 , 95.125 through
95.133 , 95.145 through 95.147 , 95.160 , 95.161 and 95.195 ;



   (F)   Chapter 111 , Alcoholic Beverages;



   (G)   Chapter 117 , Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers;



   (H)   Title XIII, General Offenses;



   (I)   Chapter 150 , Buildings; and



   (J)   Such other city ordinances and code provisions as the City
Council may, from time to time, designate in accordance with applicable law.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008; Ord. 2009-24, passed 7-20-2009; Ord.
2015-65, passed 11-2-2015)



§ 11.03  HEARING PROCEDURES NON-EXCLUSIVE.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the city from using
other methods or proceedings to enforce and adjudicate the code or other
ordinances of the city, including, without limitation, the institution of an
action in the Lake County Circuit Court, the United States District Court or
any administrative proceeding.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008)



§ 11.04  ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION.



   The Code Hearing Unit consists of one or more Hearing Officers (as
further described in § 11.05), one or more Code Enforcement Administrators
(as further described in § 11.06), and necessary or appropriate hearing room
personnel, all with the power, authority and limitations as set forth in this
chapter.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008)



§ 11.05  HEARING OFFICER.



   (A)   Appointment. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
City Council, has the authority to appoint one or more qualified Hearing
Officers to perform the functions set forth in this section.



   (B)   Term. The term of a Hearing Officer will be one year;
provided, however, that the City Council may remove a Hearing Officer, with
or without cause.



   (C)   Qualifications. To qualify as a Hearing Officer, an individual
must:



      (1)   Be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state for
at least three years;



      (2)   Be in good standing with the State Supreme Court
Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission; and



      (3)   Complete a formal training program conducted by the City
Manager and the City Attorney consisting of:



         (a)   Instruction on the rules of procedure for
administrative hearings;



         (b)   Orientation to each subject area of the code that
will be adjudicated;



         (c)   Observation of hearings conducted by state
municipalities that have adopted the administrative hearing system; and



         (d)   Participation in hypothetical hearings, including
ruling on evidence and issuance of final orders.



   (D)   Compensation. Compensation for a Hearing Officer will be
authorized by the City Council through the city’s annual budget process.
The City Manager thereafter is authorized to establish specific compensation
levels for individual Hearing Officers within approved budget limitations.



   (E)   Authority and jurisdiction. Hearing Officers are hereby
authorized, empowered and directed to:



      (1)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to
the allegation of a violation;



      (2)   Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give
relevant testimony at the hearing (as provided for in § 11.09), upon the
request of the parties or their representatives;



      (3)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing,
including all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;



      (4)   Issue a determination, based on the evidence presented
at the hearing, on whether a violation occurred or exists. The Hearing
Officer’s determination must be in writing and must include a written
finding of fact, decision and order, including any corrective measures, the
fine, penalty and interest charges, or other action with which the defendant
must comply;



      (5)   Impose penalties consistent with applicable code
provisions, order the defendant to obtain a compliance bond and require the
defendant to take corrective measures to cure the violation upon finding a
defendant liable for the charged violation, except as expressly provided in
this chapter;



      (6)   Impose administrative costs in an amount not less than
the minimum amount set by the City Council in a resolution adopted pursuant
to § 11.17, upon finding a defendant liable for the charged violation. The
Hearing Officer does not have authority to waive, or impose an amount less
than, the minimum amount set by the City Council; provided, however, that the
Hearing Officer may waive administrative costs or impose an amount less than
the minimum amount set by the City Council for adjudged violations of Chapter
73 of the code;



      (7)   Impose interest charges not less than the minimum amount
set by the City Council in a resolution adopted pursuant to § 11.17, if a
defendant fails to pay the penalty, fine or administrative costs set by the
Hearing Officer on the day of the hearing; provided, however, that the
Hearing Officer shall have no authority to waive, or impose interest charges
in an amount less than, the minimum interest charges set by the City Council;



      (8)   Postpone or continue a defendant’s hearing to a later
hearing date;



      (9)   Impose, when applicable, enforcement expenses pursuant
to § 11.15(D);



      (10)   Ask questions of parties and witnesses; and



      (11)   Order, regardless of fines imposed or costs assessed,
the defendant to perform a term of community service.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008; Ord. 2015-65, passed 11-2-2015)



§ 11.06  CODE ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Appointment. The City Manager will appoint one or more Code
Enforcement Administrators to perform the functions set forth in this
section. The Code Enforcement Administrator may be an employee of the city or
may be an independent contractor or agency contracted by the City Manager and
will be compensated in an amount, as determined by the City Manager.



   (B)   Authority and jurisdiction. The Code Enforcement Administrator
is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to:



      (1)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to
manage the administrative hearing system;



      (2)   Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be
required under this chapter, or as may reasonably be required to carry out
the purpose of this chapter;



      (3)   Collect payments made as a result of fines and/or
penalties assessed and transmit such payments to the Director of Finance;



      (4)   Certify reports to the Illinois Secretary of State
concerning initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and those of 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5;



      (5)   Refer to the Director of Finance the collection of
unpaid fines and penalties, which may be pursued through private collection
agencies that the city may retain or by filing complaints in the Lake County
Circuit Court; or select or appoint an individual or agency to act on behalf
of the city in filing complaints, seeking judgments for unpaid fines or
penalties and pursuing all post-judgment remedies available under current law;



      (6)   Certify copies of findings, decisions and orders
adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any factual reports verifying the
findings, decisions and orders that are issued in accordance with this
chapter or the laws of the state;



      (7)   Oversee the operation and maintenance of the computer
programs for the administrative hearing system, including, without limitation:



         (a)   Inputting information for the violation notice (as
provided for in § 11.07);



         (b)   Establishing hearing dates and notice dates;



         (c)   Recording fine and penalty assessment and payments;



         (d)   Issuing payment receipts;



         (e)   Issuing notices of hearing dates, notices of
default, final notices, such other notices as may be necessary to implement
the administrative hearing system and final notices; and



         (f)   Keeping accurate records of appearances and
nonappearances at hearings, pleas entered, fines and other penalties assessed
and paid.



      (8)   Postpone or continue a defendant’s hearing to a later
hearing date, if such request is made prior to the first scheduled hearing
date. Such a determination is within the sole discretion of the Code
Enforcement Administrator.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008)



§ 11.07  VIOLATION NOTICE.



   (A)   A notice of any violation (“violation notice”) will be
issued by the persons authorized under this chapter, must contain information
as to the nature of the violation, shall be certified, and will constitute
prima facie evidence of the violation cited.



   (B)   All full-time, part-time and auxiliary police officers, as
well as other individuals holding positions in any department of the city and
specifically authorized by the City Manager pursuant to an administrative
order, have the authority to issue violation notices.



   (C)   Any individual authorized to issue violation notices who
detects a violation is authorized to issue a violation notice and thereafter
to serve the violation notice in the manner set forth in this section.



   (D)   For violations of Chapter 73 of the code and for violations of
any chapter of the code that has a penalty provision that permits the
pre-payment of fines, an individual authorized by the City Manager shall
issue an initial ticket in compliance with the most current policies and
procedures of the ticket issuer’s city department (the “initial
ticket”). In lieu of paying the fine provided in the initial ticket, the
defendant may request a hearing. If the defendant requests a hearing, then
the city department shall issue a violation notice to the defendant in
accordance with § 11.08, containing the information required by division (E)
below.



   (E)   A violation notice must contain at least the following
information:



      (1)   The date, time and location of the alleged violation;



      (2)   The name and address of the defendant, if known;



      (3)   The type and nature of the alleged violation;



      (4)   The signature of the person issuing the violation notice;



      (5)   The date, time and location of the hearing;



      (6)   The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the
hearing is to be held; and



      (7)   The penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008)



§ 11.08  SERVICE.



   (A)   Service of a violation notice is required to be made as
follows:



      (1)   Handing the notice to the person responsible for the
violation or handing it to his or her employee or agent;



      (2)   Leaving the notice with any person 13 years of age or
older at the residence of the responsible person, and informing that person
of the contents of the summons, provided the person making service shall also
send a copy of the summons in a sealed envelope with postage fully prepaid,
addressed to the defendant at his or her usual place of abode;



      (3)   Service on corporations or partnerships must be in
accordance with the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2-201 et
seq.);



      (4)   Mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known address of record of the individual/entity or
his, her or its registered agent; or



      (5)   Posting the notice upon the property where the violation
is found when the person alleged to have committed the violation is the
owner, manager or tenant of the property, and serving the owner/manager or
agent therefor.



   (B)   The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice is
to be certified as follows:



      (1)   By the person issuing the notice through signing his or
her name to the notice at the time of issuance; or



      (2)   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device,
by signing a single certificate to be kept by the Code Enforcement
Administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the
device while under his or her control.



   (C)   The Code Enforcement Administrator will retain the original or
a facsimile of the violation notice and keep it as a record in the ordinary
course of business.



   (D)   The violation notice or a copy thereof is admissible in any
subsequent administrative or judicial proceeding to the extent permitted by
law.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008)



§ 11.09  HEARINGS.



   All hearings conducted under the administrative hearing system will be
conducted by a Hearing Officer in accordance with the following rules and
procedures.



   (A)   The date, time and place will be set forth in the violation
notice, or such additional notices as are issued in accordance with this
chapter, provided that for hearings scheduled in all non-emergency
situations, if requested by the defendant, the defendant will have at least
15 days after service of process to prepare for a hearing. For purposes of
this division (A), NON-EMERGENCY SITUATION means any situation that does not
reasonably constitute a threat to the public interest, safety, health or
welfare. If service is provided by mail, the 15-day period begins to run on
the date that the notice is deposited in the mail.



   (B)   The hearings will be recorded, digitally or in analog format
or by other means.



   (C)   The parties may be represented by counsel, present witnesses
and cross-examine opposing witnesses.



   (D)   Parties may request the Hearing Officer to issue, and the
Hearing Officer has the authority to issue, subpoenas to direct the
attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses and produce relevant documents.



   (E)   The formal and technical rules of evidence will not apply.
Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted, but only if it is of a type
commonly relied upon by reasonable, prudent persons in the conduct of their
affairs.



   (F)   Each hearing will culminate in a written determination of
liability or nonliability by the Hearing Officer, or a determination of
liability based upon the failure of the defendant to appear at the scheduled
hearing, whichever occurs first. Upon issuance, the written determination of
liability must either be personally delivered to the defendant at the time of
hearing, or be mailed to the defendant via first class mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the defendant’s last known residence or place of business.



   (G)   (1)   Pursuant to, and subject to the limitations set forth
in § 11.05(E)(5) and (E)(7), the Hearing Officer, upon a determination of
liability, has the discretion to assess fines and penalties in accordance
with the code, assess interest charges for late payments and order the
defendant to undertake corrective actions to remedy the violation. In
addition, pursuant to, and subject to the limitations set forth in, §
11.05(E)(6), the Hearing Officer will assess administrative costs upon
finding a defendant liable for the charged violation.



      (2)   In no event does the Hearing Officer have authority to:



         (a)   Impose a penalty of incarceration; or



         (b)   Impose a fine in excess of $50,000 for a violation.



   (H)   The maximum monetary fine imposed under this chapter is
exclusive of administrative costs, costs of enforcement, interest charges for
late payments or costs incurred by the city to secure compliance with the
city’s code and ordinances. The maximum monetary fine also does not apply
to cases to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the
city.



   (I)   Hearing room personnel shall be designated and appointed by
the city’s Chief of Police and are authorized and directed to:



      (1)   Maintain hearing room decorum;



      (2)   Execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of
the Lake County Circuit Court; and



      (3)   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be
required and as directed by the Hearing Officer or the Code Enforcement
Administrator.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008; Ord. 2015-65, passed 11-2-2015)



§ 11.10  LIABILITY FOR FAILURE TO APPEAR AT HEARING.



   (A)   Default. If at the time set for hearing, the defendant, or the
defendant’s attorney or agent of record, fails to appear, and the hearing
was neither postponed by the Code Enforcement Administrator, pursuant to his
or her authority under § 11.06(B)(8), nor continued by the Hearing Officer
pursuant to his or her authority under § 11.05(E)(8), the Hearing Officer
may enter a finding of default within the findings, decision and order and
impose liability against the defendant including the assessment of fines and
administrative costs. A copy of the finding of default, which is a final
determination, will be promptly served upon the defendant by first class
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the defendant at the defendant’s last
known residence or place of business, to apprise the defendant of the
procedure for setting aside the finding of default and to apprise the
defendant of the opportunity to appeal the finding of default to the Lake
County Circuit Court.



   (B)   Set aside of default. A written petition to set aside a
finding of default may be filed by a person owing an unpaid fine or penalty
assessed for a violation, and will be considered, in accordance with the
following procedures.



      (1)   The petition must be filed with the Hearing Officer not
later than 21 days from the date on which the finding of default was served,
however, a defendant may file a petition to set aside the finding of default
at any time if such defendant establishes that the city did not provide
proper service of process.



      (2)   The Hearing Officer will render a decision on a timely
filed set-aside petition after the date of receipt of the petition.



      (3)   The grounds for setting aside a finding of default are
limited to the following:



         (a)   The person, against whom the finding of default is
made, not being the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle or not being the
owner, tenant or manager of the cited property on the date the violation
notice was issued;



         (b)   The person having paid the fine or penalty prior
to the finding of default for the violation in question;



         (c)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new
date for any hearing; and



         (d)   The defendant establishes that the city did not
provide proper service of process.



      (4)   Should the finding of default be set aside, the Hearing
Officer will notify the defendant by first class mail, postage prepaid, to
the address set forth on the petition hereunder, and service thereof shall be
complete on the date the notice is deposited in the United States mail; the
notice will state that the finding of default has been set aside, as well as
any administrative costs, and of the date, time, and place for a hearing on
the merits of the violation for which the finding of default has been set
aside. The Hearing Officer is authorized to enter an order extinguishing any
lien that has been recorded for any debt due and owing the city as a result
of the vacated finding of default. When a finding of default is vacated, the
Hearing Officer will set a new date for a hearing on the underlying violation.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008)



§ 11.11  NONRESIDENT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Any nonresident of the city who has been served a violation
notice for violation of any provision of Chapter 73 of the code may contest
the alleged violation on its merits without personally appearing at a hearing
by:



      (1)   Requesting and completing, in full, the nonresident
request for hearing nonappearance form;



      (2)   Acknowledging in the space specified in the form that
his or her personal appearance is waived and submitting to an adjudication
based upon the notarized statement filed by him or her and the facts
contained in the violation notice;



      (3)   Filing the form with the Code Enforcement Administrator
postmarked by the twenty-fifth of the month, if the violation notice was
issued between the first through the fifteenth day of that month; or
postmarked by the tenth of the month, if the violation notice was issued
between the sixteenth of and the last day of the immediately preceding month.
The filing will be deemed completed if postmarked by the due dates herein
specified; and



      (4)   Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the
grounds for challenging the violation notice with the Code Enforcement
Administrator in conjunction with the nonappearance form.



   (B)   The Hearing Officer will make a decision based upon the facts
set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the nonresident and as
contained in the violation notice.



   (C)   Notice of the determination of the Hearing Officer will be
served upon the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed
to the nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of facts
submitted.



   (D)   Service of the notice of such determination will be complete
on the date the notice is deposited in the United States mail.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008)



§ 11.12  CERTIFIED REPORT AND CONTESTING CERTIFIED REPORT.



   (A)   A notice of impending suspension of a person’s driver’s
license will be sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of
any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on ten or more vehicular
standing, parking or compliance violations under 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5. The
notice will state that the failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within 45
days of the date of the notice will result in the city notifying the
Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension
proceedings. This notice will also state that the person may obtain a
photostatic copy of an original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending
a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the city along with a request for the
photostatic copy. Such notice is to be sent by first class United States
mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary of State.



   (B)   Upon a failure to pay fines or penalties deemed due and owing
to the city pursuant to Chapter 73 of the code and after exhaustion of the
procedures set forth herein, the Code Enforcement Administrator will make a
certified report, pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5(c), to the Secretary of
State stating that the owner or lessee of a registered vehicle has failed to
pay the fine or penalty due or owing the city as a result of ten or more such
violations of Chapter 73 of the code, and thereby initiate the suspension of
that person’s driver’s license.



   (C)   The Code Enforcement Administrator will take no further action
thereafter unless and until the fines and penalties due and owing the city
are paid or upon determination under divisions (D) and (E) below that the
inclusion of the person’s name on the certified report was in error. At
either such time, the Code Enforcement Administrator will submit to the
Secretary of State a notification to halt the driver’s license suspension
proceeding pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5(d). The person named therein will
receive a certified copy of such notification upon request and at no charge.



   (D)   Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report by
completing and filing within 21 days of the date of the Secretary of
State’s notice under 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5(b) a form provided by the Code
Enforcement Administrator specifying the grounds on which such challenge is
based. Grounds for challenge are limited to the following:



      (1)   The person was neither the owner nor the lessee of the
vehicle receiving the ten or more applicable violation notices on the date or
dates such notices were issued; or



      (2)   The person has paid the fine and penalty for the ten or
more violations indicated on the certified report.



   (E)   The Code Enforcement Administrator will give notice of a
determination thereupon within 14 days of receipt of the form and will notify
the person filing the challenge of the determination, and, if applicable,
will notify the Secretary of State.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008)



§ 11.13  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   Any final decision by a Hearing Officer that a violation does or does
not exist constitutes a final determination for purposes of judicial review
and will be subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law
(735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.).



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008)



§ 11.14  DEBT TO CITY.



   Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or penalty assessed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and remaining unpaid after the exhaustion
of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative procedures under this chapter
and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures, will be a debt due and
owing the city, and, as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable
law and as provided in § 11.15.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008)



§ 11.15  ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENTS.



   (A)   Fines. All fines and other moneys to be paid to the city in
accordance with this chapter will be remitted to the city and deposited in
the appropriate city account as designated by the City Manager.



   (B)   Compliance bond.



      (1)   In order to ensure that violations are remedied in a
timely manner, the Hearing Officer, upon issuing a determination of liability
that includes an order of compliance, will have the authority to order the
defendant in the case to obtain a bond (“compliance bond”) to ensure
defendant’s timely compliance in correcting the violation. Any compliance
bond ordered pursuant to this division (B) must name the city as a
beneficiary and be in the amount specified by the Hearing Officer, provided
that the amount of the compliance bond is to be reasonably related to the
cost of compliance. If the defendant fails to remedy in a timely manner the
violation for which a compliance bond has been ordered and issued, and the
city undertakes remediation or otherwise expends funds related to the
violation for which a compliance bond has been ordered and issued, the
Hearing Officer, after giving the parties notice and an opportunity to be
heard, as provided in division (F) below, may issue an order permitting the
city to draw against the compliance bond in an appropriate amount. Upon proof
of compliance, the Hearing Officer will order the compliance bond amount,
less the reasonable costs incurred by the city, returned to the defendant.



      (2)   In the event a defendant ordered to secure a compliance
bond as provided by this division (B), seeks judicial review of that portion
of the Hearing Officer’s order requiring a compliance bond and prevails on
that issue, the city will release the compliance bond, and if the city has
drawn against the compliance bond, the city will refund to the defendant the
total amount drawn within 30 days of receiving a copy of the reviewing
court’s mandate.



   (C)   Expiration of judicial review period.  After expiration of
the period that judicial review under 735 ILCS 5/Art. III may be sought,
unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision
and order of the Hearing Officer may be enforced in the same manner as a
judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   Liability for city enforcement expenses. If the defendant
fails to comply with a judgment ordering the defendant to correct a violation
or imposing any fine or other sanction, any expenses incurred by the city to
enforce the judgment entered against that defendant, including without
limitation administrative costs, attorney’s fees, court costs and costs
related to property demolition or foreclosure (collectively “enforcement
expenses”), after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction, or
by a Hearing Officer in accordance with division (F) below, will be a debt
due and owing the city and may be collected in accordance with applicable
law, including without limitation drawing against any compliance bond.



   (E)   Lien on property. In addition to all other enforcement action
set forth in this chapter, the Hearing Officer, after providing the notice
and opportunity to be heard, in accordance with division (F) below, has the
authority to impose a lien on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of
the defendant in the amount of any debt due and owing the city for any
violation under this chapter, including any and all enforcement expenses.



   (F)   Final notice and hearing.



      (1)   The Hearing Officer will conduct a hearing pursuant to
notice sent to defendant by first class mail, postage prepaid not less than
seven days prior to the date of the hearing prior to:



         (a)   Imposing enforcement expenses pursuant to division
(D) above; or



         (b)   Imposing a lien pursuant to division (E) above.



      (2)   The defendant’s failure to appear at such hearing will
not preclude the Hearing Officer from imposing enforcement expenses or a lien.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008)



§ 11.16  SCHEDULE OF FINES/PENALTIES.



   For any violation of any city ordinance, fines and penalties will be as
established from time to time by the Mayor and City Council.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008)



§ 11.17  ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS AND INTEREST CHARGES.



   Administrative costs and interest charges assessed pursuant to this
chapter will be in the amounts established, from time to time, by the City
Council pursuant to an administrative hearings costs and interest charges
schedule resolution or similar enactment.



(Ord. 2008-11, passed 4-24-2008)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   CITY COUNCIL; COUNCIL RULES



      31.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES



      32.   DEPARTMENTS AND ORGANIZATIONS



      33.   CITY STANDARDS



      34.   CIVIL DEFENSE



      35.   ELECTIONS



      36.   FINANCES



      37.   PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT SYSTEM



      38.   PURCHASING AND PAYMENTS



      39.   TAXATION



      40.   GOVERNMENTAL ETHICS



      41.   FEE SCHEDULE



CHAPTER 30:  CITY COUNCIL; COUNCIL RULES



Section




City Council




   30.01   Elections; functions



   30.02   Qualifications



   30.03   Vacancies



   30.04   Quorum



   30.05   Records



   30.06   Disturbing meetings



   30.07   Elected officials




Council Rules




   30.20   Establishment



   30.21   Meetings



   30.22   Order of business



   30.23   Priority of business



   30.24   Duties and privileges of the Mayor



   30.25   Duties and privileges of members



   30.26   Motions and resolutions



   30.27   Taking and entering vote



   30.28   Precedence of question



   30.29   Adjournment



   30.30   Previous question



   30.31   To lay on the table or postpone



   30.32   To refer



   30.33   To amend



   30.34   To substitute



   30.35   Reconsideration



   30.36   Committees of the City Council



   30.37   Standing committees



   30.38   Select committees



   30.39   Report of committees



   30.40   Respecting matters referred



   30.41   General provisions regarding ordinances



   30.42   Suspension of rules



 



   30.99   Penalty



CITY COUNCIL



§ 30.01  ELECTIONS; FUNCTIONS.



   (A)   The City Council shall consist of two aldermen from each ward,
who shall be elected for a two-year term, as is provided by § 2 of Article
II of the City Charter. The aldermen shall be executive officers of the city
and the Council shall be the legislative division of the city government and
shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be authorized by the
City Charter or by any other statute.



   (B)   The term of the aldermen shall be limited to three consecutive
two-year terms and aldermen are prohibited from seeking reelection to the
office of aldermen for three years thereafter.



(Prior Code, § 2-11)  (Ord. 93-24, passed 6-7-1993)



§ 30.02  QUALIFICATIONS.



   Members of the City Council shall possess the qualifications required
for that office by § 6 of Article II of the City Charter.



(Prior Code, § 2-12)



§ 30.03  VACANCIES.



   Vacancies on the City Council may be filled by special election as is
provided by §§ 7 and 9 of Article II of the City Charter.



(Prior Code, § 2-13)



§ 30.04  QUORUM.



   A majority of the members elected to the Council shall constitute a
quorum to do business as is provided by § 3 of Article II and § 7 of
Article IV of the City Charter.



(Prior Code, § 2-14)



§ 30.05  RECORDS.



   The City Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council and shall keep the
minutes of the meetings thereof, the record of ordinances passed, and such
other records pertaining thereto as may be required by statute or ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 2-15)



§ 30.06  DISTURBING MEETINGS.



   It shall be unlawful to disturb any regular or special meeting of the
Council or of any committee thereof, or to behave in a disorderly manner at
any such meeting.



(Prior Code, § 2-16)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 30.07  ELECTED OFFICIALS.



   (A)   The terms of office of all officers of the city who are
elected by the qualified voters of the city shall be for a two-year period
(as provided in §§ 2 and 4 of Article II of the City Charter except as
modified by law and referendum) and their terms shall commence with their
inauguration at the second session of the first regular meeting of the City
Council in May after their election.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever the certification of
election results is not required under applicable election law to be
completed before the first regular meeting in May after such election, the
inauguration will take place at the commencement of the next regular meeting
of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-17)  (Ord. 07-40, passed 11-5-2007)



COUNCIL RULES



§ 30.20  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The following rules of order and procedure shall govern the
deliberations and meetings of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-23)



§ 30.21  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Regular stated meetings of the City Council shall be held on
the first and third Monday evening of each month or on the Monday evening
immediately following the first Monday if such first Monday shall fall upon
an approved holiday. All regular, stated meetings shall commence at 6:30 p.m.
in the evening. Special meetings may be held at any time, on call of the
Mayor or any two or more aldermen. Such call shall be in writing duly signed,
and shall be presented to the City Clerk, who shall proceed immediately to
prepare notices of the same, and shall cause them to be served on members of
the Council in the usual manner. Such notices shall describe, in brief, the
nature or object of the call.



   (B)   At every special meeting, the call for such meeting shall be
read and afterwards filed by the City Clerk; and no business other than
proposed by the call shall be in order at such meeting.



(Prior Code, § 2-24)  (Ord. 671, passed 9-25-1965; Ord. 1449, passed
7-2-1984)



§ 30.22  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   At the hour appointed for the meeting, the Council shall be called to
order, the Mayor taking the chair, if present, and the Council appointing a
temporary Chairperson if he or she should be absent. The City Clerk (or
someone appointed to act in his or her absence) shall proceed to call the
roll of the members, marking the absentees and announce whether a quorum
(i.e., a majority of all the members elected) be present. If a quorum does
not appear, the Council shall not thereby stand adjourned, unless by a vote
of the members present. When a quorum is present the Council shall proceed to
the business before them, which shall be conducted in the order established
by the Mayor.



(Prior Code, § 2-25)  (Ord. 671, passed 9-25-1965; Ord. 1626, passed
7-19-1986)



§ 30.23  PRIORITY OF BUSINESS.



   All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided
upon by the Mayor without debate.



(Prior Code, § 2-26)  (Ord. 671, passed 9-25-1965)



§ 30.24  DUTIES AND PRIVILEGES OF THE MAYOR.



   (A)   The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide
all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the City Council; he or she
shall have the right to vote upon all questions upon which the Council is
equally divided, but not otherwise.



   (B)   While the Mayor is putting the question, no member shall walk
across or out of the Council room.



   (C)   Every member, previous to his or her speaking, shall address
himself or herself to the Mayor and say, “Mr. Mayor, or Ms. Mayor”, as
appropriate, but shall not proceed with his or her remarks until recognized
by the Chair.



   (D)   When two or more members address him or her at once, the Mayor
shall name the member who is first to speak.



(Prior Code, § 2-27)



§ 30.25  DUTIES AND PRIVILEGES OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   When a member wishes to present a communication, petition,
order, resolution or other original matter, he or she shall, after being
recognized by the Mayor, briefly state its nature before presenting the same.



   (B)   No member shall speak more than twice upon the same subject
without leave of the City Council, nor more than once, in any case, until
every member choosing to speak shall have spoken.



   (C)   A member called to order by the Chair shall immediately be
silent, unless permitted to explain. If there be no appeal, the decision of
the Chair shall be conclusive; but if the member appeal from the decision of
the Chair, the City Council shall decide on the case without debate.



   (D)   While a member is speaking, no member shall hold any private
discourse, nor pass between the speaker and the Chair.



   (E)   Every member who shall be present when a question is stated
from the Chair, shall vote thereon, unless excused by the City Council or
unless he or she be directly interested in the question, in which case he or
she shall not vote.



   (F)   No member shall be allowed to leave the Council while in
session, unless excused; and for attempting to do so, or for persistent
violation of any other rule or order, may be restrained, arrested or
otherwise dealt with as the Mayor or Council may direct.



(Prior Code, § 2-28)



§ 30.26  MOTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS.



   (A)   No motion or resolution shall be put or debated unless it be
seconded. When a motion is seconded, it shall be stated by the Mayor before
the debate, and every such motion shall be reduced to writing, if required by
a member.



   (B)   After a motion or resolution is stated by the Mayor, it shall
be deemed to be in the possession of the City Council, but may be withdrawn
at any time before decision or amendment, by the consent of the City Council.



   (C)   If the question in debate contains several distinct
propositions, any member may have the same divided, when the sense admits of
it.



   (D)   In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered on the
minutes of the City Council, the names of the members who moved and seconded
the same shall be entered.



(Prior Code, § 2-29)



§ 30.27  TAKING AND ENTERING VOTE.



   If any member require it, the ayes and nays upon any question shall be
taken and entered on the minutes.



(Prior Code, § 2-30)



§ 30.28  PRECEDENCE OF QUESTION.



   (A)   When a blank is to be filled, and different sums or times are
proposed, the question shall be taken first on the largest sum or the longest
time.



   (B)   When a question is under debate, the only motion in order
shall be:



      (1)   To adjourn;



      (2)   The previous question;



      (3)   To lay on the table;



      (4)   To postpone indefinitely;



      (5)   To adjourn to a certain day;



      (6)   To refer;



      (7)   To amend; and



      (8)   To substitute; and such motion shall have precedence in
the order herein arranged, the first three to be decided without debate.



(Prior Code, § 2-31)



§ 30.29  ADJOURNMENT.



   (A)   A motion to adjourn the City Council shall always be in order,
except:



      (1)   When a member is in possession of the floor;



      (2)   While the ayes and noes are being called;



      (3)   When the members are voting;



      (4)   When adjournment was the last preceding motion; or



      (5)   When it has been decided that the previous question
shall be taken.



   (B)   A motion to adjourn, simply, cannot be amended; but a motion
to adjourn to a given time may be and is open to debate.



(Prior Code, § 2-32)



§ 30.30  PREVIOUS QUESTION.



   When the previous question is moved and seconded, it shall be put in
this form: “Shall the main question now be put?” If this is carried, all
further amendments and all further motions and debates shall be excluded, and
the question be put without delay.



(Prior Code, § 2-33)



§ 30.31  TO LAY ON THE TABLE OR POSTPONE.



   (A)   A motion to lay a question on the table is not debatable; but
a motion to lay on the table and publish, or any other condition is subject
to amendment and debate.



   (B)   When a motion is postponed indefinitely, it shall not be taken
up again during the same meeting.



(Prior Code, § 2-34)



§ 30.32  TO REFER.



   A motion to refer to a standing committee shall take precedence to a
similar motion for a special committee.



(Prior Code, § 2-35)



§ 30.33  TO AMEND.



   (A)   A motion to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be
entertained.



   (B)   An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in
order; but an amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order.



   (C)   On an amendment to “strike out and insert,” the paragraph
to be amended shall first be read as it stands, then the words proposed to be
struck out and those to be inserted, and finally, the paragraph as it would
stand if so amended.



(Prior Code, § 2-36)



§ 30.34  TO SUBSTITUTE.



   A substitute for an original proposition in debate may be entertained
when further amendment is not admissible; and if accepted by the mover of
such original proposition, or by vote of the Council, it shall entirely
supersede such original proposition, and cut off all amendments appertaining
thereto.



(Prior Code, § 2-37)



§ 30.35  RECONSIDERATION.



   (A)   A question may be reconsidered at any time during the same
meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A motion for
reconsideration being once made, and decided in the negative, shall not be
renewed before the next meeting.



   (B)   A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by members
who voted in the majority.



   (C)   No question shall be reconsidered more than once, nor shall a
vote to reconsider be reconsidered.



(Prior Code, § 2-38)



§ 30.36  COMMITTEES OF THE CITY COUNCIL.



   All committees shall be appointed by the Mayor, unless otherwise
specifically directed by the City Council, in which case they shall be
appointed by ballot.



(Prior Code, § 2-39)



§ 30.37  STANDING COMMITTEES.



   (A)   The standing committees of the City Council shall be appointed
by the Mayor, annually at the regular May meeting, and the first named person
on the committee shall be the Chairperson thereof.



   (B)   The standing committees shall have no executive or
administrative authority. Their purpose, or purposes, shall be to
investigate, study, report and make recommendations to the City Council as a
whole on matters pertaining to legislative or executive policy. All actions
of the committees shall be in response to requests by the Mayor or City
Manager, and committee actions shall be limited to the matters or activities
with which the particular committee may be concerned.



   (C)   The standing committees of the City Council and the particular
committees or functions with which each of said committees shall be
particularly concerned, shall be as established from time to time by the
Mayor and the City Council.



   (D)   The Mayor shall be a member ex officio of all standing
committees and shall have the right to vote if necessary to break a tie vote
of those committee members voting.



   (E)   If certain subjects come within the scope of activity of more
than one committee, the Mayor or City Manager shall designate the committee
or committees to which the matter is to be assigned and, in the event that
more than one committee is to take a subject under consideration, the Mayor
shall designate the Chairperson of the combined committees.



   (F)   The committees shall call upon the City Manager for such
technical and professional advice and assistance as he or she and members of
his or her staff, or department heads may be able to provide, and for all
city records and other available data pertaining to the subject or subjects
under consideration.



   (G)   The standing committees of the City Council shall consist of
the number of alderman so designated by the Mayor from time to time.



   (H)   (1)   (a)   The Audit Committee shall consist of no more
than five and no less than three members, who are appointed by the Mayor and
subject to the consent of the City Council.



         (b)   The Mayor and Finance Committee Chairperson shall
serve as ex officio members.



         (c)   The appointed members shall serve a maximum of
three two-year terms on a staggered basis.



      (2)   The Audit Committee is hereby established to review:



         (a)   All city financial records as part of an
independent annual audit prepared by the Committee;



         (b)   To serve as a review body where the City Council
shall submit any question of impropriety or alleged violation of the city’s
ethics ordinance to the Committee for investigation and review; and



         (c)   To serve as a review body upon the request of the
Mayor and City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-40)  (Ord. 648, passed 10-5-1964; Ord. 702, passed
5-1-1967; Ord. 1435, passed 5-19-1984; Ord. 04-25, passed 5-10-2004)



§ 30.38  SELECT COMMITTEES.



   (A)   The Mayor shall have the authority to assign special projects
and matters of policy interest to a select committee, if in his or her
judgment such committee may be more appropriate than assigning the matter to
a standing committee.



   (B)   All select committees shall consist of three members each,
unless some other number be specified by the Mayor; and the first person
named shall be the Chairperson.



   (C)   On the acceptance of a final report from a select committee,
the said committee shall be considered discharged without a vote unless
otherwise ordered by the Mayor.



(Prior Code, § 2-41)  (Ord. 702, passed 5-1-1967)



§ 30.39  REPORT OF COMMITTEES.



   (A)   Standing and select committees to whom references are made,
shall in all cases report, in writing, the state of facts, with their
opinions thereon.



   (B)   All reports of committees shall be addressed, “To the Mayor
and Aldermen of The City of Lake Forest in City Council Assembled.” They
shall briefly describe the matter referred and the conclusion to which the
committee has arrived, which conclusion shall be accompanied by an
appropriate ordinance, order, resolution, recommendation or some other
distinct proposition.



(Prior Code, § 2-42)  (Ord. 702, passed 5-1-1967)



§ 30.40  RESPECTING MATTERS REFERRED.



   (A)   Any petition, or other proper matter of reference may be
referred by the Mayor or City Manager to an appropriate committee, or officer
of the corporation, when the Council is not in session.



   (B)   Such references may also be made by the Mayor or City Manager
during the session of the Council, without reading, unless objected to, or
the reading called for by a member.



(Prior Code, § 2-43)  (Ord. 702, passed 5-1-1967)



§ 30.41  GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Two meetings required. No ordinance (except such ordinances as
relate to public improvements to be paid for by special assessment) shall be
finally passed by the City Council at the same meeting at which such
ordinance shall be introduced; and every such ordinance, after having been
presented to the City Council, shall lie over until next meeting of the
Council before final action thereon shall be had and any member may be
furnished with a copy upon request.



   (B)   Voting requirement for the approval of tax rates, fees and
charges. No ordinance that establishes tax rates, fees or charges levied by
the city shall be approved unless by a supermajority (two-thirds) vote of the
City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-44)  (Ord. 671, passed 9-25-1965; Ord. 92-13, passed
4-6-1992; Ord. 92-26, passed 5-21-1992; Ord. 2004-61, passed 10-4-2004)



§ 30.42  SUSPENSION OF RULES.



   These rules may be temporarily suspended for the passage of any
ordinance or resolution, with the exception of any ordinance that sets tax
rates, fees or charges levied by the city, by a two-thirds vote of all of the
Aldermen elected. These rules may be repealed, altered or amended by a
two-thirds vote of all of the Aldermen elected.



(Prior Code, § 2-45)  (Ord. 92-13, passed 4-6-1992; Ord. 2004-61, passed
10-4-2004)



§ 30.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of § 30.06 shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $750; and any such person may be ejected
from the Council room or place of committee meeting, and from the building in
which the Council or such committee is meeting.



(Prior Code, § 2-16)



CHAPTER 31:  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES



Section




General Provisions




   31.001   Appointment of officers



   31.002   Designation of officers’ duties



   31.003   Effect of subchapter



   31.004   Appointments



   31.005   Term of office; vacancies



   31.006   Assignment of duties



   31.007   Employment policies and practices



   31.008   Records



   31.009   Moneys received



   31.010   Oath



   31.011   Salaries



   31.012   Arrests



   31.013   Removals



   31.014   Commissions



   31.015   Termination of office



   31.016   Impersonation



   31.017   Interfering with officers



   31.018   Surety bonds



   31.019   Indemnity protection and defense for city officers,
officials and employees




Mayor




   31.035   Election; qualification



   31.036   Bond; oath



   31.037   Duties



   31.038   Powers as member of Council



   31.039   Acting Mayor



   31.040   Salary



   31.041   Veto of ordinance or resolution




City Manager




   31.055   Creation of office



   31.056   Appointment



   31.057   Compensation



   31.058   Powers and duties




City Clerk




   31.070   Election; term



   31.071   Bond



   31.072   Signatures



   31.073   Money collected



   31.074   Accounts



   31.075   Records



   31.076   Documents



   31.077   Additional duties



   31.078   Salary




City Treasurer




   31.090   Appointment; term



   31.091   Bond



   31.092   Duties generally



   31.093   Salary



   31.094   Deposit of funds



   31.095   Records



   31.096   Accounting



   31.097   Reports




City Attorney




   31.110   Election; term



   31.111   Suits and actions



   31.112   Judgments



   31.113   Advice



   31.114   Additional counsel



   31.115   Ordinances and documents




Marshal and Collector




   31.130   Election



   31.131   Bond



   31.132   Duties



   31.133   Salary



   31.134   Special assessments and special tax



   31.135   Money received



   31.136   Reports




City Surveyor and Engineer




   31.150   Election; term



   31.151   Bond



   31.152   Duties




Public Engineer




   31.165   Creation of office



   31.166   Appointment



   31.167   Duties and powers




City Supervisor




   31.180   Appointment; term



   31.181   Bond



   31.182   Duties



   31.183   Salary




Director of Public Services




   31.195   Creation of office



   31.196   Appointment



   31.197   Duties and authority



   31.198   Operations and functions of Engineering Department, Streets
and Sanitation Department and Water Department



 



   31.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   City Council, see Ch. 30



   Departments and organizations, see Ch. 31



   Pensions and retirement system, see Ch. 37



   Purchases and payments, see Ch. 38



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.001  APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.



   The Mayor shall appoint, by and with the approval of the City Council,
all officers of the city whose election or appointment is not otherwise
provided for; any vacancies occurring in such appointive offices shall be
filled in the same manner.



(Prior Code, § 2-52)



§ 31.002  DESIGNATION OF OFFICERS’ DUTIES.



   Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of
any appointed officer of the city, this dispute shall be settled by the
Mayor, after consulting with the City Attorney; and the Mayor shall have the
power to delegate to any appointed officer any duty which is to be performed
when no specific officer has been directed to perform that duty.



(Prior Code, § 2-53)



§ 31.003  EFFECT OF SUBCHAPTER.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply alike to all officers of
the city, regardless of the time of the creation of the office or of the time
of the appointment of the officer.



(Prior Code, § 2-54)



§ 31.004  APPOINTMENTS.



   The Mayor shall make appointments to fill all appointive offices, in
the absence of provision to the contrary by statute or ordinance, such
appointments to be made by and with the approval of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-55)



§ 31.005  TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES.



   Every appointive officer or employee of the city shall hold office for
a term of one year or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified,
unless it is otherwise provided by ordinance. In case of a vacancy in any
such office, the person whose duty it is to make the appointment shall
appoint a new officer or employee.



(Prior Code, § 2-56)



§ 31.006  ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES.



   The Mayor shall have the power to assign to any appointed officer any
duty which is not assigned by ordinance to some other specific officer; and
he or she shall determine disputes or questions relating to the respective
powers or duties of officers after consultation with the City Attorney.



(Prior Code, § 2-57)



§ 31.007  EMPLOYMENT POLICIES AND PRACTICES.



   In order to further the efficient and harmonious conduct of the
administration and business of the city, the City Council shall prescribe and
publish uniform rules and regulations governing employment policies and
practices of all officers and employees of the city, and from time to time
alter, amend and supplement such rules and regulations as it shall see fit,
and such uniform rules and regulations shall be binding upon all officers and
employees of the city and shall be filed for use and examination by the
public in the office of the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 2-58)



§ 31.008  RECORDS.



   All records kept by any officer of the city shall be open to inspection
by the Mayor, or any member of the City Council, or any officer or board at
all reasonable times, whether such records are required to be kept by statute
or ordinance or not.



(Prior Code, § 2-61)



§ 31.009  MONEYS RECEIVED.



   Every officer or employee of the city shall promptly turn over all
money received by him or her on behalf of the city to the City Treasurer; and
with such money, he or she shall give a statement as to the source thereof.



(Prior Code, § 2-62) (Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



§ 31.010  OATH.



   Every person chosen or appointed to an executive, judicial or
administrative office shall, before he or she enters upon the duties of his
or her office, take and subscribe the oath of office prescribed in the
Constitution of this state, and file the same, duly certified by the officer
before whom it was taken, with the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 2-63)



§ 31.011  SALARIES.



   All officers and employees of the city shall receive such salary as may
be provided from time to time by ordinance or by approval of the City
Council. No officer or employee receiving a salary from the city shall be
entitled to retain any portion of any fees collected by him or her in the
performance of his or her duties as a municipal officer or employee in the
absence of a specific ordinance or statute to that effect.



(Prior Code, § 2-64)



§ 31.012  ARRESTS.



   (A)   Subject to the requirements of division (B) below, the Mayor
and the members of the City Council, as well as every member of the Police
Department, are hereby declared to be conservators of the peace with such
powers to make arrests as are given to the conservators of the peace by
statute.



   (B)   Only after receiving a certificate attesting to the successful
completion of a training course administered by the State Law Enforcement
Training Standards Board, may the Mayor, aldermen or sworn members of the
Police Department have power:



      (1)   To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without
process, all persons who break the peace or are found violating any municipal
ordinance or any criminal law of the state;



      (2)   To commit arrested persons for examination;



      (3)   If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody
overnight or Sunday in any safe place or until they can be brought before the
proper court; and



      (4)   To exercise all other powers as conservators of the
peace prescribed by this code or state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 2-65)  (Ord. 2013-30, passed 6-3-2013)



§ 31.013  REMOVALS.



   (A)   Any officer elected or appointed to any office may be removed
from such office by a vote of three-fourths of the aldermen authorized by law
to be elected, but no officer shall be removed except for good cause, nor
unless first furnished with the charges against him or her, and heard in his
or her defense. And the City Council shall have power to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of papers, when necessary for the
purpose of such trial; and shall proceed within ten days to hear and
determine upon the merits of such case-, and if such officer shall neglect to
appear and answer such charge, then the City Council may declare such office
vacated.



   (B)   Provided, this section shall not be deemed to apply to any
officer appointed by the City Council. Such officer may be removed at any
time by a vote of three-fourths as aforesaid, in their discretion; but any
officer may be suspended until the disposition of the charges when preferred.



   (C)   Provided, that the Mayor may suspend members of the Police
Department or Fire Department for cause, but suspension shall be reported to
the City Council at the next regular meeting thereof.



(Prior Code, § 2-66)



§ 31.014  COMMISSIONS.



   All officers, except the Mayor, elected or appointed to city office
shall be commissioned by warrant under the corporate seal, signed by the
Mayor or presiding officer of the City Council and the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 2-67)



§ 31.015  TERMINATION OF OFFICE.



   Every officer of the city, upon termination of his or her office for
any cause, shall deliver to his or her successor all books and records which
may be the property of the city; and if no successor has been appointed
within one week after the termination of office such property shall be
delivered either to the City Clerk or to the Treasurer. Such books and
properties shall be turned over no later than ten days after the termination
of the term of office.



(Prior Code, § 2-68)



§ 31.016  IMPERSONATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate without lawful
authority any city officer or employee.



(Prior Code, § 2-69)  Penalty, see § 31.999



Cross-reference:



   General penalty, see § 10.99



§ 31.017  INTERFERING WITH OFFICERS.



   It shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder any officer or
employee of the city while engaged in the duties of his or her office.



(Prior Code, § 2-70)  Penalty, see § 31.999



§ 31.018  SURETY BONDS.



   (A)   Whenever, in its opinion, additional sureties or an additional
surety may be needed on any bond given to indemnify the city against loss or
liability, because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties, or
for any other reason, the City Council may order a new surety or sureties to
be secured for such bond. If such new surety or sureties are not procured
within ten days from the time such order is transmitted to the principal on
the bond, the Council shall declare the bond to be void, and thereupon such
principal shall be deemed to have surrendered the privilege or position as a
condition of which the bond was required.



   (B)   Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the city is required as a
prerequisite to exercising the duties of any office or position, or to the
issuance of a license or permit, or the exercise of any special privilege,
the surety on such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do
business in this state as a surety company, in the absence of specific
provision to the contrary by law or ordinance, and all sureties, corporate or
private, shall be approved by the Council before a bond shall be accepted.



(Prior Code, § 2-71)



§ 31.019  INDEMNITY PROTECTION AND DEFENSE FOR CITY OFFICERS, OFFICIALS AND
EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   The city shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless its current
and former aldermen, commissioners, officers, officials and employees, as
well as representatives serving on other bodies who have been appointed by
the City Council, against any civil, criminal or administrative
investigation, claims, actions or proceedings, and any judgments, fines,
liabilities and other costs thereof, including reasonable attorney’s fees
and any amounts paid in any settlement concurred in by the city, based upon
any act, error or omission that could reasonably be construed to be within
the exercise of its lawful duties or scope of employment; except that any
willful or wanton conduct shall not be protected by the terms of this section
unless there is not an intention to injure or do harm. Any such costs,
whether incurred or anticipated, shall require the approval of the City
Council in order to qualify for indemnity, except where the city incurs such
costs directly. This section shall not apply to provide defense or
indemnification to any such alderman, commissioner, officer, official,
employee or representative in any such investigation, claim, action or
proceeding instituted by the city against such alderman, commissioner,
officer, official, employee or representative.



   (B)   The foregoing rights shall not be exclusive of any other
rights which any current or former aldermen, commissioners, officers,
officials and employees, as well as representatives serving on other bodies
who have been appointed by the City Council, may have as a matter of law. The
foregoing rights shall, in the case of the death of such alderman,
commissioner, officer, official, employee or representative, inure to the
benefit of his or her successors.



   (C)   The liability of the city for payments hereunder may be
insured to the extent permitted by law but to the extent not insured shall be
payable out of the funds and moneys of the city.



(Ord. 06-04, passed 3-6-2006)



MAYOR



§ 31.035  ELECTION; QUALIFICATION.



   The Mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city and
shall hold his or her office for such term as is provided by § 4 of Article
II of the City Charter. He or she shall have the qualifications for office
required by § 5 of Article II of the City Charter. The term of the Mayor
shall be limited to three consecutive one-year terms and the Mayor is
prohibited from seeking re-election to the office of Mayor for three years
thereafter.



(Prior Code, § 2-77)  (Ord. 93-24, passed 6-7-1993)



§ 31.036  BOND; OATH.



   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office the Mayor shall
take oath of office, as is required by § 2 of Article IV of the City
Charter, and shall file such bond, conditioned upon the faithful performance
of his or her duties, as may be required by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-78)



§ 31.037  DUTIES.



   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city, and shall
have such powers and perform such duties as may be required of him or her by
statute or ordinance. He or she shall have supervision over all of the
officers and employees of the city, and shall have the power and authority to
inspect all books and records pertaining to city affairs and kept by any
officer or employee of the city, at any reasonable time.



(Prior Code, § 2-79)



§ 31.038  POWERS AS MEMBER OF COUNCIL.



   The Mayor shall be a member of the City Council, and the presiding
officer thereof, and he or she shall have the deciding vote in case of a tie,
as is provided by § 1 of Article V of the City Charter; and he or she shall
have the power to veto ordinances as is provided by § 7 of Article IV of the
City Charter.



(Prior Code, § 2-80)



§ 31.039  ACTING MAYOR.



   In the event of a vacancy in the office of the Mayor, or in the event
of the temporary inability of the Mayor to act, the Council shall have the
power to appoint from its membership an Acting Mayor, to act in the stead of
the Mayor until his or her resumption of duties or until the office has been
filled by election, as is provided by § 8 of Article IV of the City Charter.



(Prior Code, § 2-81)



§ 31.040  SALARY.



   (A)   The annual salary of the Mayor shall be as set by the Council.



   (B)   This salary, however, shall not be payable to any person
holding said office if such person shall at the same time be receiving
compensation from any other office of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-82)



§ 31.041  VETO OF ORDINANCE OR RESOLUTION.



   In accordance with the City Charter, when the Mayor vetoes any
ordinance or resolution passed by the City Council, the City Council shall
consider the same at its next meeting and a vote of the majority of the
members elected to the City Council shall be sufficient to override the veto.



(Ord. 93-19, passed 4-5-1993)



CITY MANAGER



§ 31.055  CREATION OF OFFICE.



   There is hereby created the office of City Manager, an administrative
office of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-89)



§ 31.056  APPOINTMENT.



   The City Manager shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the
approval of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-90)



§ 31.057  COMPENSATION.



   The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the City Council
shall fix from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 2-91)



§ 31.058  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of
the city. He or she shall be responsible to the Mayor and City Council for
the proper administration of all affairs, departments and offices of the city.



   (B)   He or she shall have the power and be required to:



      (1)   Recommend to the Mayor, the appointment of officers of
the city who are required by law to be appointed by the Mayor, and to
recommend to the Mayor and City Council the appointment of officers who are
required by law to be appointed by the Mayor by and with the consent of the
City Council. He or she shall further recommend the removal or suspension of
any such officers when such removal or suspension shall be consistent with
the best interests of the city. All such recommendations for appointment or
removal shall be based upon merit and upon the qualifications or
disqualifications of such officers;



      (2)   Act as business manager for the city under the direction
of the Mayor and City Council. He or she shall coordinate and supervise
administrative work, including: accounting practices, preparation of monthly
financial reports; securing of annual audits by authorized certified public
accountants; payment of approved salaries, wages and bills; safe-keeping of
securities and valuable papers, preparation and use of authorized forms;
collection and deposit with authorized depositories of all revenues,
preparation of the budget and the annual appropriation and tax levy
ordinances and scheduling of hearings relating thereto; filing of plats,
ordinances, documents and papers with the provision that appropriate
documents be made conveniently available to the public; review and
maintenance of authorized fidelity bonds and insurance, preparation and
release of articles and information to keep the public informed of its city
government; and informing the Mayor and City Council of current federal and
state legislation affecting the city;



      (3)   Act ex officio as purchasing agent and perform all of
the duties and requirements of that office as set forth in this code;



      (4)   Assist the Mayor in the enforcement of the laws of the
state and the ordinances of the city;



      (5)   Take charge of and manage the City Hall and all other
city buildings and properties not specifically assigned to other officers or
agencies of the city for management;



      (6)   Administer the employment and personnel policies of the
city as approved by the Mayor and City Council; recruit, interview and employ
necessary personnel for the several city departments and offices as required;



      (7)   Administer the participation of eligible city employees
in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, and in the hospitalization and
medical care plans;



      (8)   Fix all salaries or wages of city employees not fixed by
the City Council or not required to be fixed by the City Council pursuant to
ordinance;



      (9)   Coordinate operations affecting more than one
department, office or officer of the city;



      (10)   Except as provided by Charter and law, to create,
consolidate, combine or eliminate offices, positions, departments or units of
the city organizational structure; and, based upon merit, to appoint
individuals to discharge them from such offices and positions, except for the
Director of Public Safety and Chiefs of Police and Fire Departments, who
shall be appointed and discharged by the Mayor and the City Council. The City
Manager may be the head of one or more departments;



      (11)   Make, or cause to be made, monthly and annual reports
to the Mayor and City Council of the activities of all departments under his
or her jurisdiction.



      (12)   Attend all meetings of the City Council or committees
thereof, unless excused therefrom. The City Manager shall be entitled to
notice of all meetings, regular and special, of the City Council and shall
have the privilege of taking part in the discussion of all matters coming
before the Council;



      (13)   Supply such information and recommend such measures to
the Mayor and the City Council as may be deemed advantageous to the city;



      (14)   Meet the public in behalf of the Mayor and City
Council; receive suggestions; hear and investigate complaints in relation to
all matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and
in regard to services rendered by the public utilities in the city, and see
that all franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the city are
faithfully observed;



      (15)   Inform succeeding Mayors and City Councils of the
general principles of administrative programs and policies of previous
administrations so that a continuity of programs and policies may be possible;



      (16)   Perform such other duties, consistent with the City
Charter, the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state, as the Mayor
and City Council may direct or delegate from time to time;



      (17)   (a)   Dispose of personal property which:



            1.   Is no longer serviceable or in repairable
condition; or



            2.   Is no longer useful to any department within
the city.



         (b)   The City Manager is authorized to dispose of said
items from time to time as they accumulate provided the estimated value of
any such item does not exceed $4,000, by negotiating its sale or through
publication of official notice of sale and acceptance of competitive bids.



      (18)   Establish regulations and requirements regarding the
payment of fees or charges to the city and approve payment arrangements
(including waivers or reductions of fees or charges in an amount not to
exceed $5,000 in any particular instance, unless otherwise authorized by the
code or upon approval of the City Council) or general discounts of such fees
or charges when, in the City Manager's determination such actions are deemed
to be in the best interest of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-92)  (Ord. 973, passed 1-17-1976; Ord. 1271, passed - -;
Ord. 1289, passed 3-1-1982; Ord. 2012-10, passed 4-16-2012; Ord. 2013-081,
passed 12-2-2013)



CITY CLERK



§ 31.070  ELECTION; TERM.



   The City Clerk, an administrative officer shall be elected by the City
Council and shall hold his or her office as is provided by § 4 of Article II
of the City Charter. The City Clerk need not be a resident of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-99) (Ord. 2016-44, passed 8-1-2016)



§ 31.071  BOND.



   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the City Clerk
shall execute a bond to the city in such sums and with such securities as may
be prescribed by the City Council, conditioned that he or she shall
faithfully executive the duties of his or her office and account for and pay
over and deliver all money and other properties received.



(Prior Code, § 2-100)



§ 31.072  SIGNATURES.



   The City Clerk shall seal and attest all contracts of the city and all
licenses, permits and such other documents as shall require this formality.



(Prior Code, § 2-101)



§ 31.073  MONEY COLLECTED.



   The City Clerk shall promptly turn over all money received by him or
her on behalf of the city to the City Treasurer; and with such money he or
she shall give a statement as to the source thereof.



(Prior Code, § 2-102) (Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



§ 31.074  ACCOUNTS.



   The City Clerk or designee shall keep accounts showing all money
received by him or her and the source and disposition thereof, and such other
accounts as may be required by statute ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 2-103)



§ 31.075  RECORDS.



   In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the
City Clerk is required by statute to keep, the City Clerk shall keep a
register of all licenses and permits issued, and the payments thereon, a
record showing all of the officers and regular employees of the city; and
such other records as may be required by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-104)



§ 31.076  DOCUMENTS.



   The City Clerk shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to the
city, which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer.



(Prior Code, § 2-105)



§ 31.077  ADDITIONAL DUTIES.



   In addition to the duties herein provided, the City Clerk shall perform
such other duties and functions as may be required by statute or ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 2-106)



§ 31.078  SALARY.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall receive an annual salary, in such amount
as may be provided from time to time by ordinance or approval of the City
Council, in lieu of all the fees, costs and other emoluments provided by law
to be paid to such City Clerk.



   (B)   All fees, costs and other emoluments provided to be paid to
such City Clerk, by statute, ordinance or regulation, in the performance of
his or her duties as City Clerk, and in the performance of the collateral
duties of said office, including those as ex officio local Registrar of Vital
Statistics, shall be promptly paid over by him or her to the City Treasurer
with a statement as to the source thereof.



(Prior Code, § 2-107)  (Ord. 606, passed 8-5-1963; Ord. 2016-02, passed
1-19-2016)



CITY TREASURER



§ 31.090  APPOINTMENT; TERM.



   The City Treasurer, an administrative officer, shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of a simple majority of the City Council and
shall hold office for such term as provided by § 4 of Article II of the City
Charter.



(Prior Code, § 2-114)  (Ord. 02-11, passed 4-18-2002)



§ 31.091  BOND.



   (A)   In connection with the duties of his or her office, the City
Treasurer shall be given a bond, in a sum and form to be fixed by the City
Council, with one or more sureties, to be approved by the City Council.



   (B)   The city shall pay the cost of any bond required of said
officer by the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-115) (Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



§ 31.092  DUTIES GENERALLY.



   The City Treasurer shall receive all moneys belonging to the city, and
shall keep an accurate account of all receipts and expenditures, in such a
manner as the City Council shall direct.



(Prior Code, § 2-116)



§ 31.093  SALARY.



   The annual salary of the City Treasurer shall be as determined by
Council. This salary, however, shall not be payable to any person holding
said office if such person shall at the same time be receiving compensation
from any other office of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-117)



§ 31.094  DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.



   The City Treasurer shall promptly deposit all money belonging to the
city which shall come into his or her hands with a regularly designated city
depository.



(Prior Code, § 2-118) (Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



§ 31.095  RECORDS.



   (A)   The Treasurer shall keep records showing all money received by
him or her, the source thereof, and the purpose for which it is received, or
the fund to which it belongs.



   (B)   All records and accounts of the Treasurer shall be kept in
such manner as may be required by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-119)



§ 31.096  ACCOUNTING.



   The Treasurer shall keep such accounts as may be required by statute or
by the Council; and he or she shall keep separate accounts for each fund or
appropriation, and for special assessments.



(Prior Code, § 2-120)



§ 31.097  REPORTS.



   The Treasurer shall make monthly reports to the City Council, in form
as authorized by it, showing the moneys received and the moneys expended by
him or her.



(Prior Code, § 2-121)



CITY ATTORNEY



§ 31.110  ELECTION; TERM.



   The City Attorney, an administrative officer, shall be elected by the
City Council and shall hold his or her office as is provided by § 4 of
Article II of the City Charter.



(Prior Code, § 2-128)



Charter reference:



   City Attorney, see Charter Art. IV, § 11



§ 31.111  SUITS AND ACTIONS.



   The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or
actions at law or equity to which the city may be a party or in which it may
be interested, or which may be brought against or by any officer of the city
on the behalf of the city, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of
the city, whenever directed to do so by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-129)



§ 31.112  JUDGMENTS.



   It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to see to the full
enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the
city, and of all similar interlocutory orders.



(Prior Code, § 2-130)



§ 31.113  ADVICE.



   The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor to the city, and shall
render advice on all legal questions affecting the city whenever requested to
do so by the Mayor or by any member of the Council. Upon request by the Mayor
or by the City Council, he or she shall reduce any such opinion in writing;
and upon request by the Mayor, he or she shall render an opinion to any
officer of the city with regard to his or her duties or powers.



(Prior Code, § 2-131)



§ 31.114  ADDITIONAL COUNSEL.



   With the advice and consent of the City Council, the Mayor may appoint
additional counsel to assist the City Attorney on special matters, such
special counsel shall receive such compensation as may be directed.



(Prior Code, § 2-132)



§ 31.115  ORDINANCES AND DOCUMENTS.



   It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to draft or supervise the
phraseology of any contracts, leases or other documents or instruments to
which the City may be a party; and upon request by the City Council to draft
ordinances covering any subjects within the powers of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-133)



MARSHAL AND COLLECTOR



§ 31.130  ELECTION.



   (A)   The City Marshal and Collector, an administrative officer,
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a simple majority of the
City Council and shall hold office for such term as provided by § 4 of
Article II of the City Charter.



   (B)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this code, all
duties and powers assigned to the City Collector in this code shall be
assigned and performed by the City Treasurer.



(Prior Code, § 2-140)  (Ord. 02-11, passed 4-18-2002; Ord. 2016-02, passed
1-19-2016)



§ 31.131  BOND.



   In connection with the duties of his or her office, the City Marshal
and Collector shall be given a bond, in a sum and form to be fixed by the
City Council, with one or more sureties, to be approved by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-141) (Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



§ 31.132  DUTIES.



   The City Marshal and Collector shall perform such duties as shall be
prescribed by the City Council for the preservation of the public peace, the
collection of license moneys, fines or otherwise.



(Prior Code, § 2-142)



§ 31.133  SALARY.



   The annual salary of the City Marshal shall be as determined by
Council. This salary, however, shall not be payable to any person holding
said office if such person shall at the same time be receiving compensation
from any other office of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-143)



§ 31.134  SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS AND SPECIAL TAX.



   Unless otherwise collected by the County Collector or Treasurer, the
City Collector shall be charged with the collection of all special
assessments and special taxes for the construction of improvements in the
city, and shall perform such duties and keep such records and make such
reports in connection therewith as may be prescribed by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-144) (Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



§ 31.135  MONEY RECEIVED.



   The City Collector shall promptly turn over all money received by him
or her on behalf of the city to the City Treasurer.



(Prior Code, § 2-145) (Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



§ 31.136  REPORTS.



   The City Collector shall prepare periodic statements showing all money
received by him or her on behalf of the city, and the disposition thereof,
and he or she shall make such other reports as required by law.



(Prior Code, § 2-146) (Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-26-2016)



CITY SURVEYOR AND ENGINEER



§ 31.150  ELECTION; TERM.



   The City Surveyor and Engineer, an administrative officer, shall be
elected by the City Council and shall hold his or her office, as is provided
by § 4 of Article II of the City Charter.



(Prior Code, § 2-153)



Charter reference:



   City Surveyor, see Charter, Art. IV, § 15



§ 31.151  BOND.



   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the City Surveyor
and Engineer shall execute a bond to the city in such sums and with such
securities as may be prescribed by the City Council, conditioned that he or
she shall faithfully execute the duties of his or her office and account for
and pay over and deliver all money and other properties received.



(Prior Code, § 2-154)



§ 31.152  DUTIES.



   (A)   The City Surveyor and Engineer shall perform such duties as
are required of him or her by the Charter or by the City Council, under the
general supervision of the City Manager within the authority granted by the
City Council. Consistent with such requirements, he or she shall prepare or
superintend and approve the preparation of the following: plans and
specifications for all public improvements, all surveys required by the city,
all maps, plats and charts required in and about the matter of public works;
all profiles, taking of all levels and establishment of all sidewalk and
street grades for the city. He or she shall prepare or superintend the
preparation of all necessary plans, specifications, detail and estimates
required in connection with all improvements and maintenance work paid for
with Motor Fuel Tax Funds, and shall have supervision over the construction
of same. He or she shall also be responsible to ensure that all field notes
affecting street improvements or alterations in books to be kept for that
purpose and all such field notes and all original tracings shall be and
become the property of the City. He or she shall superintend and supervise
all public work and public improvements, subject to the control and guidance
of the City Council and shall superintend and supervise all public
improvements and work that he or she may be directed to perform by the City
Council. He or she shall, from time to time as required by the Council, make
reports regarding public improvements, the repairs of streets, bridges and
sidewalks; the making of new improvements, and shall make such suggestions to
the City Council regarding the same as shall, in his or her judgment, seem
best and proper. As regards to the necessity and expediency of public
improvements, he or she shall have the right to be heard upon the same before
the City Council but shall not have the right to vote thereon.



   (B)   He or she shall also assist the City Attorney in matters under
his or her supervision when requested.



   (C)   He or she shall perform all of the acts herein before
mentioned except, however, such as shall by law devolve upon the Public
Engineer, or the Board of Local Improvements under the Act of the General
Assembly of the State of Illinois, entitled “An Act Concerning Local
Improvements,” approved June 14, 1897, and in force July 1, 1897, and all
amendments thereto.



   (D)   The City Surveyor and Engineer shall act as technical
assistant and adviser to the City Plan Commission. He or she shall examine or
superintend and approve the examination of all tentative and final plats of
subdivisions presented to the city for acceptance, along with all supporting
plans, specifications, contracts and other documents pertaining thereto, for
compliance with the ordinances of the city and the requirements of the Plan
Commission; and shall submit such plats and documents to the Commission with
his or her recommendations for approval or rejection thereof and with his or
her reasons therefor. He or she shall prepare or superintend preparation and
approve the preparation of such studies, maps and exhibits, and assemble such
data on the Plan Commission shall require from time to time. Upon request, he
or she shall attend all meetings and hearings held by the Plan Commission,
and, shall provide such assistants or subordinates, as required, to act as
secretary of the Plan Commission.



   (E)   It shall be the duty of the City Surveyor and Engineer to
assist and coordinate with the Director of Building and Zoning, the
enforcement of all ordinances of the City relating to zoning. He or she shall
have the power to make, or cause to be made, entry into any building or
premises at any reasonable hour for the purpose of inspection when he or she
has reasons to believe that a violation of the zoning ordinance exists.



   (F)   The City Surveyor and Engineer shall have the power to order
all work stopped on the construction, alteration or repair of buildings in
the City when such work is being done in violation of the ordinances relating
to zoning. Such a stop order shall be issued in the same manner, and shall
have the same authority, as a stop order issued by the Director of Building
and Zoning; and a violation thereof shall be subject to the same penalties as
is provided for violation of a stop order issued by the Director of Building
and Zoning.



(Prior Code, § 2-155)  (Ord. 659, passed 5-3-1965)



PUBLIC ENGINEER



§ 31.165  CREATION OF OFFICE.



   There is hereby created the office of Public Engineer, an
administrative office of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-162)



§ 31.166  APPOINTMENT.



   The Public Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the
approval of the City Council, at the first regular meeting in each year, and
shall hold his or her office during the said fiscal year or until his or her
successor is appointed and qualified.



(Prior Code, § 2-163)



§ 31.167  DUTIES AND POWERS.



   The Public Engineer shall perform all duties and possess all the powers
provided for in the Act of the General Assembly entitled, “An Act
Concerning Local Improvements,” approved June 14, 1897, as amended, or may
be given by any other statute or ordinance. The aforementioned act is hereby
adopted by the City, and all local improvements to be paid for by special
assessments or special taxation shall be completed in compliance with the
provisions thereof.



(Prior Code, § 2-164)



CITY SUPERVISOR



§ 31.180  APPOINTMENT; TERM.



   The City Supervisor, an administrative officer, shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of a simple majority of the City Council and
shall hold office for such term as provided by § 4 of Article II of the City
Charter.



(Prior Code, § 20-11)  (Ord. 02-11, passed 4-18-2002)



§ 31.181  BOND.



   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Supervisor
shall execute a bond to the City in such sums and with such securities as may
be prescribed by the City Council, conditioned that he or she shall
faithfully execute the duties of his or her office and account for and pay
over and deliver all money and other properties received.



(Prior Code, § 20-12)



§ 31.182  DUTIES.



   The Supervisor shall superintend the construction of all public works
and improvements in the City, except those put in by special assessments, and
shall see that the same are constructed in accordance with the ordinances
authorizing them, as is provided by § 17 of Article IV of the City Charter.



(Prior Code, § 20-13)



§ 31.183  SALARY.



   The annual salary of the City Supervisor shall be as determined by
Council. This salary, however, shall not be payable to any person holding
said office if such person shall at the same time be receiving compensation
from any other office of the City.



(Prior Code, § 20-14)



DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICES



§ 31.195  CREATION OF OFFICE.



   There is hereby created the office of Director of Public Services, an
administrative office of the City.



(Prior Code, § 34-11)



§ 31.196  APPOINTMENT.



   The Director of Public Works shall be an administrative officer of the
City, who shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the approval of the
City Council.



(Prior Code, § 34-11.1)



§ 31.197  DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Services,
subject to the ordinances of the city and under the general supervision of
the City Manager within the authority granted by the City Council, to provide
day to day coordination and long-range planning and budgeting direction for
the operations and functions of the Engineering, Streets and Sanitation, and
Water Departments, which operations and functions shall be as set forth in
greater detail in other sections of this subchapter.



   (B)   In carrying out the aforementioned coordination and long-range
planning duties the Director of Public Services shall have the authority to
provide general supervision and direction to the Superintendent of
Engineering, Superintendent of Streets and Sanitation, and the Superintendent
of Water, such being department heads of the Engineering, Streets and
Sanitation, and Water Departments. He or she shall also have such assistants
and subordinates as may be required from time to time for the proper
discharge of his or her office, subject to the approval of the City Manager
and within authority granted by the City Council. The aforementioned
department heads, assistants and subordinates shall be employed in a manner
consistent with the approved personnel policies and practices of the city.



   (C)   The Director of Public Services shall keep accurate records
showing the operations, accomplishments and expenses of his or her office,
and shall make reports thereof periodically to the City Manager in such
manner and at such times as shall be prescribed by the City Manager, which
reports shall in turn be transmitted by the City Manager to the City Council
from time to time as may be required by the City Council.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Services, and
he or she shall have the authority, to enforce all of the ordinances, rules
and regulations of the city pertaining to areas, facilities, equipment and
appurtenances thereto, that are within or under the jurisdiction of the
departments under his or her general supervision and direction as
hereinbefore described. The Director of Public Services shall have the
authority to delegate such responsibilities and authority to the
Superintendents of Engineering, Streets and Sanitation, and Water, or to one
or more of his or her assistants or subordinates as he or she may deem
necessary for the proper enforcement of such ordinances, rules and
regulations, and for the proper and efficient functioning of the office of
Director of Public Services.



   (E)   The Director of Public Services shall perform such other
duties as the City Manager and the City Council may from time to time direct,
except such as shall by statute or ordinance devolve upon other officers or
departments of the City, or upon other agencies, either governmental or
private.



   (F)   Wherever, in any ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or
directive of the City, reference is made to the Commissioner of Streets or to
the Superintendent of Public Works, such reference shall be interpreted to
mean the Director of Public Services, and all powers, authority, duties and
responsibilities conferred upon the Commissioner of Streets or the
Superintendent of Public Works in any ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation
or directive of the City shall be considered as being conferred upon the
Director of Public Services.



(Prior Code, § 34-12)



§ 31.198  OPERATIONS AND FUNCTIONS OF ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT, STREETS AND
SANITATION DEPARTMENT AND WATER DEPARTMENT.



   The following departments shall be under the general coordination and
supervision of the Director of Public Services.



   (A)   Engineering Department.



      (1)   The operations and functions of this Department shall be
under the immediate charge and direct supervision of the Superintendent of
Engineering, who shall, as department head, report and be directly
responsible to the City Manager for the efficient and proper performance of
the day to day functions and operations of the said Department. In the area
of coordination of operations and long-range planning and budgetary
considerations, the Superintendent shall assist and be a subordinate of the
Director of Public Services.



      (2)   The said Engineering Department shall, under the general
supervision and approval of the City Surveyor and Engineer, be responsible
for: the preparation of plans and specifications for all public improvements;
preparation of ail surveys required by the city; preparation of all maps,
plats and charts required in and about the matter of public works;
preparation of all profiles, taking of all levels and establishment of all
sidewalks and street grades for the city. Said Department shall provide the
City Surveyor and Engineer with all necessary plans, specifications, detail
and estimates required in connection with all improvements and maintenance
work paid for with Motor Fuel Tax Funds, and shall assist in the supervision
over construction of same.



      (3)   Said Department shall superintend and supervise all
public work and public improvements, subject to the direction and approval of
the City Surveyor and Engineer. The Superintendent of Engineering shall, upon
request of the City Surveyor and Engineer and City Manager, make reports
regarding public improvements, the repairs of streets, bridges and sidewalks;
the making of new improvements.



   (B)   Streets and Sanitation Departments.



      (1)   The operations and functions of this Department shall be
under the immediate charge and direct supervision of the Superintendent of
Streets and Sanitation, who shall, as Department head, report and be directly
responsible to the City Manager for the efficient and proper performance of
the day to day functions and operations of the said Department. In the area
of coordination of operations and long-range planning and budgetary
considerations the Superintendent shall assist and be a subordinate of the
Director of Public Services.



      (2)   The said Streets and Sanitation Department shall be
responsible for: the care, maintenance, repair, cleaning and operation of all
of the public streets, alleys and ways of the City, and the pavements,
bridges, walks, sidewalks, crosswalks and parkways thereon and thereof, all
of the street lights and traffic signal lights of the City, together with the
cables, wiring, conduits and appurtenances thereto and therefor; all of the
street name signs, traffic signs and other signs of the City, including
traffic markings; all of the public parking lots of the City; all of the
sanitary sewers, storm water sewers, drains, ditches and drainage ways of the
City, together with the appurtenances thereto; the collection of garbage and
refuse within the City and the disposal thereof, the maintenance and care of
any public areas, places or facilities of the City where the maintenance and
care thereof has not been assigned or delegated to some other agency of the
City; and such other public works as the Director of Public Services may from
time to time direct.



   (C)   Water Department.



      (1)   The operation and functions of this Department shall be
under the immediate charge and direct supervision of the Superintendent of
Water, who shall, as department head, report and be directly responsible to
the City Manager for the efficient and proper performance of the day to day
functions and operations of the said Department. In the area of coordination
of operations and long-range planning and budgetary considerations, the
Superintendent shall assist and be a subordinate of the Director of Public
Services.



      (2)   The said Water Department shall be responsible for: the
production, treatment, storage, transmission and distribution of the public
water supply of the City, including the operation, maintenance, repairs and
alteration of the water plant, the lands and properties devoted to, or
contemplated for, use by or for the public water supply system, the water
treatment and storage facilities, the water transmission and distribution
pipes and mains and all of the appurtenances thereto and therefor, now owned
or hereafter acquired by the City. The said Water Department shall be
responsible for the furnishing, installing, maintaining, repairing and
reading of all water meters used to measure the consumption of water by all
users of water from the public water supply system of the City in such manner
as may be prescribed by the ordinances, regulations and rules of the City, as
approved by the City Council.



      (3)   The Superintendent of Water shall keep, or cause to be
kept, an accurate record of the operations, activities, income and expenses
of the said Water Department, which records shall be kept and reported to the
City Manager periodically at such times and in such form as shall be
prescribed by the City Manager within the authority granted by the City
Council; and which records and reports shall in turn be transmitted by the
City Manager to the City Council from time to time as the City Council may
require.



      (4)   The Superintendent of Water shall keep, or cause to be
kept, a correct and complete map or set of maps of the properties,
facilities, pipes and mains of the public water supply system, now or
hereafter constructed, showing dimensions, sizes, locations, connections,
valves, hydrants and such other information relative thereto as may be
required; and all such maps shall be open and available at all reasonable
times for reference to and inspection by the City Council and other agencies
of the City.



      (5)   The Superintendent of Water shall from time to time make
recommendations and bring to the attention of the City Manager and the City
Council such alterations, additions or extensions to the existing public
water supply system which he or she may deem necessary for the proper
operation and adequate capacity of said water supply system.



      (6)   The Superintendent of Water shall assist in the
preparation of suitable forms and procedures for water billing, tapping
permits, hydrant permits and such other forms and procedures as may from time
to time be considered necessary. All such forms and procedures shall be
subject to the approval of the City Manager within the authority granted by
the City Council.



      (7)   The Superintendent of Water shall keep, or cause to be
kept, a permanent record of all permits issued which pertain to the
operations and facilities of the public water supply system.



      (8)   The Superintendent of Water shall take, and submit to
the proper agency of the state, all samples of water for testing as may be
required; and shall be responsible for the operation of the laboratory
facilities of the Water Department and such periodic testing of the water
supply, both raw and treated, as may be required to determine its purity and
potability for public consumption. He or she shall submit reports on all such
tests to the City Manager for transmittal to the City Council and to such
other governmental and private agencies as may be required by statute,
ordinance or directive.



      (9)   The Superintendent of Water shall prescribe, prepare and
publish uniform rules and regulations governing the proper control of water
service installations and connected to, or to be connected to, the public
water supply system of the city, and from time to time shall amend and
supplement such rules and regulations in such manner as may be deemed
necessary; and such uniform rules and regulations, and any amendments and
supplements thereto, shall, upon approval by the City Council, be binding
upon all persons, organizations and agencies having, or proposing to have,
water service installations connected to the public water supply system of
the city. Copies of such uniform rules and regulations shall be kept on file
in the office of the Water Department, for examination by the public.



(Prior Code, § 34-13)



§ 31.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating § 31.018 shall be fined not less than $1
nor more than $100 for each offense.



(Prior Code, § 2-69)



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of § 31.019 shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $100
for each offense.



(Prior Code, § 2-70)



CHAPTER 32:  DEPARTMENTS AND ORGANIZATIONS



Section




Fire Department




   32.001   Establishment



   32.002   Appointment



   32.003   Membership; organization



   32.004   Duties



   32.005   Enforcement of ordinances



   32.006   Foreign Fire Insurance Board



   32.007   Fire Chief; records



   32.008   Unauthorized use of apparatus



   32.009   Entering fire house



   32.010   Order of command at fires



   32.011   Duties of spectators at fires




Police Department




   32.025   Created



   32.026   Duties



   32.027   Conduct of members



   32.028   Witness fees



   32.029   Chief of Police; duties



   32.030   Police officers; rules and regulations



   32.031   Police officers; serving process



   32.032   City jail; established



   32.033   City jail; keeper



   32.034   City jail; prisoners



   32.035   House of correction



   32.036   Escape



   32.037   Communication with prisoners




Board of Fire and Police Commissioners




   32.050   Creation; composition



   32.051   Appointment and term of members; vacancies



   32.052   Qualifications; oath; bond; removal



   32.053   Organization; meetings; compensation



   32.054   Powers and duties




Housing Trust Fund




   32.080   Definitions



   32.081   Policy



   32.082   Housing Trust Fund established



   32.083   Housing Trust Fund Board



   32.084   Housing Trust Fund operations



   32.085   Eligibility requirements



   32.086   Review and approval of applications



   32.087   Conditions



   32.088   Available funds



 



   32.999   Penalty



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.001  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   There shall be and is hereby established and created a Fire
Department, consisting of a Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chiefs and such other
officers and members of said Fire Department as may from time to time be
provided for by the Mayor and City Council.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall be chief of the Department and have
control and supervision over same, subject to the supervision of the Mayor.



(Prior Code, § 15-1)  (Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 32.002  APPOINTMENT.



   All officers of the Fire Department who receive regular compensation
shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the approval of the City Council.
All members who serve as volunteers receiving no compensation or compensation
for only such fires as they may serve shall be appointed by the Fire Chief,
subject to the approval of the Mayor and City Council.



(Prior Code, § 15-2)



§ 32.003  MEMBERSHIP; ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall consist of so many officers and
members as may be decided by the Mayor and the City Council. The Secretary of
the Fire Department, if any is elected or appointed, shall keep a record of
all meetings and shall make a report of all meetings and all activities of
the Fire Department to the Mayor.



   (B)   No officer shall be elected or appointed within the
organization of the Fire Department without the approval of the Mayor.



(Prior Code, § 15-3)



§ 32.004  DUTIES.



   It shall be the function and duty of the Fire Department and every
officer and member thereof to extinguish accidental or destructive fires, to
prevent the occurrence or spread of such fires; and to enforce all ordinances
relating to the occurrence or spread of such fires.



(Prior Code, § 15-4)



§ 32.005  ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCES.



   It shall be the duty of all officers of the Fire Department and all
police officers of the city to see that the provisions of this subchapter are
enforced and to arrest on view any person who shall be found violating any of
the provisions of this subchapter or who shall hinder, resist or refuse to
obey any such officer in the discharge of his or her duty, and to that end
all such officers are hereby vested with the usual power and authority of
police officers.



(Prior Code, § 15-5)



§ 32.006  FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD.



   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established a Foreign Fire
Insurance Board, which shall replace, and assume the duties of the former 2%
Committee. The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall consist of seven trustees,
including the Fire Chief, who shall hold office by virtue of rank, and six
members, who shall be elected at large by the sworn members of the Department
in accordance with division (D) below. If there is an insufficient number of
candidates to fill all these positions, the number of Board members may be
reduced but not to fewer than three trustees.



   (B)   Establishment of Foreign Fire Insurance Fund. There is hereby
established a Foreign Fire Insurance Fund to be managed and administered by
the Foreign Fire Insurance Board in accordance with division (E) below.



   (C)   Payments to Foreign Fire Insurance Fund. Each year, the
Treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall collect foreign fire
insurance taxes, as established in § 110.066 of the city code, and shall
deposit such taxes into the Foreign Fire Insurance Fund on or before December
31 of such year.



   (D)   Election, powers, duties of Foreign Fire Insurance Board.



      (1)   Election of Foreign Fire Insurance Board.



         (a)   The sworn members of the City Fire Department
shall elect three of the six members of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board to
serve two-year terms from among themselves at an election called and
organized for such purpose in December of each calendar year. All sworn
members of the Fire Department shall be eligible for election; but not
including paid-on-call firefighters. The sworn members receiving the most
votes shall be elected to the Foreign Fire Insurance Board. A member of the
Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall be eligible for re-election.



         (b)   Members of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall
serve for their designated two-year terms and until their successors have
been elected and qualified for office. Any vacancy that may occur shall be
filled for the balance of the unexpired term by a special election called by
the remaining members of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board.



         (c)   Following each regular election in December of
each year, the Foreign Fire Insurance Board members shall elect which of them
shall serve as Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Treasurer and Secretary.



      (2)   Treasurer’s bond.The city may provide for securing a
bond for the Treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board before entering
upon the duties of his or her office, in the sum of $50,000. Any such bond,
the form and content of which shall be approved by the Mayor, shall be
conditioned on the faithful performance by the Treasurer of his or her duties
and shall indemnify the city and the Foreign Fire Insurance Fund for any loss
by reason of any neglect of duty or any act of the Treasurer. The cost of
such bond shall be paid out of the Foreign Fire Insurance Fund.



      (3)   Powers and duties of Board. The Foreign Fire Insurance
Board shall manage and administer the money in the Foreign Fire Insurance
Fund as required by the provisions of this section. The Chairperson of the
Foreign Fire Insurance Board (or, in the Chairperson’s absence, the Vice
Chairperson) shall preside over all meetings of such Board, and a quorum of
at least a majority of the members then holding office shall be required to
conduct any Board business. The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall have the
power to adopt additional rules and regulations for the management and
operation of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board and Foreign Fire Insurance Fund
not inconsistent with the provisions of this section; provided, however, that
no such rules and regulations shall be effective until 15 days after they are
adopted and a copy is delivered to the City Manager. In addition, the members
of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall have the other responsibilities set
forth in this section.



   (E)   Management and administration of Fund. The Foreign Fire
Insurance Board shall administer the Foreign Fire Insurance Fund in
accordance with the following rules and regulations.



      (1)   Fund account. All money in the Foreign Fire Insurance
Fund shall be kept in a fully insured or collateralized interest-bearing
account in a bank or savings and loan, designated by city ordinance as an
approved depository of city funds, and meeting the standards of the Public
Funds Investment Act, 30 ILCS 235/0.01 et seq., for deposit of public funds.



      (2)   Restrictions on use of Fund. Money from the Foreign Fire
Insurance Fund may be used only for the maintenance, use and benefit of the
Fire Department.



      (3)   Designation of uses.



         (a)   List of appropriate expenditures. The Foreign Fire
Insurance Board shall develop and maintain a list of those items that the
Board determines to be appropriate expenditures under 65 ILCS 5/11-10-2, and
this section. The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall review and, if
necessary, update this list at least once each year no later than April 1 of
each year. The list shall be a public document.



         (b)   Annual hearing; notice. The Foreign Fire Insurance
Board shall authorize use of money from the Foreign Fire Insurance Fund by
written resolution setting forth with particularity the items on which funds
may be expended and the amounts approved for expenditure. Such resolution
shall be adopted after an annual public hearing conducted no later than April
1 of each year, at the City Public Safety Building or such other location
within the city designated in the notice, which public hearing shall be
noticed and conducted in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5
ILCS 120/1 et seq. In addition, notice of said public hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten
nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the public hearing.



         (c)   Recommended uses. Not less than 21 days prior to
the date of the aforesaid public hearing, the Foreign Fire Insurance Board
shall submit to the Mayor and City Council and make available to the general
public a list of items recommended for approval and funding from the Foreign
Fire Insurance Fund.



         (d)   Necessary vote. An affirmative vote of at least a
majority of the members of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board then holding
office shall be required to authorize any use of money from the Foreign Fire
Insurance Fund.



      (4)   Fund pay outs. The Treasurer of the Foreign Fire
Insurance Board shall pay out money from the Foreign Fire Insurance Fund only
upon the written order of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board and only for
maintenance work or purchases authorized by resolution of the Foreign Fire
Insurance Board pursuant to division (E)(3) above. The written order of the
Foreign Fire Insurance Board may consist of a notation in duly approved
minutes, an order signed by the Chairperson of the Foreign Fire Insurance
Board, or such other writing as may be designated by rule of the Foreign Fire
Insurance Board. The signatures of both the Treasurer and either the
Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall be
required on any check, draft or other order drawn on the accounts of the
Foreign Fire Insurance Fund.



      (5)   Limitation on debt and expenditures. Without the express
authorization of the City Council, the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall not
be permitted:



         (a)   To incur debt; or



         (b)   To enter into any contract or agreement for
maintenance of existing equipment or for new equipment in excess of the
unencumbered funds currently on deposit in, and authorized for expenditure
from, the Foreign Fire Insurance Fund at the time of execution of such
contract or agreement.



      (6)   Fund records; meeting minutes. The Treasurer of the
Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall keep accurate and current records of the
Foreign Fire Insurance Fund and all accounts maintained thereunder, including
all deposits thereto, withdrawals and disbursements therefrom, balances and
the like. The Secretary of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall keep
accurate and current minutes of all meetings conducted by the Foreign Fire
Insurance Board, including, but not limited to, the annual public hearing.



      (7)   Annual report. The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall,
on or before May 30 of each year, make and file with the City Clerk an annual
report of the activities of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board during the prior
year ended April 30, including a full and detailed account of all receipts
and disbursements made from the Foreign Fire Insurance Fund during the
city’s fiscal year ended immediately prior to the filing of such report.
The Foreign Fire Insurance Fund and all records relating thereto shall be
subject to and part of the annual audit of the city.



(Ord. 2010-03, passed 1-4-2010; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 32.007  FIRE CHIEF; RECORDS.



   The Fire Chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all meetings
of the company and the attendance of the members, a record of all fires, and
shall submit an annual report in such form and detail as may be prescribed by
the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 15-12)



§ 32.008  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF APPARATUS.



   (A)   Whoever shall use any fire engine or any other apparatus,
belonging to the city for private purposes, other than the extinguishment of
fires or whoever shall remove the same or any part thereof from its place of
deposit, or having the control thereof, shall permit such engine or other
apparatus to be used for any private purpose other than aforesaid, shall,
upon conviction, be fined.



   (B)   Whoever shall willfully or negligently break, deface, or in
any manner injure any fire engine, fire hydrant, hose, equipment or other
fire apparatus belonging to the city or shall remove any screw, bolt, nut, or
part of any such engine or other fire apparatus or in any manner interfere
with the working or use of the same shall, upon conviction, be fined.



   (C)   In addition, any cost of collection of fines or other amounts
due to the city under this section may be assessed in accordance with §
10.99(B) of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 15-19)  (Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)  Penalty, see §
32.999



§ 32.009  ENTERING FIRE HOUSE.



   (A)   It shall be and is hereby declared unlawful for any person or
persons to enter the Fire Department house at any time except on business
pertaining to the Fire Department, or the fire apparatus or other city
business.



   (B)   In addition, any cost of collection of fines or other amounts
due to the city under this section may be assessed in accordance with §
10.99(B) of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 15-20)  (Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)  Penalty, see §
32.999



§ 32.010  ORDER OF COMMAND AT FIRES.



   In case of fire, the Fire Chief and his or her assistants or other
officers in their order, shall rank in the order herein named and the officer
designated shall take command of the Fire Department and direct the
management thereof for the suppression of the fire, in the best manner
possible; and when it may be necessary for the protection of other property
and to prevent the spread of the conflagration, the officer in command may
cause buildings to be removed, torn down, or destroyed in the best manner
possible.



(Prior Code, § 15-27)



§ 32.011  DUTIES OF SPECTATORS AT FIRES.



   (A)   Every person above the age of 18 years who shall be present at
a fire shall be subject to the orders of the officer in command at such fire
and shall render all the assistance in his or her power, and in such manner
as he or she may be directed, in extinguishment of the fire, and in the
removal and protection of property, and any person refusing to obey such
orders, shall upon conviction be fined, provided no person shall be bound to
obey any such officer, unless such officer’s official character shall be
known or made known to such person.



   (B)   In addition, any cost of collection of fines or other amounts
due to the city under this section may be assessed in accordance with §
10.99(B) of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 15-28)  (Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)  Penalty, see §
32.999



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.025  CREATED.



   There is hereby created a Police Department. The Police Department
shall consist of the Chief of Police, an administrative officer of the city,
who shall be appointed by the Mayor and who shall be Chief of the Department;
of a Deputy Chief, who shall be acting Chief of Police during such times as
the Chief shall be absent or unable to carry out his or her duties, and of
Commander, Sergeants, patrol officers, technicians and such other members as
may be appointed from time to time by the Mayor by and with the approval of
the City Council. Members of the Police Department shall serve for a term of
one year or such time as the Council may direct.



(Prior Code, § 33-1)



§ 32.026  DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see the
enforcement of all the ordinances of the city, and to preserve order and
prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators thereof.



(Prior Code, § 33-2)



§ 32.027  CONDUCT OF MEMBERS.



   It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to
conduct himself or herself in a proper and law abiding manner at all times,
and to avoid the use of unnecessary force. Each member of the Department
shall obey the orders and directions of his or her superior.



(Prior Code, § 33-3)



§ 32.028  WITNESS FEES.



   Every member of the Police Department shall appear as witness whenever
this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any
state or federal law. No such member shall receive any witness fee for
service as witness in any action or suit to which the city is a party; any
fees paid for such services shall be turned over to the Chief, who shall
deposit the same with the City Treasurer.



(Prior Code, § 33-4)



§ 32.029  CHIEF OF POLICE; DUTIES.



   The Chief of Police shall be the keeper of the jail, and shall have
custody for the city of all persons incarcerated therein. He or she shall
keep such records and make such reports concerning the functions of his or
her Department as may be required by statutes or by the City Council. During
the absence or inability of the Chief of Police to carry out his or her
duties, the Acting Chief of Police shall have all the duties of the Chief of
Police.



(Prior Code, § 33-11)



§ 32.030  POLICE OFFICERS; RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Chief of the Police Department may make or prescribe such
rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the
Department as he or she shall deem available; such rules, when approved by
the City Manager shall be binding on such members.



   (B)   The respective rank and grade of the members, as to
superiority within the Department, may be prescribed by regulations.



(Prior Code, § 33-18)  (Ord. 1107, passed 7-2-1979)



§ 32.031  POLICE OFFICERS; SERVING PROCESS.



   No member of the Police Department, other than the Chief, shall serve
any process, except on command of the Chief of the Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 33-19)



§ 32.032  CITY JAIL; ESTABLISHED.



   The place in the city hitherto established and used as the jail, or any
other place which may hereafter be established by the Council for that
purpose, is hereby declared to be the jail.



(Prior Code, § 33-26)



§ 32.033  CITY JAIL; KEEPER.



   The Chief of Police, or, in his or her inability or temporary absence,
then the officer acting in his or her stead, shall be keeper of the jail and
shall have custody for the city of all persons confined therein and of all
property pertaining thereto.



(Prior Code, § 33-27)



§ 32.034  CITY JAIL; PRISONERS.



   The jail shall be used for the incarceration of all persons arrested
for violating any laws of the state, the United States or for violating any
city ordinance until such person shall be brought before a magistrate for a
hearing or until such person shall be lawfully transferred to some other
place of incarceration, or otherwise lawfully released.



(Prior Code, § 33-28)



§ 32.035  HOUSE OF CORRECTION.



   Any person convicted of a violation of a city ordinance and sentenced
to the payment of a fine may be imprisoned for the non-payment of such fine.
Such persons may be imprisoned in either the jail, or in the county jail or
such other place of incarceration with which the City Council has made the
necessary arrangements for such transfer of prisoners. When so, incarcerated
prisoners shall be allowed to work out their fine at the rate provided by
statute.



(Prior Code, § 33-35)



§ 32.036  ESCAPE.



   It shall be unlawful for any prisoner to escape, attempt to escape, or
assist any person to escape or attempt to escape from the jail.



(Prior Code, § 33-36)  Penalty, see § 32.999



§ 32.037  COMMUNICATION WITH PRISONERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate with any prisoner
held in the jail without the permission of the keeper of the jail.



(Prior Code, § 33-37)  Penalty, see § 32.999



BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS



§ 32.050  CREATION; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners for
the city, consisting of three members, pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1 and the
city’s home rule authority under Article VII, § 6 of the Illinois
Constitution.



(Prior Code, § 33-44)  (Ord. 2009-02, passed 1-5-2009)



§ 32.051  APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF MEMBERS; VACANCIES.



   The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be
appointed by the Mayor of the city with the consent of the City Council. The
terms of office of the members shall be three years, with one member’s term
expiring annually; provided, however, that each member shall serve until such
member’s successor shall be appointed and qualified; provided further that
no appointment shall be made by the Mayor within 30 days before the
expiration of the Mayor’s term of office. Vacancies arising from death,
resignation, removal or otherwise shall be filled in the same manner as an
original appointment for the balance of the term being filled.



(Prior Code, § 33-45)  (Ord. 2009-02, passed 1-5-2009)



§ 32.052  QUALIFICATIONS; OATH; BOND; REMOVAL.



   No person related by blood or marriage up to the degree of first cousin
to any elected official of the city shall be a member of the Board. Members
shall be officers of the municipality and shall file an oath of office and a
bond in a sum not less than that fixed from time to time by the Council of
the city by resolution, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties of the office. Members of the Board shall be subject to removal
according to 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1 or any successor statute.



(Prior Code, § 33-46)  (Ord. 2009-02, passed 1-5-2009)



§ 32.053  ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS; COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The Chairperson is appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval
of the City Council, from the three members. A majority of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the conduct of all business. The city’s Director of
Human Resources serves as Secretary to the Board.



   (B)   The members of the Board and the Secretary of the Board shall
serve without compensation unless such compensation is approved and provided
for by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 33-47)  (Ord. 2009-02, passed 1-5-2009)



§ 32.054  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall exercise such
powers in appointing, promoting and disciplining sworn officers and sworn
members of the Fire and Police Departments and shall exercise such other and
further powers as are granted by statute.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Board shall not have any
such power with respect to the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief or other
appointed positions within the Police and Fire Departments.



   (C)   The Board shall have power to make rules appropriate to
carrying out its statutory and ordinance powers not inconsistent with the
city code, but no such rule shall be made to govern the operation of the
Police or Fire Departments or the conduct of its members.



(Prior Code, § 33-48)  (Ord. 2009-02, passed 1-5-2009)



HOUSING TRUST FUND



§ 32.080  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   In general. The words and phrases used in this subchapter
shall be interpreted to have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.
To the extent that words or phrases used in this subchapter are not defined
in this section, but such words or phrases are defined in the Inclusionary
Housing Chapter (Chapter 158) or the Zoning Code (Chapter 159), such words or
phrases shall be deemed to have the meanings set forth in the Inclusionary
Housing Chapter or, if not set forth therein, in the Zoning Code. Otherwise,
words and phrases shall be interpreted in their commonly used sense as set
forth in the Webster’s Third International Dictionary (most recent
edition), unless the context reasonably requires another construction.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN. The Affordable Housing Plan adopted by
the City Council on March 21, 2005, as amended on October 18, 2010, and as it
may be further amended in the future.



      ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES. The housing activities set forth in §
32.085(C) for which the Housing Trust Fund Board has considered financial
support.



      ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS. Applicants that satisfy eligibility
requirements to receive Housing Trust Fund awards, as set forth in §
32.085(B).



      HOUSING TRUST FUND. The Housing Trust Fund established by this
chapter with the central purpose of providing financial resources to address
the housing needs of individuals and families of low- and moderate-income
households who live in the city.



      HOUSING TRUST FUND BOARD. The Board established pursuant to §
32.083 to serve as an advisory body to the City Council on the use and
management of the Housing Trust Fund.



(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 32.081  POLICY.



   (A)   The housing goals of the city’s affordable housing plan
emphasize the city’s commitment to promote the public health, safety and
welfare by encouraging high quality housing throughout the community
sufficient to meet the needs of all city residents. Throughout its history,
the city has offered a diverse housing stock that permitted families of
varying income levels and with various housing needs to reside in the
community. In recent years, property values have escalated to the point of
discouraging a diverse housing stock. A certain percentage of residents who
currently live in the city are unable to meet or maintain the household
income level necessary to support residing in the city and, therefore, must
look to other communities for housing. Based upon the review and
consideration of reports and analyses of the housing situation in the city,
it is apparent that the diversity of the city’s housing stock and
affordable housing opportunities have declined as a result of increasing
property values, housing costs and the demolition of certain existing
dwellings. Subsequent redevelopment has in many cases contributed to property
value increases that further the difficulty of making affordable housing
available in the city. With the exception of housing developed in partnership
with the city and the Lake Forest Senior Cottages Foundation, the privately
developed new residential housing that is being built in the city generally
is not affordable to low- and moderate-income households. The city recognizes
the need to provide alternative housing opportunities in order to maintain
the diversity of population that has historically characterized the city.



   (B)   In response to these developments, on March 21, 2005, the City
Council adopted the affordable housing plan, with amendments adopted on
October 18, 2010, which identifies policies and incentives to encourage the
development of affordable housing in the city. One of the primary
recommendations of this affordable housing plan is for the city to establish
a Housing Trust Fund.



(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 32.082  HOUSING TRUST FUND ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Creation; management and administration. There is hereby
established the Housing Trust Fund, to be held as a separate fund within the
city, for the purpose of advancing affordable housing opportunities. The
city, by and through its Director of Finance, shall be responsible for the
day to day investment and fiscal maintenance and management of the Housing
Trust Fund. The day to day fiscal maintenance and management shall be
undertaken pursuant to the approved investment policies and practices used by
the city for other similarly held funds. Except for disbursements and other
action taken as part of the day to day fiscal maintenance and management of
the Housing Trust Fund, no disbursements of the Housing Trust Fund shall be
made except by the Director of Finance, or his or her designee, in accordance
with this chapter and Chapter 35 of the city code. The Housing Trust Fund
Board shall advise the City Council with respect to the organization,
operation and implementation of the Housing Trust Fund as set forth in §
32.083.



   (B)   Purpose.



      (1)   The purpose of the Housing Trust Fund is to provide
financial resources to address the affordable housing needs of individuals
and families of low- and moderate-income households by promoting, preserving
or producing long-term affordable housing; providing housing-related services
to low- and moderate-income households, and providing support for
not-for-profit organizations that actively address the affordable housing
needs of low- and moderate-income households.



      (2)   The Housing Trust Fund may provide financial support for
a wide variety of eligible activities that serve persons in low- and
moderate-income households, including, without limitation:



         (a)   Seniors on fixed incomes;



         (b)   Persons with disabilities who require accessible
affordable housing;



         (c)   Persons employed in the city but financially
unable to live in the city;



         (d)   Single-parent families; and



         (e)   Young households.



   (C)   Distribution and use of Housing Trust Fund. The City Council
shall be solely responsible for the distribution of the Housing Trust Fund
resources and funds in accordance with the requirements of this section.
Distribution of funds from the Housing Trust Fund shall be in the form of
grants or loans or such other funding mechanisms that support the purposes of
the Housing Trust Fund. Any Housing Trust Fund money unused at the end of any
year shall remain in the Housing Trust Fund for future eligible activities,
pursuant to the requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 32.083  HOUSING TRUST FUND BOARD.



   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created a Housing Trust Fund Board.
The Board shall advise the City Council in the management and administration
of the Housing Trust Fund. The Board shall be subject to the provisions of
the Illinois Open Meetings Act, being 5 ILCS 120.



   (B)   Purpose. The Board shall make recommendations to the City
Council regarding the programs and operations of the Housing Trust Fund,
including, without limitation:



      (1)   The goals for the Housing Trust Fund;



      (2)   The Housing Trust Fund’s operating budget and
projected expenditures and revenue;



      (3)   The Housing Trust Fund’s funding and award policies
and priorities;



      (4)   The development of the Housing Trust Fund’s programs;



      (5)   The Housing Trust Fund’s program requirements;



      (6)   The Housing Trust Fund’s procedures for disbursing
Fund resources;



      (7)   The review of applications for Housing Trust Fund awards;



      (8)   The granting of awards;



      (9)   The monitoring of eligible activities funded by the
Housing Trust Fund; and



      (10)   The evaluation of Housing Trust Fund activities.



   (C)   Members. The Housing Trust Fund Board shall consist of three
members, each of whom shall have demonstrated interest, knowledge, ability,
experience or expertise in one or more of the following areas: housing
related issues, the needs and interests of senior citizens, financing
mechanisms for affordable and moderately priced housing units, employer
assisted housing, legal aspects of establishing and maintaining units as
affordable, development review and approval processes and the character of
the city. Consideration shall be given to the appointment of individuals
serving on (or who have served on) the City Council and related city boards
and commissions including, but not limited to, the Senior Resources
Commission and the Plan Commission. In addition, Board members shall be
residents of the city or affiliated with major employers located in the city.
Each Board member shall have one vote.



   (D)   Appointment, terms, vacancies and ethical responsibilities.



      (1)   Board members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of Council for terms of two years; provided that the Mayor
may initially appoint up to four members with initial terms of one year so
that appointments shall be staggered to ensure that the terms of not more
than four Board members shall expire in any calendar year. Every Board member
shall continue in office after expiration of the term until a successor shall
have been duly appointed. Terms shall commence on May 1, except when a
vacancy is created by the resignation or disqualification of a Board member
prior to expiration of that Board member’s term, in which case such term
shall commence on the date of the appointment.



      (2)   Board members shall be eligible for re-appointment,
provided that no member shall serve more than three consecutive full two-year
terms.



      (3)   Vacancies on the Board shall be filled by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of Council for the unexpired term of the former Board
member.



      (4)   Any Board member may be removed from office at any time
by the Mayor for failure to regularly attend meetings or inattention to
duties or responsibilities.



      (5)   Board members shall be subject to the provisions of all
rules, regulations, ordinances and statutes governing conduct of members of
the boards and commissions of the city, including but not limited to Chapter
40, Governmental Ethics, of the city code, state statutes regarding gifts to
public officials, filing of statements of economic interest, and the like. In
addition, during and for two years after a Board member’s term on the
Housing Trust Fund Board, a Board member shall not have any financial
interest (as defined in § 40.02 of the city code) in any affordable housing
development in the city that has received or requested (or may receive or
request) moneys from the Housing Trust Fund.



   (E)   Compensation. Board members shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011; Ord. 2017-33, passed 6-5-2017)



§ 32.084  HOUSING TRUST FUND OPERATIONS.



   The Housing Trust Fund Board shall serve as an advisory body to the
City Council on the operation of the Housing Trust Fund, including, without
limitation, the following:



   (A)   Recommending Housing Trust Fund goals, and reporting and
presenting those goals to the City Council;



   (B)   Recommending policies, funding priorities, Housing Trust Fund
program requirements, procedures for investing Housing Trust Funds,
procedures for disbursing Housing Trust Fund awards and an annual budget to
be reported to the City Council prior to the beginning of each fiscal year of
the Housing Trust Fund;



   (C)   Recommending Housing Trust Fund awards for eligible activities;



   (D)   Monitoring eligible activities funded by the Housing Trust
Fund;



   (E)   Evaluating Housing Trust Fund activities;



   (F)   Pursuing donations and grants, except that any grant agreement
shall be subject to approval of the City Council;



   (G)   Actively exploring opportunities to leverage funds with other
government agencies, non-profit organizations, corporate sponsors or
employers; and



   (H)   Reporting no less than annually to the City Council on the
expenditures, accomplishments, and activities of the Housing Trust Fund.



(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 32.085  ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose of eligible activity. Each eligible applicant shall be
required to demonstrate that the requested eligible activity will advance and
support the purpose of the Housing Trust Fund, as set forth in this section.



   (B)   Eligible applicants. Developers, not-for-profit organizations,
housing owners/operators, and units of government shall be eligible
applicants for Housing Trust Fund resources. The Housing Trust Fund Board
shall seek proposals from eligible applicants and make awards for eligible
activities based on the priorities set forth in division (D) below and on the
eligibility guidelines, program requirements and process established in
connection with the Housing Trust Fund. The Housing Trust Fund Board shall
develop and issue eligibility guidelines, program requirements, and
application forms for Housing Trust Fund grants and loans, subject to the
approval of the City Council. Eligible applicants may apply to the Housing
Trust Fund Board for Housing Trust Fund awards for eligible activities.



   (C)   Types of eligible activities. The following housing-related
activities are the types of activities that may receive Housing Trust Fund
resources:



      (1)   Housing production, including, without limitation, new
construction, rehabilitation and adaptive re-use, as well as technical
studies, plans and designs relating thereto;



      (2)   Acquisition and disposition, including, without
limitation, vacant land, single-family homes, multi-unit buildings and other
existing structures that may be used in whole or part for residential use;



      (3)   Capacity grants for not-for-profit organizations that
are actively engaged in addressing the housing needs of low and
moderate-income households; and



      (4)   Any other activity that the City Council, following
consideration and recommendation by the Housing Trust Fund Board, determines
would address the city’s affordable housing needs, including, without
limitation:



         (a)   Rental assistance;



         (b)   Home ownership assistance;



         (c)   Preservation of existing housing;



         (d)   Weatherization; and



         (e)   Emergency repairs.



   (D)   Priorities for trust fund awards. Among proposals for eligible
activities that otherwise meet established program requirements and
eligibility criteria, priority shall be given:



      (1)   To applications that provide for leveraging of funds for
projects;



      (2)   To applications that provide the longest term of
affordability of affordable housing; and



      (3)   To applications that provide housing to serve the needs
of households who live in the city and the head of the household or the
spouse or domestic partner is 65 years of age or older.



(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 32.086  REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS.



   All complete applications for Housing Trust Fund awards shall be
submitted to the Housing Trust Fund Board. The Board shall review and make
recommendations to the City Council to approve or deny an application. The
City Council shall make the final decision to approve or deny all
applications for funding by the Housing Trust Fund.



(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 32.087  CONDITIONS.



   As a condition to any Housing Trust Fund award for any eligible
activity, the eligible applicant shall first, among other applicable
requirements as established from time to time by the City Council, execute
and record such agreements, conditions and restrictive covenants, or other
similar instruments, as shall be required by the City Council
(“conditions”). Among other requirements, the conditions may bind the
eligible applicant and the property, if applicable, to the requirements of
this subchapter and provide that all awards shall be used in strict
compliance with the requirements of the City Council and the conditions. The
conditions may also include a requirement that if the property or development
is no longer being used for affordable housing pursuant to the requirements
of the specific award, the eligible applicant or successor owner of the
property or development may be required to reimburse the Housing Trust Fund
for up to 100% of the award, plus applicable interest.



(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 32.088  AVAILABLE FUNDS.



   The Housing Trust Fund is authorized, subject to approval of the City
Council, to accept and utilize funds, property and other resources from all
proper and lawful public and private sources, including, without limitation,
the funds dedicated to the Housing Trust Fund from the imposition of the
demolition tax, pursuant to Chapter 39 of the city code, and cash payments in
lieu of constructing some or all of the required affordable housing units on
the site of a covered development project, pursuant to the Inclusionary
Housing Ordinance, § 158.08 of the city code. The City Council may make
additional funds available, as it deems necessary and appropriate.



(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)



§ 32.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person violating § 32.008(A) shall, upon
conviction, be fined not more than $750.



      (2)   Any person violating § 32.008(B) shall, upon
conviction, be fined in any sum not more than $750.



(Prior Code, § 15-19)



   (C)   The penalty for violation of § 32.009 shall be a fine of not
more than $750.



(Prior Code, § 15-20)



   (D)   (1)   Any person violating § 32.011(A), shall upon
conviction be fined in any sum not exceeding $750, provided no person shall
be bound to obey any such officer, unless such officer’s official character
shall be known or made known to such person.



      (2)   Any person violating § 32.011(B) shall, upon
conviction, be fined not more than $750.



(Prior Code, § 15-28)



(Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)



CHAPTER 33:  CITY STANDARDS



Section




City Seal




   33.01   Specifications



   33.02   Custody




Benchmark




   33.15   Established




Illinois Freedom of Information Act




   33.30   Approval and adoption of the FOIA and related fees



   33.31   Delegation of authority



   33.32   Copying costs



 



   33.99   Penalty



CITY SEAL



§ 33.01  SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The corporate seal of the city shall be as follows.



   (B)   The seal hitherto established and used as the City Seal, with
the motto “Naturae et Scientiae Amor” with the inscription “The City of
Lake Forest, Incorporated February 21, 1861" and with a representation of
natural scenery in the center.



(Prior Code, § 2-171)



Charter reference:



   Corporate seal, see Charter Art. IV, § 10



§ 33.02  CUSTODY.



   The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal, and shall affix
its impression on documents whenever this is required.



(Prior Code, § 2-172)



BENCHMARK



§ 33.15  ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The datum for the establishment of grades in the city is
hereby established as a horizontal plane.



      (1)   134.58 feet below an X on the top of the stone water
table of the City Hall of the city at the southeast corner of said City Hall;



      (2)   128.58 feet below an X on the east pedestal base of the
southeast corner entrance of the three-story brick building located on the
east half of Lot 335, Lake Forest, Illinois;



      (3)   123.66 feet below an X on the top of water table of the
brick corner post at the southeast corner of the building located on the
southeast corner of Lot 342, Lake Forest, Illinois;



      (4)   106.87 feet below an X on the northwest corner of the
top stone step of the west entrance to the Edward F. Gorton School Building
located at the northeasterly corner of McKinley Road and Illinois Avenue,
Lake Forest, Illinois;



      (5)   91.2 feet below an X on the northwesterly corner of the
Henry C. Durand Art Institute building located on Lot 106, Lake Forest,
Illinois; and



      (6)   132.506 feet below the top of a United States Geological
Survey bench mark stamped “Principal Traverse Station 12,1906,” located
in the southeast corner of the City Hall fawn, 33 feet north of the center
line of Deerpath and 31 feet west of the center line of Forest Avenue
U.S.G.S. bench mark elevation 712.676.



   (B)   All grades now and hereafter fixed shall have reference to the
base or datum plan herein established.



(Prior Code, § 2-179)



ILLINOIS FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT



§ 33.30  APPROVAL AND ADOPTION OF THE FOIA AND RELATED FEES.



   In order to establish rules, regulations, fees and forms pursuant to,
and in compliance with, the Illinois Freedom of Information Act, 5 ILCS 140/1
et seq. (the “Act”), as amended, the Mayor and City Council hereby
approve and adopt the FOIA Rules and Forms, in substantially the form as
attached to this Ord. 2009-36 as Exhibit A and incorporated in this
subchapter by reference, but subject to revisions and amendments that the
City Manager, in consultation with the City Attorney, from time to time
determines are necessary or appropriate to effect compliance with the Act in
an administratively efficient manner.



(Ord. 2009-36, passed 12-7-2009)



§ 33.31  DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.



   The City Manager along with the officers and employees designated by
the City Manager or otherwise set forth in the FOIA Rules and Forms shall be
and are hereby authorized and directed to take all steps necessary to comply
with and effectively administer the Act in accordance with the FOIA Rules and
Forms. The City Manager is further authorized to appoint one or more Freedom
of Information Officers and such deputies or assistants as the City Manager
deems appropriate to assist in implementing the Act.



(Ord. 2009-36, passed 12-7-2009)



§ 33.32  COPYING COSTS.



   The city shall charge a fee to recover costs associated with copying
records. The amount of such fee shall be as set out in the fee schedule per
page for black and white copies, and, for all other copies, the city’s
actual cost incurred.



(Ord. 2009-36, passed 12-7-2009)



§ 33.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any requestor who is in violation of §§ 33.30 through 33.32
shall be fined $750 for each violation. A requestor is in violation of §§
33.30 through 33.32, if he or she does not accurately indicate whether the
request for records was made for a commercial purpose. Each request for
records, even if presented with other requests for records, shall be deemed a
separate request for purposes of calculating fines for violations. To the
extent permitted by law, no person who has any outstanding fees, charges or
fines due to the city under §§ 33.30 through 33.32 or rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant to §§ 33.30 through 33.32, shall be allowed to make
additional requests of the city until such fees, charges and fines shall have
been fully paid. The City Manager, in consultation with the City Attorney, is
hereby directed and authorized to establish such rules and regulations
accordingly.



(Ord. 2009-36, passed 12-7-2009)



CHAPTER 34:  CIVIL DEFENSE



Section




ESDA Director




   34.035   Appointment




Civil Emergency




   34.050   Definitions



   34.051   Powers of Mayor



   34.052   Curfew



   34.053   Orders of Mayor



   34.054   Special meeting of Council



   34.055   Notification of news media



   34.056   Severability



   34.057   Charter provisions




Finances




   34.070   Appropriation; levy of taxes



   34.071   Purchases and expenditures



   34.072   Reimbursement by state



 



   34.999   Penalty



ESDA DIRECTOR



§ 34.035  APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   The ESDA Director shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
consent of the City Council at the first regular meeting in each year, for a
term of one year and until his or her successor has been appointed.



   (B)   The Director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training and operation of the civil defense
organization, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor, as provided
by statute.



   (C)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability
to serve of the Director, the Mayor or any person designated by him or her,
shall be and act as Director until a new appointment is made as provided in
this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 11-20)  (Ord. 493, passed 11-3-1958; Ord. 2016-16, passed
6-20-2016)



CIVIL EMERGENCY



§ 34.050  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIVIL EMERGENCY.



      (1)   Any natural disaster or human-made calamity, including
flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the
corporate limits of the city, resulting in the death or injury of persons or
the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures
must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare; or



      (2)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by
immediate power to execute by three or more persons acting together without
authority of law.



   GENERAL CURFEW. A prohibition against any person or persons walking,
running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street highway,
public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city,
excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially
designated to duty with reference to said civil emergency.



(Prior Code, § 11-27)



§ 34.051  POWERS OF MAYOR.



   Whenever the Mayor determines that an emergency as defined in § 34.050
exists, the Mayor shall have the extraordinary power and authority to declare
by executive order the existence of a state of emergency, provided however
that the Mayor shall not exercise such extraordinary power and authority
until after his or her signing, under oath, a statement finding that a civil
emergency exists, setting forth facts to substantiate such findings and
describing the nature of the emergency.



(Prior Code, § 11-28)



§ 34.052  CURFEW.



   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, he or she may
order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city or
to the city as a whole, and establish the conditions and restrictions thereof
as he or she deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or
night as he or she deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and
welfare.



(Prior Code, § 11-29)



§ 34.053  ORDERS OF MAYOR.



   After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor of the city may
also in the interest of public safety and welfare make any or all of the
following orders:



   (A)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including
taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of
intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted;



   (B)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by
any wholesaler or retailer;



   (C)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving
away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any
container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;



   (D)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing
or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever;
and/or



   (E)   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the
protection of life and property.



(Prior Code, § 11-30)



§ 34.054  SPECIAL MEETING OF COUNCIL.



   Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Mayor shall within
24 hours call a special meeting of the City Council to be held within 60
hours of the time of issuance of the proclamation. The state of emergency,
declared as provided herein, and the extraordinary power and authority
granted to the Mayor shall expire not later than the adjournment of the first
regular or special meeting, at which a quorum is present, after the
declaration of the state of emergency, unless continued by action of the
Council.



(Prior Code, § 11-31)



§ 34.055  NOTIFICATION OF NEWS MEDIA.



   Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the City Manager shall
notify the news media situated within the city, and shall cause three copies
of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at
the following places within the city: the City Hall, the police station and
the post office.



(Prior Code, § 11-32)



§ 34.056  SEVERABILITY.



   If any part, article, section or division of this subchapter shall be
held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such holding shall not be
construed to invalidate or impair the remainder of this subchapter, which
shall continue in full force and effect notwithstanding such holding.



(Prior Code, § 11-34)



§ 34.057  CHARTER PROVISIONS.



   That nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to impair
the powers contained in the Act of the Legislature of the State of Illinois
entitled “An Act to Amend an Act Entitled, “An Act to Incorporate The
City of Lake Forest” approved March 11, 1869, commonly referred to as the
City Charter, or the city code, as amended, giving powers to the Mayor, City
Manager, Police and Fire Departments and other city officials, but shall be
construed together with existing ordinances now in effect for the safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city.



(Prior Code, § 11-35)



FINANCES



§ 34.070  APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES.



   The City Council may have an appropriation for civil defense purposes
in the manner provided by law, and may levy in addition for civil defense
purposes only, a tax not to exceed $0.05 per $100 of the assessed value of
all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the
Illinois Emergency Management Act.



(Prior Code, § 11-39)  (Ord. 493, passed 11-3-1958)



§ 34.071  PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.



   (A)   The City Council may, on recommendation of the Municipal
Director of Civil Defense, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to
place the municipality in a position to combat effectively any disaster
resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to
protect the public health and safety, protect property and provide emergency
assistance to victims in the case of such disaster, or from natural disaster.



   (B)   In the event of enemy caused or natural disaster, the
Municipal Director of Civil Defense is authorized, on behalf of the
municipality to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may
be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to
the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining
to municipal contracts or obligations, as authorized by the Illinois
Emergency Management Act; provided that, if the City Council meets at such
time, he or she shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed
by that body.



(Prior Code, § 11-40)  (Ord. 493, passed 11-3-1958)



§ 34.072  REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.



   The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund
any reimbursement by the state to the municipality for expenses incident to
training members of the civil defense organization as prescribed by the State
Director of Civil Defense, compensation for services and expenses of members
of a mobile support team while serving outside the municipality in response
to a call by the Governor or State Director of Civil Defense, as provided by
law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to civil defense
activities, as provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 11-41)  (Ord. 493, passed 11-3-1958)



§ 34.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 34.050 through
34.057 or executive order issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty of an
offense against the city, and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$750. In addition, any cost of collection may be assessed in accordance with
§ 10.99(B) of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 11-33)  (Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)



CHAPTER 35:  ELECTIONS



Section



Wards



   35.01   Wards established



   35.02   Wards described; First Ward



   35.03   Wards described; Second Ward



   35.04   Wards described; Third Ward



   35.05   Wards described; Fourth Ward



   35.06   Ward boundary map



Contested Elections



   35.20   Deposition



   35.21   Filing proofs



   35.22   Trial



   35.23   Decision



   35.24   Witness



 



   35.99   Penalty



WARDS



§ 35.01  WARDS ESTABLISHED.



   For the purpose of electing aldermen to the City Council the city is
hereby divided into wards which are and shall be established as provided in
the following sections.



(Prior Code, § 12-11)



§ 35.02  WARDS DESCRIBED; FIRST WARD.



   Commencing at the northerly city limits of Lake Forest and Lake
Michigan; thence westerly along the northerly city limits to the Union
Pacific RR tracks; thence southerly along the Union Pacific RR tracks to the
northerly property line of South Park, thence easterly along the northerly
property line of South Park to Greenview Place; east along the centerline of
Greenview Place to Sheridan Road; thence southerly along the centerline of
Sheridan Road to Westleigh Road; thence east along the centerline of
Westleigh Road to Lake Michigan.



(Prior Code, § 12-12)  (Ord. 02-40, passed 12-7-2002)



§ 35.03  WARDS DESCRIBED; SECOND WARD.



   Commencing at Lake Michigan and the southerly city limits; thence
westerly along the southerly city limits to Highway 41; thence northerly
along the centerline of Highway 41 to Deerpath; thence easterly along the
centerline of Deerpath to the East Skokie Drainage Ditch; thence south along
the East Skokie Drainage Ditch to a line extending Kennedy Road (Rt. 60) to
the Union Pacific RR tracks; thence east along this line to the Union Pacific
RR tracks; thence southerly along the Union Pacific RR tracks to the
northerly property line of South Park; thence easterly along the northerly
property line of South Park to Greenview Place; east along the centerline of
Greenview Place to Sheridan Road; thence southerly along the centerline of
Sheridan Road to Westleigh Road; thence east along the centerline of
Westleigh Road to Lake Michigan.



(Prior Code, § 12-13)  (Ord. 02-40, passed 12-7-2002)



§ 35.04  WARDS DESCRIBED; THIRD WARD.



   Commencing at the northern boundary of Lake Forest and the Union
Pacific RR tracks; thence southerly along the Union Pacific RR tracks to a
line extending Kennedy Road (Rt. 60) to the Union Pacific RR tracks; thence
west along this line to the East Skokie Drainage Ditch; thence northerly
along the East Skokie Drainage Ditch to Deerpath; thence westerly along the
centerline of Deerpath to Highway 41; thence southerly along the centerline
of Highway 41 to Kennedy Road (Rt. 60); thence westerly along the centerline
of Kennedy Road (Rt. 60) to the northwest corner of Section 6-43-12; thence
south along the west line of Section 6-43-12 to Everett Road; thence west
along the centerline of Everett Road to the westerly city limit (I-94);
thence northerly along the westerly city limits to the northerly city limits;
thence easterly to the point of commencement.



(Prior Code, § 12-14)  (Ord. 02-40, passed 12-7-2002)



§ 35.05  WARDS DESCRIBED; FOURTH WARD.



   Commencing at Highway 41 and the southerly city limits; thence
northerly along the centerline of Highway 41 to Kennedy Road (Rt. 60); thence
west along the centerline of Kennedy Road (Rt. 60) to the northwest corner of
Section 6-43-12; thence south along the west line of Section 6-43-12 to
Everett Road; thence west along the centerline of Everett Road to the western
city limit (I-94); thence southerly along the westerly city limits to the
southerly city limits; thence easterly along the southerly city limits to the
point of commencement.



(Prior Code, § 12-15)  (Ord. 02-40, passed 12-7-2002)



§ 35.06  WARD BOUNDARY MAP.



   A map of the foregoing ward boundaries is hereby incorporated into this
city code and appears below. To the extent of any conflict between the
foregoing description and the map included below, the foregoing sections
shall control.







 



(Ord. 02-40, passed 12-7-2002)



CONTESTED ELECTIONS



§ 35.20  DEPOSITION.



   Whenever said statement shall have been filed and served as aforesaid,
it shall be the duty of the City Council, upon application of either party,
to fix the time and place for taking the depositions of witnesses, when
either party may proceed to take the testimony of any witness, in the manner
and as provided for taking depositions to be used in cases in chancery,
before any judge, justice of the peace, master in chancery or notary public,
at the time and place so fixed, and continue the same from day to day
thereafter, until all the testimony shall have been taken.



(Prior Code, § 12-35)



§ 35.21  FILING PROOFS.



   In all cases of contested elections, the proofs shall be taken and
filed with the City Clerk, as hereinafter provided, within 30 days from the
day fixed by the City Council for taking the same; provided, that the Council
may, from time to time, upon sufficient cause shown, extend the time for
taking and filing said proofs.



(Prior Code, § 12-36)



§ 35.22  TRIAL.



   No testimony shall be taken or produced on the hearing before the City
Council except upon the points set forth in the said statement required to be
filed with the City Clerk and served upon the respondent.



(Prior Code, § 12-37)



§ 35.23  DECISION.



   (A)   Whenever it shall appear in any case that the person receiving
the highest number of votes is ineligible to the office because of any legal
disqualifications, it shall, for that reason, be the duty of the City Council
to declare said election null and void, and immediately call a special
election to fill said office.



   (B)   In all cases of contested election, the parties contesting
same, shall have the right to have the package or packages of ballots which
have been returned to the City Clerk, as required by law, opened and examined
in the presence of said City Clerk and counted by a committee of three
aldermen appointed for that purpose.



(Prior Code, § 12-38)



§ 35.24  WITNESS.



   (A)   Subpoenas for witnesses in any contested election shall be
issued by the City Clerk, stating the time and place for the attendance of
any such witness and the same may be served by the Chief of Police, or any
member of the police force, or any other person, but it shall be the duty of
the Chief of Police to cause all such subpoenas to be promptly served.



   (B)   Any person who has been served with any subpoena, in any such
contested election, who shall fail or neglect to attend at the time and place
mentioned in such subpoena and there remain until his or her testimony can be
taken, or who refuses to testify, or who avoids the service of any such
subpoena upon him or her, shall be subject to a fine.



(Prior Code, § 12-39)  (Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)  Penalty, see § 35.99



§ 35.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of § 35.24 shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $750; and each refusal to
testify or failure to attend shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
In addition, any cost of collection of fines or other amounts due to the city
under this section may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99(B) of this
city code.



(Prior Code, § 12-39)  (Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)



CHAPTER 36:  FINANCES



Section



   36.01   Fiscal year



   36.02   City Assessor; appointment; term; duties



Charter reference:



   Publication of financial statement, see Charter Art. XI, § 2



Cross-reference:



   Taxation, see Ch. 39



§ 36.01  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on May 1 of each year.



(Prior Code, § 14-1)



§ 36.02  CITY ASSESSOR; APPOINTMENT; TERM; DUTIES.



   The City Assessor, an administrative officer, shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of a simple majority of the City Council and shall
hold office for such term as provided by § 4 of Article II of the City
Charter. The City Assessor shall perform such duties as are prescribed in the
City Charter and as the City Council may otherwise establish from time to
time.



(Ord. 02-11, passed 4-18-2002)



CHAPTER 37:  PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT SYSTEM



Section



Police Pension Fund



   37.01   Established



   37.02   Oath of trustees created



   37.03   Duties of Board



Firefighter’s Pension Fund



   37.15   Creation; composition; term



   37.16   Purpose; powers and duties



Public Safety Employee Benefits Act



   37.20   Administrative procedures for assessing and determining
claims under PSEBA



POLICE PENSION FUND



§ 37.01  ESTABLISHED.



   The Police Pension Fund of the city is hereby established pursuant to
and in accordance with an Act entitled “An Act to provide for the setting
apart, formation and disbursement of a police pension fund in cities,
villages and incorporated towns in the State of Illinois having a population
of not less than 5,000 and not more than 200,000 inhabitants,” approved
June 14, 1909, in force July 1, 1909, and all amendments thereto.



(Prior Code, § 30-11)  (Ord. 272, passed 7-7-1941)



§ 37.02  OATH OF TRUSTEES CREATED.



   There is hereby created a Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund
of the city for the administration of such Fund and such Board of Trustees
shall be composed of five members, two of whom shall be appointed by the
Mayor and two of whom shall be elected from the regular police force by the
active members. The fifth member shall be elected by and from among the
beneficiaries of the Fund. The successors to any of the appointed members of
such Boards shall serve for two years each or until their successors are
appointed and qualified.



(Prior Code, § 30-12)  (Ord. 272, passed 7-7-1941)



§ 37.03  DUTIES OF BOARD.



   The Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund of the city shall do
and perform all duties required of or imposed upon it by such act of the
General Assembly and shall administer the said Fund and receive and disburse
all moneys belonging thereto pursuant to and in accordance with said act of
the General Assembly.



(Prior Code, § 30-13)  (Ord. 272, passed 7-7-1941)



FIREFIGHTER’S PENSION FUND



§ 37.15  CREATION; COMPOSITION; TERM.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Board of Trustees of the
Firefighters’ Pension Fund, herein referenced as the Board, in accordance
with the provisions of the Illinois Pension Law, 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq., as
well as the city’s home rule authority under Article VII, § 6 of the
Illinois Constitution of 1970.



   (B)   The Board shall consist of five members. Two members of the
Board shall be appointed by the Mayor. Two members of the Board shall be
active participants of the pension fund who are elected from the active
participants of the Fund. One member of the Board shall be a person who is
retired under the Firemen’s Pension Fund Act of 1919 or 40 ILCS 5/4-121,
who is elected from all persons retired under the Firemen’s Pension Fund
Act of 1919 or 40 ILCS 5/4-121. For the purposes of this section, a
firefighter receiving a disability pension shall be considered a retired
firefighter. In the event that there are no retired firefighters under the
Fund or if none is willing to serve on the Board, then an additional active
firefighter shall be elected to the Board in lieu of the retired firefighter
that would otherwise be elected. Likewise, in the event that there are no
active firefighters under the Fund or if none is willing to serve on the
Board, then an additional retired firefighter shall be elected to the Board
in lieu of the active firefighter that would otherwise be elected.



   (C)   The appointments by the Mayor are to be three-year
appointments, for which the Mayor will make formal written appointments and
subsequent reappointments to the Board.



   (D)   The members chosen from the active and retired firefighters
shall be elected by secret ballot at elections to be held on the third Monday
in April of the applicable years, at such place or places, and under such
regulations as shall be prescribed by the Board. In the elections for Board
members to be chosen from the active firefighters, all active firefighters
and no others may vote. In the elections for Board members to be chosen from
retired firefighters, the retired firefighters and no others may vote.



   (E)   Each member of the Board so elected shall hold office for a
term of three years and until his or her successor has been duly elected and
qualified.



   (F)   The Board shall elect annually from its members a President
and Secretary.



   (G)   The Treasurer of the city shall remain the Treasurer of the
Board, but will only be a voting member of the Board if he or she is one of
the two appointed members of the Board.



(Ord. 2009-12, passed 4-20-2009)



§ 37.16  PURPOSE; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Purpose. The Board is responsible for administering the
Firefighters’ Pension Fund in accordance 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq., for the
benefit of its firefighters and of their surviving spouses, children, and
certain other dependents.



   (B)   Powers and duties. The Board shall do and have all powers and
perform all duties required of or imposed upon it by 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.
and shall administer the said Fund in accordance with 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.



(Ord. 2009-12, passed 4-20-2009)



PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT



§ 37.20  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR ASSESSING AND DETERMINING CLAIMS
UNDER PSEBA.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a fair and
efficient method for determining the eligibility of a full-time employee for
the benefits enumerated under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act, 820
ILCS 320 (PSEBA), through an administrative process, including if necessary,
an administrative or evidentiary hearing.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
terms will have the following meanings:



      CATASTROPHIC INJURY.  An injury, the direct and proximate
consequences of which permanently prevent an individual from performing any
gainful work.



      GAINFUL WORK.  Full- or part-time activity that actually is
compensated or commonly is compensated.



      INJURY.  A traumatic physical wound (or a traumatized physical
condition of the body) directly and proximately caused by external force
(such as bullets, explosives, sharp instruments, blunt objects, or physical
blows), chemicals, electricity, climatic conditions, infectious disease,
radiation, virii, or bacteria, but does not include:



         (a)   Any occupational disease; or



         (b)   Any condition of the body caused or occasioned by
stress or strain.



   [Note: These definitions are derived from the federal Public Health and
Welfare Act, which was enacted in 1944 and amended in 1984.]



   (C)   Application procedure.



      (1)   Public Safety Officers, or family member(s) of an
injured or deceased Public Safety Officer, (“applicant”) must file a full
and complete PSEBA application in writing within 30 days of filing a
disability pension claim with the city or within 30 days of the date of the
adoption of this section in the event that an Applicant has filed for a PSEBA
claim prior to the date of adoption of this section, whichever is later, if
the Applicant is seeking benefits under PSEBA. The city shall notify
applicant if the PSEBA application is incomplete and applicant shall have
five days to remedy their application. Failure to timely file the full and
complete application shall result in a forfeiture of the benefits under PSEBA
by failure to properly submit a complete application.



      (2)    Complete PSEBA application includes the following:



         (a)   The name of the applicant, date of hire, detailed
information regarding the incident, including information relating to how the
injury was sustained in the line of duty (date, time, place, nature of
injury, and other factual circumstances surrounding the incident giving rise
to said claim);



         (b)   The applicant’s firsthand knowledge explaining,
to the city’s satisfaction, how the injury/death directly resulted from:



            1.   Response to fresh pursuit;



            2.   Response to what is reasonably believed to be
an emergency;



            3.   Response to an unlawful act perpetrated by
another; or



            4.   Participation during the investigation of a
criminal act;



         (c)   A signed PSEBA medical authorization release which
authorizes the collection of information related to the incident including,
but not limited to, disability pension proceedings, worker’s compensation
records, and medical records and specifies the name and address for pertinent
health care providers);



         (d)   A signed PSEBA general information release
specifying the name and signature of the applicant or her/his authorized
representative along with legal proof of said representation and name and
signature of witness authorizing the collection of information pertinent to
the incident review process;



         (e)   The name(s) of witnesses to the incident;



         (f)   The name(s) of witnesses the applicant intends to
call at the PSEBA hearing (if any);



         (g)   Information and supporting pension documentation
filed with the appropriate pension board;



         (h)   Information supporting the PSEBA eligibility
requirements;



         (i)   A statement of whether the applicant is currently
enrolled in the city’s health care insurance plan for which continuation of
coverage is sought; and



         (j)   Other sources of health insurance benefits
currently enrolled in or received by the applicant and/or family members if
the applicant is deceased.



      The City Manager is hereby authorized to prepare application and
other forms that are necessary or appropriate to simplify the procedures of
this section.



      (3)   The PSEBA application must be submitted to the Office of
the City Manager, 220 E. Deerpath, Lake Forest, IL 60045, in its entirety.



      (4)   The PSEBA application must be sworn and notarized to
certify the truthfulness of the content of the information. A review of the
application shall not occur until the application is complete.



      (5)   On the date that the PSEBA application is deemed
complete by the city, the completed application shall then be submitted to
the city as the preliminary record (“preliminary record”), and a copy of
the same shall be date stamped and provided to the applicant.



      (6)   Upon receipt of a complete application for PSEBA
benefits timely filed, the City Manager shall review the application and
supporting documents for purposes of making a recommendation that the City
Council:



         (a)   Grant benefits based upon the facts on the
application as it stands;



         (b)   Set matter for a final administrative hearing
before a hearing officer to make a determination based on the result of an
administrative hearing.



         (c)   Set matter for an evidentiary hearing before a
hearing officer to make a recommendation to the City Council based on the
result of an evidentiary hearing. Following receipt of the recommendation of
the hearing officer, the City Council shall render a determination regarding
the applicant’s eligibility for benefits under PSEBA.



         (d)   Enter such other finding as is consistent with the
evidence or by agreement of the applicant and the city.



      Within 30 days following receipt of the recommendation of the
City Manager, the City Council shall make a determination regarding the
application, which determination may include a direction for further
proceedings on the application before a final determination is made.



      (7)   If the City Council grants the benefit based on the
preliminary record as it stands, the applicant will be contacted by the city
within 30 days of the decision. The Applicant will be required to contact the
City Manager for benefit explanation and processing.



      (8)   If the City Council determines the matter requires a
final administrative or evidentiary hearing, the applicant will be given
written notice of such decision along with a date for the scheduled hearing.



      (9)   If the applicant, upon receiving written notice of the
date for a final administrative hearing or an evidentiary hearing cannot
attend said date as indicated in the notice of such hearing, the applicant
must contact the hearing officer within seven days after being served with
notice of the hearing, communicating alternative hearing date(s) which are
within close proximity of the original date indicated by the hearing officer.
Failure to appear may result in denial of benefits.



      (10)   If the City Council denies the benefit based on the
preliminary record as it stands, the applicant will receive written notice of
such denial and the applicant shall have the right to request an evidentiary
hearing, which request must be served in writing to the City Manager not
later than 30 calendar days after being served with written notice of the
denial. Upon receipt of a timely notice from the applicant, the City Manager
shall schedule the evidentiary hearing and serve the applicant with notice of
such hearing.



      (11)   If the applicant, upon receiving written notice of
denial, chooses not to request an evidentiary hearing, the Applicant will be
required to contact the City Manager to discuss other options in which the
applicant may be eligible to continue participation in the city’s health
care insurance plan.



   (D)   Administrative hearing composition. A final administrative
hearing or an evidentiary hearing shall be scheduled and conducted by a
hearing officer whose authority and limitations are as follows:



      (1)   Authority of the hearing officer. The hearing officer
shall have all of the authorities granted to her/him under common law
relative to the conduct of a final administrative hearing or evidentiary
hearing, including the authority to:



         (a)   Preside over city hearings involving PSEBA;



         (b)   Administer oaths;



         (c)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is
relevant to the issue of eligibility under PSEBA;



         (d)   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses
and the production of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the
parties or their representatives;



         (e)   Rule upon objections in the admissibility of
evidence;



         (f)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the
hearing and all exhibits in evidence introduced at the hearing; and



         (g)   Issue a determination (in the case of a final
administrative hearing) or a recommendation (in the event of an evidentiary
hearing) based on the evidence presented at the hearing, which determination
or recommendation shall be in writing and shall include either a written
finding of fact, decision and order, or a recommended finding of fact,
decision and order.



      (2)   Hearing officer. The Mayor, with the advice and consent
of the City Council, is hereby authorized to appoint a person to hold the
position of hearing officer for each hearing on PSEBA benefits that shall
come before this city. In making said selection, the following information
should be considered, at a minimum:



         (a)   The individual’s ability to comply with the job
description as set forth herein; and



         (b)   The individual must be an attorney licensed to
practice law in the State of Illinois and have knowledge of and experience in
employment and labor law, general civil procedure, the rules of evidence, and
administrative practice.



   (E)   Administrative and evidentiary hearings. As provided herein,
an administrative or evidentiary hearing to determine of the applicant’s
eligibility for benefits under PSEBA may be initiated either by the City
Council or by the applicant after the submission of a full and complete PSEBA
application. A final administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate and
determine whether the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. An
evidentiary hearing shall be held to ascertain facts and formulate a
recommendation whether the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. If
the applicant is ultimately found eligible, the benefits shall be consistent
with the Act.



      (1)   Record. The city shall ensure that all hearings are
attended by a certified court reporter and a transcript of all proceedings
shall be made by said certified court reporter and a copy be provided to the
applicant within 28 days of the date of the administrative hearing.



      (2)   Procedures. The city (through the City Manager) and the
applicant shall be entitled to representation by counsel at said
administrative hearing and present witnesses, testimony and documents, may
cross-examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance of subpoenas
to compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant
documents.



      (3)   Evidence. The Illinois Rules of Evidence shall apply to
the extent practicable unless, by such application, the Hearing Officer
determines that application of the rule would be an injustice or preclude the
introduction of evidence of the type commonly relied upon by a reasonably
prudent person in the conduct of her or his affairs. Such determination shall
be in the sole discretion of the Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer must
state on the record her or his reason for that determination.



      (4)   Final determination; recommendation.



         (a)   For each final administrative hearing, the
determination by the hearing officer of whether the petitioning Applicant is
eligible for the benefits under PSEBA shall constitute a final administrative
determination for the purpose of judicial review under the common law writ of
certiorari.



         (b)   For each evidentiary hearing, the determination of
the City Council (after receiving the recommendation of the hearing officer)
of whether the petitioning applicant is eligible for the benefits under PSEBA
shall constitute a final administrative determination for the purpose of
judicial review under the common law writ of certiorari.



   (F)   Burden of proof. At any administrative or evidentiary hearing,
the applicant shall have the obligation and burden of proof to establish that
the applicant is eligible and qualified to receive PSEBA benefits. The
standard of proof in all hearings conducted under this section shall be by
the preponderance of the evidence.



   (G)   Administrative records. All records pertaining to the
administrative process shall be held in a separate file under the
applicant’s name with the city.



   (H)   Severability. If any provision of this section or application
thereof to any person or circumstance is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid, such



invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this section
that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and
each invalid provision or invalid application of this section is severable.



   (I)   Conflict of laws. Where the conditions imposed by any
provisions of this section are more restrictive than comparable provisions
imposed elsewhere in any other local law, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation, the regulations of this section will govern.



(Ord. 2017-60, passed 10-16-2017)



CHAPTER 38:  PURCHASING AND PAYMENTS



Section



General Provisions



   38.01   Stores system



   38.02   Payment procedures



Purchasing Agent



   38.15   Appointment



   38.16   Reports



Procedure



   38.30   Generally; rules and regulations



   38.31   Authority to approve purchases



   38.32   Authority to approve credit purchases



   38.33   Execution of contracts



   38.34   Lease and installment contracts



   38.35   Emergencies



   38.36   Compliance with contracts



   38.37   Authority to approve other purchases and contracts



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 38.01  STORES SYSTEM.



   The City Manager may set up a stores system for the purchase and
maintenance of such supplies as are in general use against which supplies may
be requisitioned for current use.



(Prior Code, § 35-1)  (Ord. 2007-38, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 38.02  PAYMENT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Director of Finance shall prepare a monthly summary of all
warrants (the “warrant list”) to be drawn on the city treasury for the
payment of all sums due from the city (including all warrants relating to
payroll and invoice payments) by fund and shall prepare a detailed list of
invoice payments which denotes the person to whom the warrant is payable.



   (B)   (1)   The warrant list detail of invoice payments shall be
presented for review to the Chairperson of the City Council’s Finance
Committee (or to another member of the City Council as designated by the
Finance Committee Chairperson) for review and recommendation. All items on
the warrant list detail recommended for payment by the Finance Committee
Chairperson (or the Chairperson’s designee) shall be presented in summary
form to the City Council for approval or ratification pursuant to division
(A).



      (2)   Any member of the City Council shall, upon request made
to the City Manager or Director of Finance, receive a copy of the warrant
list detail as recommended by the Finance Committee Chairperson (or the
Chairperson’s designee).



   (C)   The City Council may approve the warrant list as so
recommended by the Finance Committee Chairperson (or the Chairperson’s
designee) by a concurrence of the majority of the City Council as recorded
through a roll call vote.



(Ord. 2011-20, passed 9-19-2011; Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



PURCHASING AGENT



§ 38.15  APPOINTMENT.



   The City Manager shall act ex officio as purchasing agent and shall
exercise and perform, or superintend and direct, all duties and be subject to
all requirements and obligations appertaining to that office.



(Prior Code, § 35-9)  (Ord. 2007-38, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 38.16  REPORTS.



   The City Manager shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, such reports
which may be called for by the City Council from time to time, showing in
detail satisfactory to the City Council purchases made under the provisions
of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 35-10)  (Ord. 2007-38, passed 10-15-2007)



PROCEDURE



§ 38.30  GENERALLY; RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Subject to the direction of, and powers reserved to, the Mayor
and the City Council, the City Manager shall purchase or approve the purchase
of all construction, repair and maintenance projects, supplies and services
for the city, as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   The City Manager shall have the power to issue rules and
regulations that set forth the processes and requirements for all purchases
made by the city.



(Prior Code, § 35-17)  (Ord. 2007-38, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 38.31  AUTHORITY TO APPROVE PURCHASES.



   (A)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall have the power
to make all purchases involving a total expenditure of less than $20,000. All
other purchases (except as otherwise provided in § 38.37) shall require the
approval of the City Council.



   (B)   No purchase shall be made without an approved budgetary
allocation or appropriation by the City Council in the amount of the purchase.



   (C)   The City Manager shall endeavor to include vendors located
within the city when making purchases governed by this chapter where
practical. The City Manager is authorized to accept the bid or quote of a
vendor located within the city where the quality, customer service,
responsiveness and other aspects of the vendor and its bid or quote are at
least equivalent to the lowest vendor and its bid or quote.



(Ord. 2007-38, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



§ 38.32  AUTHORITY TO APPROVE CREDIT PURCHASES.



   The City Manager is authorized to review and approve credit cards and
credit accounts for officials and employees of the city to reasonably
facilitate the making of purchases in amounts of less than $20,000 pursuant
to this chapter. Any purchases made using such credit shall be within
approved budget allocations and appropriations.



(Ord. 2007-38, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 38.33  EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS.



   The City Manager may sign on behalf of the city any contract and other
documents necessary to complete any purchase approved by the City Council,
except where the City Council directs that some other officer or officers
shall do so.



(Ord. 2007-38, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 38.34  LEASE AND INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.



   All leases and all options or installment purchase contracts must be
approved by the City Manager. If a lease, option or installment purchase
contract is in an amount exceeding $20,000, it must also be approved by the
City Council.



(Ord. 2007-38, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 38.35  EMERGENCIES.



   The City Manager may make purchases and enter into contracts on behalf
of the city in the case of accidents or other circumstances creating an
emergency where necessary to protect life, the public health and safety, and
public property, by such process as may be practicable under the
circumstances. All emergency procurements involving expenditures of $20,000
or more must be presented to the City Council for ratification at the next
scheduled City Council meeting.



(Ord. 2007-38, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 38.36  COMPLIANCE WITH CONTRACTS.



   (A)   The City Manager shall examine all proposed contracts governed
by this chapter to which the city may be a party.



   (B)   The City Manager shall be responsible to assure that the terms
of any contract governed by this chapter to which the city is a party are
properly performed by all parties.



   (C)   No bill shall be paid for goods purchased unless the person
requisitioning the purchase shall have indicated to the City Manager that the
goods have been received and unless the bill shall be approved by the person
who requisitioned the purchase and the City Manager.



   (D)   Authorized petty cash funds may be used for purchases by
persons other than the City Manager and may be replenished if requisitions
for purchases out of said funds shall be approved by the City Manager.



(Ord. 2007-38, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 38.37  AUTHORITY TO APPROVE OTHER PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS.



   For any purchase or contract not otherwise authorized for approval by
the City Manager pursuant to §§ 38.30 through 38.37, such purchases and
contracts shall be approved in one of the following manners.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, for contracts with
vendors or other providers delivering services on an unspecified but ongoing
basis in annual amounts anticipated to be more than $20,000, such contracts
or similar authorizations shall be presented to the City Council for
consideration as part of the review and approval of the city’s annual
budget.



   (B)   For contracts relating to insurance-related services from
vendors or other providers delivering services on an unspecified but ongoing
basis in annual amounts anticipated to be more than $20,000 but whose costs
for services are established on a calendar year basis, such contracts or
similar authorizations shall be presented to the City Council for
consideration prior to the beginning of the calendar year for which services
are to be provided.



   (C)   For contracts relating to services of a regular but routine
nature for which savings might be attained through multi-year arrangements in
which the annualized amount of the contract is expected to exceed $20,000,
such contracts or similar authorizations shall be competitively bid and
presented to the City Council for consideration and approval as directed by
the City Council.



   (D)   For contracts with vendors or other providers:



      (1)   Delivering supplies or parts on an as-needed basis in
individual amounts under $20,000 but in annual amounts anticipated to be more
than $20,000; or



      (2)   Delivering instructional services as part of fee-based
recreational programs such contracts or similar authorizations may be
approved by the City Manager;



provided that: (a) the total amount approved for such contracts or other
authorizations by the City Manager do not exceed the amounts set forth in the
city’s annual budget; and (b) the budgeted amount for such contracts or
similar authorizations does not exceed $75,000.



   (E)   For all other contracts, by presentation to, and approval or
ratification by, the City Council as a specific matter for consideration.



(Ord. 2011-20, passed 9-19-2011; Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



CHAPTER 39:  TAXATION



Section



Tax Rates



   39.001   Collection



   39.002   Garbage Fund tax; maximum rate



   39.003   Garbage Fund tax; levy



Utilities Tax



   39.015   Definitions



   39.016   Occupation and privilege taxes



   39.017   Applicability of tax



   39.018   Extent of tax rate



   39.019   Statement by taxpayer



   39.020   Erroneous payments



   39.021   Overpayment of tax and credit



   39.022   Definitions



   39.023   Tax imposed



   39.024   Collection of tax



   39.025   Tax remittance and return



   39.026   Resales



   39.027   Books and records



   39.028   Credits and refunds



   39.029   Municipal gas use and consumption tax



Public Benefit Fund



   39.040   Fund created



   39.041   Levy



Home Rule Municipal Sales Taxes



   39.055   Imposition of home rule municipal retailer’s occupation
tax



   39.056   Imposition of home rule municipal service occupation tax



   39.057   Imposition of home rule municipal use tax



   39.058   Use of tax revenues



   39.059   Collection of tax



Municipal Use Tax



   39.070   Purchase of tangible property



Telecommunications Tax



   39.085   Generally



   39.086   Definitions



   39.087   Telecommunications tax



   39.088   Collection of tax by retailers



   39.089   Registration



   39.090   Filing returns and remittance by retailers



   39.091   Filing returns/payments by taxpayers



   39.092   Resale numbers



   39.093   Maintaining books and records



Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee



   39.105   Adoption of telecommunications infrastructure maintenance
fee



   39.106   Registration of telecommunication providers



   39.107   Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fees



   39.108   Collection, enforcement, administration of
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fees



   39.109   Compliance with other laws



   39.110   Existing franchises and licenses



   39.111   Enforcement



   39.112   Waiver and fee implementation



Hotel Tax



   39.125   Hotel tax



Demolition Tax



   39.140   Demolition tax imposed



   39.141   Special applicability rules; appeals



   39.142   General applicability



Real Estate Transfer Tax



   39.155   Real estate transfer tax imposed



   39.156   Collection of tax; declaration



   39.157   Recordation



   39.158   Lien created; enforcement



   39.159   Deed exempted from tax



   39.160   Reserved



   39.161   Enforcement; suit for collection



   39.162   Interest



   39.163   Proceeds of tax



   39.164   Refunds



   39.165   Rules



   39.166   Appeals



E-911 Surcharge and ETS Board



   39.180   Purpose and authority



   39.181   Imposition of E-911 surcharge



   39.182   Definitions



   39.183   Exemptions



   39.184   Remittance of surcharge



   39.185   Carrier returns



   39.186   Credits to carriers



   39.187   Emergency Telephone System Board created; authority



Municipal Service Occupation Tax



   39.200   Tax for sales of service



   39.201   Report to be filed



   39.202   Payment of tax



Municipal Leasing Occupation Tax



   39.215   Tax for renting or leasing personal property



   39.216   Report to be filed



   39.217   Payment of tax



Taxpayers’ Rights



   39.230   Definitions



   39.231   Application of payments



   39.232   Limitations



   39.233   Audit procedures



   39.234   Notice of tax assessment



   39.235   Appeals process for credits, refunds and protest



   39.236   Interest



   39.237   Installment contracts



   39.238   Voluntary disclosure



   39.239   Review of liens



   39.240   Publication of tax ordinances



 



   39.999   Penalty



TAX RATES



§ 39.001  COLLECTION.



   For any tax or penalty not timely paid in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, any cost of collection incurred by the city
pursuant to this chapter may be assessed as an addition tax or penalty, or
both, consistent with § 10.99(B) of this city code.



(Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)



§ 39.002  GARBAGE FUND TAX; MAXIMUM RATE.



   The maximum tax rate for garbage fund purposes shall be increased to
0.078% of the full fair cash value as equalized or assessed by the State
Department of Revenue on all taxable property within the corporate limits of
the city.



(Prior Code, § 39-11)  (Ord. 675, passed 11-13-1965)



§ 39.003  GARBAGE FUND TAX; LEVY.



   The City Council shall annually provide in the appropriation and tax
levy ordinances for the levy of a garbage fund tax.



(Prior Code, § 39-12)  (Ord. 675, passed 11-13-1965)



UTILITIES TAX



§ 39.015  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas, electricity, or water for use or consumption and
not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in
connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise,
including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and
for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost
of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever.
GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include receipts received from the city for the sale
to said municipality of any of the utility products or service mentioned
above.



   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this
state; or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed
by order of any court.



(Prior Code, § 39-19)  (Ord. 681, passed 4-4-1966; Ord. 1303, passed
7-7-1944; Ord. 2006-36, passed 7-20-2006)



§ 39.016  OCCUPATION AND PRIVILEGE TAXES.



   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:



   (A)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits
of the city, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts
therefrom;



   (B)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate
limits of the city, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross
receipts therefrom. The tax imposed under this section shall not apply with
respect to gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution, supply,
furnishing or sale of electricity where the use or consumption of the
electricity is subject to the tax imposed under §§ 39.022 through 39.028;
and



   (C)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling water for use or consumption within the corporate
limits of the city, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross
receipts therefrom.



(Prior Code, § 39-20)  (Ord. 681, passed 4-4-1966; Ord. 99-35, passed
6-17-1999)



§ 39.017  APPLICABILITY OF TAX.



   No tax is imposed by this subchapter with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may
not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made
subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof, nor
shall any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas, water or electricity be subject to taxation under
the provisions of this subchapter for such transactions as are or may become
subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers’
Occupation Tax Act authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.



(Prior Code, § 39-21)  (Ord. 681, passed 4-4-1966)



§ 39.018  EXTENT OF TAX RATE.



   Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of
products or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayers’ business.



(Prior Code, § 39-22)  (Ord. 681, passed 4-4-1966)



§ 39.019  STATEMENT BY TAXPAYER.



   (A)   On or before the last day of June, 1982, each taxpayer shall
make a return to the City Treasurer for the months of April and May, 1982,
stating:



      (1)   His or her name;



      (2)   His or her principal place of business;



      (3)   His or her gross receipts during those months upon the
basis of which the tax is imposed;



      (4)   Amount of tax; and



      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the
corporate authorities may require.



   (B)   On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each
taxpayer shall make a return to the City Treasurer for the preceding
one-month period.



   (C)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at
the time of making such return, pay to the City Treasurer, the amount of tax
herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may,
if he or she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total
billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the
return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt
adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such
billings and the taxable gross receipts.



(Prior Code, § 39-23)  (Ord. 681, passed 4-4-1966; Ord. 1305, passed
5-3-1982)



§ 39.020  ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS.



   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any tax due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously
paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be
so credited.



(Prior Code, § 39-24)  (Ord. 681, passed 4-4-1966)



§ 39.021  OVERPAYMENT OF TAX AND CREDIT.



   If a taxpayer under this chapter is unable to use a credit authorized
by this section solely because the tax imposed by this chapter has been
replaced by the tax imposed under §§ 39.022 through 39.028, then the
taxpayer may apply such credit against any tax due under §§ 39.022 through
39.028.



(Prior Code, § 39-26)  (Ord. 99-35, passed 6-17-1999)



§ 39.022  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LAKE FOREST. The City of Lake Forest.



   PERSON. Any natural, individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.



   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any person having
or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other
affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility,
transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of
whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in
this state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or
other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this state.



   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity be a public utility, as defined in 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2,
directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of
electricity.



   PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits
of the city, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.



   TAX COLLECTOR. The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.



(Prior Code, § 39-27.1)  (Ord. 99-35, passed 6-17-1999)



§ 39.023  TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   Pursuant to § 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-2) and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon
the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at
retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the city at the
following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:



      (1)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.61 per kilowatt-hour;



      (2)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.40 per kilowatt-hour;



      (3)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.36 per kilowatt-hour;



      (4)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in
a month: $0.35 per kilowatt-hour;



      (5)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in
a month: $0.34 per kilowatt-hour;



      (6)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month: $0.32 per kilowatt-hour;



      (7)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month: $0.315 per kilowatt-hour;



      (8)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month: $0.31 per kilowatt-hour;



      (9)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month: $0.305 per kilowatt-hour; and



      (10)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of
20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month: $0.30 per kilowatt-hour.



   (B)   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue
measures imposed by the city, the state or any other political subdivision of
the state.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the tax
shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of
the tax would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or
the Constitution of the state.



   (D)   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use of
consumption of electricity by residential customers beginning with the first
bill issued on or after August 1,1999; and with respect to the use or
consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the
first bill issued to such customers for delivery services in accordance with
§ 16-104 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-104), or the first bill
issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, which ever issuance
occurs sooner.



(Prior Code, § 39-27.2)  (Ord. 99-35, passed 6-17-1999; Ord. 2016-02,
passed 1-19-2016)



§ 39.024  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of § 39.026 regarding the delivery
of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this chapter shall be
collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in
this state who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity
to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner
as the original charge for delivering the electricity.



   (B)   Any tax required to be collected by this chapter, and any tax
in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the city by the person
delivering the electricity; provided, that the person delivering electricity
shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the
charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further,
that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall
be obligated to remit such tax.



   (C)   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add
to such gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax collected to reimburse
them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers,
preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the
city upon request. For purposes of this subchapter, any partial payment of a
billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to
be for the delivery of electricity.



(Prior Code, § 39-27.3)  (Ord. 99-35, passed 6-17-1999)



§ 39.025  TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN.



   (A)   Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in
a form prescribed by the city. The return and accompanying remittance shall
be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during
which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under § 39.022 and
following.



   (B)   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax
from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under § 39.022 and
following, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the
city and pay the tax directly to the city on or before the last day of the
month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.



(Prior Code, § 39-27.4)  (Ord. 99-35, passed 6-17-1999)



§ 39.026  RESALES.



   (A)   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the city shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Finance
Director of the city and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the
electricity, and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirety or
partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.



   (B)   If a person who receives electricity in the city claims to be
an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the Finance
Director of the city for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts
showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this chapter on any
purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the
city may reasonably require.



   (C)   Upon approval of the application, the Finance Director shall
assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the
applicant.



   (D)   The Finance Director may cancel the resale number of any
person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this chapter for
electricity used or consumed by the person, or if the number:



      (1)   Was obtained through misrepresentation; or



      (2)   Is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.



   (E)   (1)   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use
or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed
by this chapter directly to the city pursuant to § 39.025(B) on the amount
of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax
pursuant to § 39.024 and remit the tax pursuant to § 39.024(A) on the
amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.



      (2)   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having
an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this
section shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion
of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person
reports to the city the total amount of electricity delivered to the
reseller, and such other information that the city may reasonably require.



(Prior Code, § 39-27.5)  (Ord. 99-35, passed 6-17-1999)



§ 39.027  BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay tax imposed by
this subchapter, shall keep accurate books and records of its business or
activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the
transaction that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability
under this subchapter. The books and records shall be subject to and
available for inspection at all times during business hours of the day.



(Prior Code, § 39-27.6)  (Ord. 99-35, passed 6-17-1999)



§ 39.028  CREDITS AND REFUNDS.



   Notwithstanding any other provision herein, in order to permit sound
fiscal planning and budgeting by the city, no person shall be entitled to a
refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this subchapter unless the
persons files a claim for refund or credit within one year after the date on
which the tax was paid or remitted to the city.



(Prior Code, § 39-27.7)  (Ord. 99-35, passed 6-17-1999)



§ 39.029  MUNICIPAL GAS USE AND CONSUMPTION TAX.



   (A)   Short title. The tax imposed by this section shall be known as
the municipal gas use and consumption tax and is imposed in addition to all
other taxes imposed by the city, the state or any other municipal corporation
or political subdivision thereof.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PUBLIC UTILITY. A public utility as defined in § 3-105 of the
Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.).



      PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT. The Public Utilities Act, as amended (220
ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.).



      RETAIL PURCHASER. Any person who purchases gas in a sale at
retail.



      SALE AT RETAIL. Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use
or consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term RETAILER means
any person engaged in the business of distribution, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas.



   (C)   Tax imposed.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided by this subchapter, a tax
is imposed on the privilege of using or consuming gas in the city that is
purchased in a sale at retail at the rate of $0.05 per therm.



      (2)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of
the tax is on the retail purchaser, and nothing in this section shall be
construed to impose a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying,
furnishing, selling or transporting gas.



      (3)   The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by
therms of gas delivered to the retail purchaser’s premises, to the public
utility designated to collect the tax pursuant to division (D) below on or
before the payment due date of the public utility’s bill first reflecting
the tax, or directly to the City Collector on or before the fifteenth day of
the second month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the
retail purchaser if no public utility has been designated to collect the tax
pursuant to division (D) below or if the gas is delivered by a person other
than a public utility so designated.



      (4)   To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the city
by a retail purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section if
the gross receipts from the sale at retail of such gas to the retail
purchaser are properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such gas
pursuant to the city’s municipal utility tax, as amended from time to time,
as set forth in this subchapter and authorized pursuant to § 8-11-2 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2).



      (5)   A purchaser who purchases gas for resale and therefore
does not pay the tax imposed by this section with respect to the use or
consumption of the gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the
gas, shall pay the tax directly to the City Collector on or before the
fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is
used or consumed.



      (6)   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the
retail purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after the effective date
of this section.



   (D)   Collection of tax.



      (1)   The City Collector is authorized to enter into a
contract for collection of the tax imposed by this section with any public
utility providing gas service in the city. The contract shall include and
substantially conform to the following provisions:



         (a)   The public utility will collect the tax with
respect to gas delivered by it to its customers as an independent contractor;



         (b)   The public utility will remit collected taxes to
the City Collector no more often than once each month;



         (c)   The public utility will be entitled to withhold
from tax collections a service fee equal to 3% of the amounts collected and
timely remitted to the City Collector;



         (d)   The public utility shall not be liable to the city
for any tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and



         (e)   Such additional terms as the parties may agree
upon.



      (2)   A public utility designated to collect the tax imposed
by this section from its customers shall bill each customer for the tax on
all gas delivered to the customer unless the customer’s use or consumption
is exempt from the tax pursuant to a duly passed and authorized ordinance of
the city, and the public utility has received written notification from the
city that the customer is exempt from the tax.



   (E)   Books and records. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books
and records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting
the activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any
tax liability or exemption under this section. All such books and records
shall, at all times during business hours, be subject to and available for
inspection by the city.



(Ord. 2006-36, passed 7-20-2006)



PUBLIC BENEFIT FUND



§ 39.040  FUND CREATED.



   There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Public Benefit Fund,
which fund shall be used solely for the purpose of paying that portion of the
several amounts heretofore assessed against the city for public benefit as
well as paying any such amounts as may be hereafter assessed for public
benefit under and in pursuance of any ordinance that may be hereafter passed.
However, where and whenever any road or street is constructed or
reconstructed by the state or the county or both jointly with the city, the
city may consider, accept and use, the amount estimated by the state or the
county, or both, to be its or their portion of the cost of construction, as a
part or all of the city public benefit.



(Prior Code, § 39-32)  (Ord. 635, passed 6-8-1964)



§ 39.041  LEVY.



   The City Council shall annually provide in the appropriation and tax
levy ordinances for the levy of a public benefit tax to carry out the
purposes described in § 39.040.



(Prior Code, § 39-33)  (Ord. 635, passed 6-8-1964)



HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SALES TAXES



§ 39.055  IMPOSITION OF HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILER’S OCCUPATION TAX.



   A tax is hereby imposed, in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1, upon all
persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other
than an item of personal property titled or registered with an agency of the
government of the state, at retail in the city at a rate of 0.5% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business, which tax shall
be in addition to any retailers’ occupation tax imposed by the state or any
other governmental agency. Such tax shall not be applicable on the sale of
food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it
is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been
prepared for immediate consumption); and prescription and non-prescription
medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials,
syringes and needles used by diabetics.



(Ord. 06-50, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 39.056  IMPOSITION OF HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.



   A tax is hereby imposed, in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5, upon all
persons engaged in the business of making sales of service in the city at a
rate of 0.5% of the selling price of all tangible personal property
transferred by such service person either in the form of tangible personal
property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service,
which tax shall be in addition to any service occupation tax imposed by the
state or other governmental agency. Such tax shall not be applicable on the
sale of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises
where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that
has been prepared for immediate consumption); and prescription and
nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine
testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.



(Ord. 06-50, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 39.057  IMPOSITION OF HOME RULE MUNICIPAL USE TAX.



   A tax is hereby imposed, in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/8-11-6, upon the
privilege of using in the city any item of tangible personal property that is
purchased at retail from a retailer and that is titled or registered at a
location within the corporate limits of the city with an agency of the
government of the state, at a rate of 0.5% of the selling price, as that term
is defined in 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq., which tax shall be in addition to any
use tax imposed by the state or other governmental agency. The tax shall be
collected from persons whose Illinois address for title or registration
purposes is given as being in the city.



(Ord. 06-50, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 39.058  USE OF TAX REVENUES.



   All revenues resulting from the imposition of any tax imposed pursuant
to §§ 39.055, 39.056 and 39.057 shall be used by the city for expenditure
on public infrastructure, as that term is defined in 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.2.



(Ord. 06-50, passed 9-5-2006)



§ 39.059  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   The taxes imposed pursuant to §§ 39.055 and 39.056, and all civil
penalties that may be assessed as an incident of these taxes, shall be
collected and enforced by the State Department of Revenue. The taxes imposed
pursuant to § 39.057, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident of these taxes, shall be collected and enforced by the City Manager,
who shall be authorized to establish such rules and procedures as may be
necessary or convenient for the collection of such taxes and penalties.



(Ord. 06-50, passed 9-5-2006)



MUNICIPAL USE TAX



§ 39.070  PURCHASE OF TANGIBLE PROPERTY.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using, with the city, all
tangible personal property which is purchased outside the state at retail
from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of the
state government, by persons whose Illinois address for titling or
registration purposes is given as being in the city, at the rate of 1% of the
selling price of such tangible personal property with SELLING PRICE to have
the meaning as defined in the Use Tax Act, approved July 14,1955. The use tax
hereby imposed shall be collected, administered and distributed by the State
Department of Revenue in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-6,
and all amendments thereto.



(Prior Code, § 39-49)  (Ord. 934, passed 12-2-1974)



TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX



§ 39.085  GENERALLY.



   The tax imposed by this section and following sections shall be known
as the city telecommunications tax and is imposed in addition to all other
taxes imposed by the city, the state or any other municipal corporation or
political subdivision thereof.



(Prior Code, § 39-50)  (Ord. 96-7, passed 2-5-1996)



§ 39.086  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address
located in the city regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.



   GROSS CHARGE.



      (1)   The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating
or receiving telecommunications in the city and for all services rendered in
connection therewith, valued in money or otherwise, including cash, credits,
services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined
without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the
cost of materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense
whatsoever. If credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only
as and when paid.



      (2)   GROSS CHARGE shall not include:



         (a)   Any amount added to a purchaser’s bill because
of a charge made pursuant to:



            1.   The tax imposed by this subchapter;



            2.   Additional charges added to a purchaser’s
bill pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/9-222, as amended;



            3.   The tax imposed by the Illinois
Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 630, as amended; or



            4.   The tax imposed by § 4251 of the United
States Internal Revenue Code, as amended.



         (b)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunications
received outside the city;



         (c)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges
for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the
processing of data or information intended to change its form or content.
This division (2)(c) applies to, but is not limited to, the use of
calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment or
accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a
time-sharing agreement;



         (d)   Charges for customer equipment including such
equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein
such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;



         (e)   Charges to business enterprises certified under
220 ILCS 5/9-222.1, as amended, to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the State Department of Commerce and
Community Affairs or such other agency of the state having competent
jurisdiction;



         (f)   Charges for telecommunications and all services
and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation
and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries
represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation
of profit for the corporation rendering such service;



         (g)   Bad debts ( BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt
that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise
deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as
determined under applicable federal income tax standards), however, if the
portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall
report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which
the payment is made; or



         (h)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunications devices.



   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that either
originate or terminate outside the state.



   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that originate
and terminate within the state.



   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.



   RETAILER. Includes every person engaged in the business of making sales
at retail as defined in this section.



   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (OR ANY LIKE
TERM). Includes any retailer having or maintaining within the state, directly
or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other
representative operation within the state under the authority of the retailer
or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business, agent or
other representative is located within the state permanently or temporarily,
or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in the
state.



   SALE AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for
consideration:



      (1)   To persons other than the federal and state governments,
and state universities created by statute; and



      (2)   Other than between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries, or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the tax has
already been paid to a retailer and the gross charge made by one such
corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge
paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for resale.



   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunication services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. If this is not a
defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, maritime
systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the
location of a taxpayer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment as
defined by telephone number, authorization code or location in the state
where bills are sent.



   TAXPAYER. A person who individually or through his or her agents,
employees or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the city and who incurs a tax liability under
this subchapter.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. In addition to the usual and popular meaning,
includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through
use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services,
telegraph services, teletypewriter service, specialized mobile radio
services, paging service or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or
two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information
by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable,
fiberoptics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. The
definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS set forth herein shall not include:



      (1)   Value added services in which computer processing
applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the
information for purposes other than transmission; or



      (2)   Purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the services provided by him
or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the
taxable end-to-end telecommunications.



(Prior Code, § 39-51)  (Ord. 96-7, passed 2-5-1996)



§ 39.087  TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon:



      (1)   The act or/privilege of originating or receiving in the
city intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 5% of the gross
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer; and



      (2)   The act or privilege of originating in or receiving in
the city interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 5% of the
gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer.
Any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on
the same event, shall be allowed a credit against the tax authorized by this
division (A) to the extent or the amount of such tax properly due and paid in
another state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
state or local tax in the state.



   (B)   Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for
use of intercompany facilities and all telecommunications resold in the
subsequent provision used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall be non-taxable under this subchapter as
sales for resale.



   (C)   The tax imposed by this subchapter is not imposed on any act
or privilege to the extent that such act or privilege may not, under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States, be made the subject of
taxation by the city.



(Prior Code, § 39-52)  (Ord. 96-7, passed 2-5-1996)



§ 39.088  COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.



   (A)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be collected from
the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in the state and
making or effectuating a sale at retail and shall be remitted by the retailer
to the city.



      (1)   Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this
subchapter and any tax collected by the retailer shall constitute a debt owed
by the retailer to the city.



      (2)   Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by
adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications when sold for use in the manner prescribed by
this subchapter.



      (3)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall constitute a
debt of the purchaser to the retailer that provides taxable services until
paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original
charge for taxable services.



      (4)   If the retailer fails to collect the tax from a
taxpayer, the taxpayer shall pay the tax directly to the city as provided in
this subchapter.



   (B)   The city shall, upon application therefor, authorize the
collection of this tax by any retailer not maintaining a place of business in
the state who, to the satisfaction of the City Manager, furnishes adequate
security to insure collection of any payment of the tax. Such retailer shall
be issued, without charge, a permit to collect the tax imposed by this
subchapter. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of the retailer to
collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications
originated or received in the city in the same manner, and subject to the
same requirements, as a retailer maintaining a place of business in this
state.



   (C)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall, when collected,
be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for
telecommunications.



(Prior Code, § 39-53)  (Ord. 96-7, passed 2-5-1996)



§ 39.089  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Every retailer maintaining a place of business in the state on
the effective date of this subchapter shall register with the city within 30
days after that date.



   (B)   Every person becoming a retailer maintaining a place of
business in the state after the effective date of this subchapter shall
register with the city within 30 days after commencing their business.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of every retailer subject to the
provisions of this subchapter to obtain and properly file the registration
materials referred to herein.



(Prior Code, § 39-54)  (Ord. 96-7, passed 2-5-1996)



§ 39.090  FILING RETURNS AND REMITTANCE BY RETAILERS.



   On or before the last day of each calendar month, every retailer
maintaining a place of business in the state and every retailer authorized by
the City Manager to collect the tax imposed by this subchapter shall file
with the city a remittance return and remit all applicable tax for the
preceding calendar month. The return shall be filed on a form prescribed by
the City Manager containing such information as may be reasonably required.



(Prior Code, § 39-55)  (Ord. 96-7, passed 2-5-1996)



§ 39.091  FILING RETURNS/PAYMENTS BY TAXPAYERS.



   (A)   When a taxpayer does not pay the tax imposed by this
subchapter to a retailer, the taxpayer shall file with the city a tax return
and pay the tax upon that portion of gross charges paid to the retailer
during the preceding calendar month on or before the last day of the month
following that month. The return shall be filed on a form prescribed by the
City Manager.



   (B)   When a taxpayer pays the tax imposed by this subchapter
directly to the city, the city, at the request of the taxpayer, shall issue
an appropriate receipt to the taxpayer showing the amount of tax paid.



(Prior Code, § 39-56)  (Ord. 96-7, passed 2-5-1996)



§ 39.092  RESALE NUMBERS.



   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications in
the city claims to be a reseller of telecommunications, that person shall
apply to the City Manager for a resale number. The applicant shall state
facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this subchapter on
any purchases of telecommunications and shall furnish such additional
information as the City Manager may reasonably require.



   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the city shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.



   (C)   The city may cancel the resale number of any person if such
number:



      (1)   Was obtained through misrepresentation;



      (2)   Is used to originate or receive telecommunications
tax-free when such telecommunications are not for resale; or



      (3)   Is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.



   (D)   The act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the city shall not be made tax-free on the grounds of
being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number issued
by the Finance Department of the city and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that a sale is
nontaxable as a sale for resale.



(Prior Code, § 39-57)  (Ord. 96-7, passed 2-5-1996)



§ 39.093  MAINTAINING BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   Every retailer maintaining a place of business in the state, every
retailer authorized or required by the city to collect the tax imposed by
this subchapter, and every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of
its business or activity, including original source documents and books of
entry denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to
any tax liability or exemption. All such books and records shall be kept in
the English language and, at all times during business hours of the day,
shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city.



(Prior Code, § 39-58)  (Ord. 96-7, passed 2-5-1996)



TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE



§ 39.105  ADOPTION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GROSS CHARGES.



      (1)   The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the
act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the
city, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In
case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and
when paid.



      (2)   GROSS CHARGES for private line service shall include
charges imposed at each channel point within the city, charges for the
channel mileage between each channel point within the city and charges for
that portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within the city.



      (3)   However, GROSS CHARGES shall not include:



         (a)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because
of a charge made under:



            1.   The fee imposed by this section;



            2.   Additional charges added to a purchaser’s
bill under the Illinois Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5/1 et seq.;



            3.   Amounts collected under § 8-11-17 of the
Illinois Municipal Code;



            4.   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications
Excise Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 630;



            5.   911 surcharges; or



            6.   The tax imposed by § 4251 of the Internal
Revenue Code.



         (b)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication
received outside the city;



         (c)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges
for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the
processing of data or information intended to change its form or content.
Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators,
computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting
equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing
agreement;



         (d)   Charges for customer equipment, including such
equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein
such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;



         (e)   Charges to business enterprises certified under §
9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and
during the period of time specified by the city;



         (f)   Charges for telecommunications and all services
and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation
and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and
only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit other
than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such services;



         (g)   Bad debts ( BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt
that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise
deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as
determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and
pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment
is made);



         (h)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunications devices; or



         (i)   Charges for telecommunications and all services
and equipment provided to the city.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any municipal street, alley, water or public
right-of-way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including
utility easements wherein the city has acquired the right and authority to
locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications
facilities. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal city
property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and
shall not include city buildings and other structures or improvements,
regardless of whether they are situated in the public right-of-way.



   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (OR ANY LIKE
TERM). Includes any retailer having or maintaining within the state, directly
or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent
or other representative operating within this state under the authority of
the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do
business in this state.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined location,
as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime
systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the
location of the customer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment
as defined by the location in the state where bills are sent.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio
services or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic
or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics,
laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. Unless the context
clearly requires otherwise, TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also include wireless
telecommunications as hereinafter defined. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are
used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for
use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales
for resale. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable
services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of
1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.) as now or hereafter amended or cable or
other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the
city through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 et seq.) as now or hereafter
amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.



      (1)   Any telecommunications retailer; and



      (2)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer
that installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the public
right-of-way that is used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER or RETAILER or CARRIER. Includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at
retail as defined in this section. The city may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any
retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the
satisfaction of the city, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection
and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such
retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications
in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer
maintaining a place of business within the city.



   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes cellular mobile telephone
services, personal wireless services as defined in § 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Pub. Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C. §
332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services and paging services.



(Prior Code, § 39-59)  (Ord. 97-54, passed 11-20-1997)



§ 39.106  REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDERS.



   (A)   Every telecommunications provider as defined by this
subchapter shall register with the city within 30 days after the effective
date of this subchapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever
is later, on a form to be provided by the city, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to § 39.108(C)
shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this section.



   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the
city pursuant to division (A) above has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by § 39.108(C), as
the case may be, to the city within 30 days from the date of the occurrence
of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider
in the registration form or most recent return on file with the city.



(Prior Code, § 39-60)  (Ord. 97-54, passed 11-20-1997)



§ 39.107  MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES.



   (A)   A city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is
hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1.0% of
all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service
addresses within the city for telecommunications originating or received in
the city.



   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this subchapter, the city infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights-of-way within the city by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this
subchapter does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any
taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.



   (C)   The city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in § 39.108.



(Prior Code, § 39-61)  (Ord. 97-54, passed 11-20-1997)



§ 39.108  COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, ADMINISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES.



   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from
each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the city
infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer’s service
address.



   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the City Manager, the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the city not later than the last day of the month subsequent to
the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that
the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2% of the
city infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for
expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.



   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the city
shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the City
Manager, which shall contain such information as the City Manager may
reasonably require.



   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected
pursuant to this subchapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee
collected by such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by
the telecommunications retailer to the city. The charge imposed under
division (A) above by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this
subchapter shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications
retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable
at law in the same manner as the original charge for such services.



   (E)   (1)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure
maintenance fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this
subchapter, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then
such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due,
or to become due, under this subchapter, from the telecommunications retailer
who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the City Manager may
request, and telecommunications retailer shall provide, written
substantiation for such credit.



      (2)   However, no claim for such credit may be made more than
three years after the date of the erroneous payment unless:



         (a)   The credit is used only to offset a claim of
underpayment made by the city within the applicable statutory period of
limitations; and



         (b)   The credit derives from an overpayment made by the
same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.



   (F)   Amounts paid under this subchapter by telecommunications
retailers shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following
acts as described immediately below:



      (1)   Gross charges for purposes of the Telecommunications
Excise Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 630;



      (2)   Gross receipts for purposes of the municipal utility tax
as prescribed in 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2;



      (3)   Gross charges for purposes of the municipal
telecommunications tax as prescribed in 65 ILCS 5/8-11-17; and



      (4)   Gross revenue for purposes of the tax on annual gross
revenue of public utilities prescribed in the Illinois Public Utilities Act,
being 220 ILCS 5/1 et seq..



   (G)   The city shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the
books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this
subchapter to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly
accounted to the city for the city infrastructure maintenance fee.



   (H)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, may promulgate such
further or additional regulations concerning the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be
required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers
that are registered pursuant to § 39.106 of such regulations.



(Prior Code, § 39-62)  (Ord. 97-54, passed 11-20-1997; Ord. 00-47, passed
12-4-2000)



§ 39.109  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall excuse any person or entity from
obligations imposed under any law, including but not limited to:



   (A)   Generally applicable taxes;



   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under or within, use of
or repair of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to
freestanding towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as
provided;



   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such
generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over,
under or within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and



   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code
concerning uses or structures not located on, over or within the right-of-way.



(Prior Code, § 39-63)  (Ord. 97-54, passed 11-20-1997)



§ 39.110  EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES.



   Any franchise, license or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the city entered into before the effective date of this
subchapter regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid
according to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other
compensation to the extent waived.



(Prior Code, § 39-64)  (Ord. 97-54, passed 11-20-1997)



§ 39.111  ENFORCEMENT.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any
additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 39-66)  (Ord. 97-54, passed 11-20-1997)



§ 39.112  WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION.



   (A)   The city hereby waives all fees, charges and other
compensation that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the
city by a telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing city
franchise, license or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer
during the time the city imposes the telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee. This waiver shall only be effective during the time the
infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this subchapter is subject to
being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by
the telecommunications retailer from the customer.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified
mail/return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer with whom
the city has a franchise agreement.



   (C)   The city infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this
subchapter shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month
not less than 90 days after the city provides written notice by certified
mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the city has an existing
franchise, license or similar agreement that the city waives all compensation
under such existing franchise, license or similar agreement during such time
as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected by the retailer
and remitted to the city. The infrastructure maintenance fee shall apply to
gross charges billed on or after the effective date as established in the
preceding sentence.



(Prior Code, § 39-67)  (Ord. 97-54, passed 11-20-1997)



HOTEL TAX



§ 39.125  HOTEL TAX.



   (A)   (1)   HOTEL for the purpose of this section shall have the
same definition as is set forth in the Illinois Hotel Operators Occupation
Tax Act which is any building or buildings in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping
accommodations.



      (2)   The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts,
lodging houses, rooming houses and apartment houses.



   (B)   A tax of 5% of the gross rental receipts is hereby imposed
upon all persons engaged in the city in the business of renting, leasing or
renting rooms in a hotel as defined herein.



   (C)   This tax shall not apply to the gross rental receipts from
renting, leasing or letting to permanent residents of a hotel.



   (D)   All persons engaged in the business of renting, leasing or
letting rooms in a hotel of the city shall file a monthly return on forms
provided by the Department of Finance of the city and shall pay the tax with
each monthly return within 90 days after the end of each month.



   (E)   Persons subject to the tax imposed by this section may
reimburse themselves for their tax liability for such tax by separately
stating such tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in
combination, in a single amount, with state tax imposed under the Illinois
Hotel Operators Occupation Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 145.



   (F)   The Department of Finance of the city, all other officers and
employees are authorized and empowered to take such additional steps as may
be necessary to see to the enforcement of this section and the collection of
the tax hereby imposed.



(Prior Code, § 39-70)  (Ord. 98-13, passed 5-21-1998; Ord. 00-47, passed
12-4-2000; Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



DEMOLITION TAX



§ 39.140  DEMOLITION TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon the activity of demolition of
dwellings within the city. Any person granted a permit for demolition (a
“demolition permit”) as provided in the City Building Code for a
principal structure as defined by the City Zoning Code shall pay a demolition
tax for the demolition of any single-family dwelling or other building in
which a dwelling unit (as defined in the city’s Zoning Code) is located (a
“demolition building”).



   (B)   The demolition tax shall be at a rate of not less than:



      (1)   Ten thousand dollars per demolition permit for any
single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling that is a demolition building;



      (2)   For any other demolition building, $5,000 times the
number of dwelling units in such demolition building, but not less than
$10,000; or



      (3)   Such greater amount as may be established from time to
time in the city’s annual fee ordinance.



   (C)   The tax imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall be in
addition to any demolition permit fee authorized in connection with the
city’s Building Code or any other applicable fees and charges. Payment of
the demolition tax shall be due prior to issuance of a demolition permit by
the city.



   (D)   The funds received by the city for the amount imposed pursuant
to this subchapter shall be deposited as follows:



      (1)   Fifty percent in the city’s Capital Improvement Fund;
and



      (2)   Fifty percent in a special fund to be established for
affordable housing.



(Ord. 2006-01, passed 2-6-2006; Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



§ 39.141  SPECIAL APPLICABILITY RULES; APPEALS.



   (A)   Notwithstanding the general requirement set forth in §
39.140, the demolition tax shall not apply under the following circumstances
upon filing of an application on a form provided and prepared hy the city;
provided however, that this section shall not affect an applicant’s
obligation to pay any fee authorized under the city’s Building Code for a
demolition permit.



      (1)   If the applicant and the city enter into an agreement
for consideration regarding the demolition tax (e.g., an agreement relating
to the provision of new or additional affordable housing units), which
agreement expressly waives or abates, in whole or in part, the demolition
tax. Any such agreement shall specifically set forth the applicability of
this division (A)(1) with regard to the demolition tax otherwise required
under this subchapter.



      (2)   If the applicant has been the record title or beneficial
interest owner and occupant of the property on which the demolition building
is located for all of the three years immediately preceding the date of the
application (pre-permit period), and remains the record title or beneficial
interest owner and occupant of such property at all times after the
pre-permit period until the date that is three years immediately after the
date on which the certificate of occupancy for a new single-family dwelling
on such property (the “replacement building”) is issued (post-permit
period). To qualify under this division (A)(2), the applicant shall pay the
applicable demolition tax to the city and notify the city at the time of such
payment of applicant’s intent to seek a rebate; the applicant may
thereafter apply for a rebate of such tax after the post-permit period has
elapsed. Such application for rebate shall include title documents
establishing the applicant’s ownership during the entire pre-permit period,
as well as applicant’s ownership and occupancy of the property for the
entire post-permit period. Any application for rebate shall be on forms
prepared and provided by the city.



      (3)   If the applicant establishes to the satisfaction of the
City Manager that structural measures that qualify as a “demolition”
under the city’s Building Code are required due to extensive damage to the
demolition building caused by force majeure. For purposes of this division
(A)(3), FORCE MAJEURE shall mean acts of God, or other factors beyond the
owner’s reasonable control and reasonable ability to remedy; provided,
however, that for purposes of this division (A)(3) force majeure shall not
include damage caused by the owner, an agent or employee of the owner, or a
third party in privity with the owner.



   (B)   Any person who shall be subject to the tax pursuant to this
subchapter, or any applicant for relief under division (A) above, who
disputes the imposition of or amount of the demolition tax imposed pursuant
to this subchapter or a determination under division (A) above may seek a
review of such imposition or amount of the demolition tax or determination
under division (A) above by filing with the City Manager, within 30 days
after the notification of the demolition tax amount or the determination on a
request for relief under division (A) above, a request for review. The
request for review shall set forth in detail the basis for the dispute of the
imposition, amount or determination relating to the demolition tax. The City
Manager shall thereafter consider the request for review, determine whether
the demolition tax should be waived or reduced, and provide a written
determination thereof. If such person seeks further review of the imposition
or amount of the demolition tax or determination under division (A) above,
such person shall file a request to appeal the determination of the City
Manager with the City Clerk within 30 days after mailing of the determination
by the City Manager; such appeal shall be considered by the Personnel,
Compensation and Administration Committee of the City Council based on the
relevant facts available regarding the demolition building, the demolition
tax, materials presented in connection with the request for relief under
division (A) above and materials presented in connection with the Manager’s
review provided under this division (B). The determination of the Personnel,
Compensation and Administration Committee shall be final. In connection with
any review or appeal under this division (B), a demolition permit may be
issued upon paying the demolition tax, but any such tax payment shall not
prevent a person from pursuing such review or appeal.



(Ord. 2006-01, passed 2-6-2006)



§ 39.142  GENERAL APPLICABILITY.



   Imposition of the tax imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall not
apply to any demolition for which a complete and proper application for the
demolition permit was on file with the city on or before February 15, 2006,
being the effective date of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-01, passed 2-6-2006)



REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX



§ 39.155  REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   A tax is imposed hereby on the privilege of transferring of
legal or beneficial title to real property and on the privilege of
transferring a beneficial interest in real property (collectively, “real
estate transfers”), when such real property is located within the corporate
limits of the city as evidenced by the recordation of a deed by any person or
by the delivery of any deed or assignment of interest of said real property,
recorded on or after July 5, 2006, whether investing the grantee with the
beneficial interest in, legal title to or a controlling interest in the real
estate entity owning said property or merely investing the grantee in the
possession or use thereof for any purpose or to secure future payment of
money or the future transfer of any such real property. For purposes of this
subchapter, and to the extent permitted by law, a real estate transfer shall
include the transfer of a controlling interest in a real estate entity owning
real property located within the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   The tax imposed shall be at a rate of $4 for every $1,000
value as stated in the declaration; or, if no value is set forth in the
declaration, then the fair market value based on the most recent equalized
assessed valuation (“EAV”); or, if no value can be ascertained from the
EAV, then the lesser of $12,500 or the value established by a certified MAI
appraisal prepared not more than six months prior to the date of the
declaration. Said tax shall be in addition to any other tax imposed by the
state or any other political subdivision thereof; provided, however, that the
actual amount of taxes due pursuant to this section shall in each case be
rounded upward to the next increment of $5.



   (C)   For purposes of this subchapter, terms shall have the same
meaning as the terms defined in the Real Estate Transfer Tax Law, 35 ILCS
200/31, as amended from time to time, unless otherwise defined in this
subchapter or unless the context plainly suggests a different meaning. In
addition, the term DEED as used in this subchapter shall include without
limitation a deed, a document transferring a controlling interest in real
property, an assignment of beneficial interest in real property or any other
document effecting or representing a real estate transfer under this
subchapter. In addition, the terms REAL PROPERTY and REAL ESTATE shall be
deemed to have the same meaning for purposes of this subchapter.



(Ord. 06-18, passed 4-20-2006; Ord. 2010-07, passed 3-15-2010)



§ 39.156  COLLECTION OF TAX; DECLARATION.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in connection with § 39.159, the
taxes levied and imposed in this section, shall be collected for and on
behalf of the city by the City Clerk or the Clerk’s designee through the
sale of a revenue stamp, which shall be prepared by said City Clerk in such
quantities as the Clerk may prescribe. Such revenue stamp shall be available
for sale at the City Clerk’s office during regular business hours of the
City Clerk and/or at other locations or times designated by the City Clerk.



   (B)   (1)   At the time the tax imposed by § 39.155 is paid or
an application is made for exemption there from, there shall also be
presented to the City Clerk or the Clerk’s designee, on a form prescribed
by the Clerk, a declaration signed by at least one of the sellers and also
signed by at least one of the buyers involved in the transaction or by their
attorneys or agents for the sellers or buyers. The declaration shall state
information including, but not limited to:



         (a)   The value of the real property located in the city
subject to a real estate transfer;



         (b)   The parcel identifying number of the property;



         (c)   The date of the deed, the date the transfer was
effected or the date of the trust document;



         (d)   The type of deed, transfer or trust document;



         (e)   The address of the property;



         (f)   The type of improvement, if any, on the property;



         (g)   Information as to whether the transfer is between
related individuals or corporate affiliates or is a compulsory transaction;



         (h)   A written statement by both the grantor or
grantor’s agent and the grantee or grantee’s agent that the information
contained in the declaration is true and correct to the best of his or her
knowledge and belief; and



         (i)   A complete and accurate copy of the declaration to
be submitted pursuant to the Real Estate Transfer Tax Law, 35 ILCS 200/31, as
such law may be amended from time to time.



      (2)   Except as provided in § 39.159, no deed shall be
accepted for recordation unless it bears on its face the transfer stamps of
the city, and no transfer stamps shall be issued unless such deed is
accompanied by a declaration containing all the information requested in the
declaration. When a declaration is signed by an attorney or agent on behalf
of sellers or buyers who have the power of direction to deal with the title
to the real estate under a land trust agreement, the trustee being a mere
repository of record legal title with a duty of conveying the real estate
only when and if directed in writing by the beneficiary or beneficiaries
having the power of direction, the attorneys or agents executing the
declaration on behalf of the sellers or buyers need only identify the land
trust that is the repository of record legal title and not the beneficiary or
beneficiaries having the power of direction under the land trust agreement.



   (C)   Each declaration so presented shall be accompanied by a deed.
In addition to other requirements imposed by law each deed so presented shall
contain the date of the conveyance which it evidences, the legal description
and the permanent tax index number of the real property being conveyed, and
the names of the grantor and grantee; except that, with respect to the
latter, in the case of an assignment of beneficial interest, a facsimile
thereof executed by agents or attorneys as and for each of the grantor and
grantee but otherwise not containing the names or identities of the grantor
and grantee shall be acceptable.



   (D)   The primary liability for payment of said tax shall be borne
by the grantee reflected in the deed unless otherwise negotiated by contract;
provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for the grantee to accept a
conveyance if the transfer tax has not been paid. If at the time of
recordation the tax has not been paid and the stamp visible to the deed, then
the grantee’s title shall be subject to the lien provided in § 39.158, as
well as the penalties set forth in § 39.999. The tax herein levied shall be
in addition to any and all other taxes.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision in this subchapter to the
contrary, the City Clerk or designee shall not issue any transfer stamps for
any real property that:



      (1)   Has any due but unpaid fees, charges, taxes, penalties
or other amounts due to the city unless and until such amounts (plus any
applicable interest) shall have been paid in full;



      (2)   Has any outstanding violations relating to the real
property for which the city has issued notice unless and until every such
violation is corrected;



      (3)   Has any incomplete permit activity unless and until such
activity is completed and inspected in accordance with applicable permits and
codes;



      (4)   Has been the subject of a transfer that is exempt under
§ 39.159 but has not paid the minimum tax (as defined in § 39.159) and any
fines, penalties, or interest relating thereto; or



      (5)   Has not obtained receipts for the final water bill
payment, payment of all amounts due pursuant to § 51.077, and successful
completion of all required inspections related to the closing or transfer of
a water account with the city.



(Ord. 06-18, passed 4-20-2006; Ord. 2010-07, passed 3-15-2010; Ord. 2016-02,
passed 1-19-2016)  Penalty, see § 39.999



§ 39.157  RECORDATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any Recorder of Deeds or agent
thereof and/or any land trustee or agent thereof to accept a deed for
recordation or execution, as the case may be, unless the tax imposed by §
39.155 has been paid and the revenue stamp sold in the collection of said tax
have been made visible on the deed to be recorded.



   (B)   Upon payment of the tax herein levied and imposed, the revenue
stamp so purchased shall be visible on the deed or other instrument of
conveyance. Any person so affixing a revenue stamp shall cancel it and so
deface it as to render it unfit for use by marking it with his or her
initials and the day, month, and year when the affixing occurs. Such markings
shall be made by writing or stamping in indelible ink or by perforating with
a machine or punch. However, any revenue stamp shall not be so defaced as to
prevent ready determination of its denomination and genuineness.



(Ord. 06-18, passed 4-20-2006)  Penalty, see § 39.999



§ 39.158  LIEN CREATED; ENFORCEMENT.



   In the event a deed is filed for recordation for real estate within the
corporate limits of the city without payment of the tax imposed in § 39.155
(as such tax may be reduced pursuant to § 39.159), a lien is hereby created
against said real estate so conveyed in the amount of the tax plus interest
as accrued pursuant to § 39.162. The fact that the deed does not contain a
city revenue stamp in an amount equal to the tax imposed by this subchapter
shall constitute constructive notice of lien. The lien may be enforced by
proceedings for foreclosure, as in cases of mortgages or mechanics’ liens.
Suit to foreclose this lien must be commenced within three years after the
date of recording the deed or the time otherwise prescribed by statute,
whichever is later. Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the city
from bringing a civil action to collect the tax imposed by this subchapter
from any person who has the liability for payment of the same, including
interest and penalties as herein below provided.



(Ord. 06-18, passed 4-20-2006; Ord. 2010-07, passed 3-15-2010)



§ 39.159  DEED EXEMPTED FROM TAX.



   The following deeds shall be exempt from the tax imposed pursuant to
this subchapter (except for the first $50 of the tax imposed pursuant to §
39.155 [the “minimum tax”], which minimum tax shall defray the cost of
processing any exemption):



   (A)   Deeds recorded before July 5, 2006;



   (B)   Deeds representing real estate transfers contracted before May
1, 2006 but recorded on or after July 5, 2006, and trust documents executed
before May 1, 2006 but recorded after July 5, 2006; provided, however, that
in no event shall this exemption apply to any deeds recorded after December
31, 2006. For real estate transfers falling within this exemption, a
declaration shall be filed in accordance with § 39.156 along with a true and
accurate copy of such contract or trust document, and the City Clerk may
affix “exempt” stamps to such deed;



   (C)   Deeds relating to:



      (1)   Real property acquired by any governmental body or from
any governmental body;



      (2)   Property or interests transferred between governmental
bodies; or



      (3)   Property by or from any corporation, society,
association, foundation or institution organized and operated exclusively for
charitable, religious or educational purposes; except that such deeds, other
than those in which the Administrators of Veterans’ Affairs of the United
States of America is the grantee pursuant to a foreclosure proceeding, shall
not be exempt from filing the declaration.



   (D)   Deeds that secure debt or other obligation;



   (E)   Deeds that, without additional consideration, confirm,
correct, modify or supplement a deed previously recorded;



   (F)   Deeds where the actual consideration is less than $100, except
that such deeds shall not be exempt from filing the declaration;



   (G)   Tax deeds;



   (H)   Deeds that release property that is security for a debt or
other obligation;



   (I)   Deeds of partition;



   (J)   Deeds made pursuant to mergers, consolidations, or transfers
of sales of substantially all of the assets of corporations pursuant to plans
of reorganization under plans of reorganization under the Federal Internal
Revenue Code or Title 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Act;



   (K)   Deeds made by a subsidiary corporation to its parent
corporation for no consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of
the subsidiary’s stock;



   (L)   Deeds where there is an actual exchange of real estate or
beneficial interests, except that the money difference or money’s worth
paid from one or the other shall not be exempt from the tax. Such deeds shall
not be exempt from filing the declaration;



   (M)   Deeds issued to holder of a mortgage, or the wholly owned
subsidiary of a holder of a mortgage, pursuant to a mortgage foreclosure
proceeding or pursuant to a transfer in lieu of foreclosure; and



   (N)   A deed related to the purchase of a principal residence by a
participant in the program authorized by the Home Ownership Made Easy Act,
310 ILCS 55/1 et seq., except that those deeds shall not be exempt from
filing the declaration.



(Ord. 06-18, passed 4-20-2006; Ord. 2008-39, passed 11-17-2008; Ord. 2010-07,
passed 3-15-2010; Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-5-2011; Ord. 2016-02, passed
1-19-2016)



§ 39.160  RESERVED.



§ 39.161  ENFORCEMENT; SUIT FOR COLLECTION.



   Whenever any person required under the terms of this subchapter to pay
the taxes or any portion thereof required to be paid as provided in this
subchapter shall fail to pay any such taxes, or whenever any purchaser or
grantee shall accept a deed of conveyance where the applicable tax imposed by
this subchapter has not been paid, said person shall be subject to a fine.



(Ord. 06-18, passed 4-20-2006; Ord. 2008-39, passed 11-17-2008)  Penalty,
see § 39.999



§ 39.162  INTEREST.



   In the event of failure by any person to pay to the Finance Clerk the
tax required hereunder when the same shall be due, interest shall accumulate
and be due upon said tax at the rate of 1% per month, commencing as of the
first day following the day when the tax becomes due.



(Ord. 06-18, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 39.163  PROCEEDS OF TAX.



   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax, including any
interest, shall be paid to the city and shall be credited to and deposited in
the city’s Capital Improvement Fund. Proceeds from any penalties collected
under this subchapter shall be deposited in the city’s General Fund.



(Ord. 06-18, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 39.164  REFUNDS.



   (A)   A grantee, assignee or purchaser (hereinafter referred to as
“taxpayer”) who has purchased a dwelling unit in the city (the
“purchased dwelling unit”) and has paid or caused to be paid to the City
Clerk or the Clerk’s designee the tax provided for in § 39.155 shall be
entitled to a refund equal to the lesser of the amount of such tax or $2,000;
provided such taxpayer satisfies the following requirements:



Either:



      (1)   Taxpayer as seller-purchaser. The taxpayer must meet all
of the following requirements:



         (a)   The taxpayer has sold a dwelling unit in the city
not more than one year prior to acquiring the purchased dwelling unit for
which any tax imposed under § 39.155 of this subchapter was timely and fully
paid (the “sold dwelling unit”);



         (b)   The taxpayer had occupied the sold dwelling unit
as taxpayer’s principal residence for at least three years prior to sale;



         (c)   The taxpayer has either:



            1.   Purchased and occupied as taxpayer’s
principal residence the purchased dwelling unit within one year after the
closing on the sale of the sold dwelling unit and has not been the legal or
beneficial owner of another dwelling unit occupied as taxpayer’s principal
residence during such one year period; or



            2.   The taxpayer has entered into a valid and
binding contract, dated not later than 60 days after the closing on the sale
of the sold dwelling unit, to purchase a newly constructed or renovated
purchased dwelling unit within the corporate limits of the city, but is
unable to occupy such newly constructed or renovated purchased dwelling unit
within the time period specified in division (A)(1)(a) above solely because a
certificate of occupancy has not been issued by the city for such newly
constructed or renovated purchased dwelling unit. The refund due under this
division (A)(1)(c)2. shall be paid to the taxpayer only upon actual occupancy
of the newly constructed or renovated purchased dwelling unit by the taxpayer
as his or her principal residence; and



         (d)   The tax due on the purchased dwelling unit was
timely and fully paid in accordance with this subchapter.



Or:



      (2)   Taxpayer as purchaser-seller. The taxpayer must meet all
of the following requirements:



         (a)   The taxpayer had purchased a purchased dwelling
unit for which any tax imposed under § 39.155 was timely and fully paid not
more than one year prior to selling the sold dwelling unit;



         (b)   The taxpayer had occupied the sold dwelling unit
as taxpayer’s principal residence for at least three years prior to the
purchase of the purchased dwelling unit;



         (c)   The taxpayer has occupied as taxpayer’s
principal residence the purchased dwelling unit within one year before the
closing on the sale of the sold dwelling unit and has not been the legal or
beneficial owner of another dwelling unit occupied as taxpayer’s principal
residence during such one-year period; and



         (d)   The tax due on the sold dwelling unit was timely
and fully paid in accordance with this subchapter.



   (B)   No taxpayer shall be entitled to a refund under this section
unless a completed application therefor shall have been filed with the City
Clerk within one year after the payment of the real estate transfer tax for
the purchased dwelling unit for which a refund is sought. The taxpayer shall
bear the burden of delivering evidence satisfactory to the City Clerk of
taxpayer’s entitlement to such refund.



(Ord. 06-18, passed 4-20-2006; Ord. 2008-39, passed 11-17-2008; Ord. 2009-29,
passed 11-16-2009; Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



§ 39.165  RULES.



   The City Manager may establish and adopt rules, regulations and
materials as the Manager deems necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the
implementation and efficient and effective administration of this subchapter.



(Ord. 06-18, passed 4-20-2006)



§ 39.166  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person who shall be subject to the tax pursuant to this
subchapter, or any applicant for exemption or refund under §§ 39.159 or
39.164, who disputes the imposition of or amount of the tax imposed pursuant
to this subchapter or a determination under §§ 39.159 or 39.164 may seek a
review of such imposition or amount of the real estate transfer tax or the
determination under either §§ 39.159 or 39.164 by filing with the City
Manager, within 30 days after the notification of the transfer tax amount or
the determination on a request for exemption or refund under §§ 39.159 or
39.164, respectively, a request for review. The request for review shall set
forth in detail the basis for the dispute of the imposition, amount or
determination relating to the transfer tax, an exemption therefrom or a
refund. The City Manager shall thereafter consider the request for review
determine whether the tax should be waived, reduced or refunded, and provide
a written determination thereof; in connection with the City Manager’s
consideration of an appeal, the City Manager may require the person filing
the appeal to provide an appraisal of the subject property, which appraisal
shall be a certified MAI appraisal prepared not more than six months prior to
the date of the appeal. If such person seeks further review of the imposition
or amount of the transfer tax or determination of exemption or refund under
§§ 39.159 or 39.164, respectively, such person shall file a request to
appeal the determination of the City Manager with the City Clerk within 30
days after mailing of the determination by the City Manager; such appeal
shall be considered by the Personnel, Compensation, and Administration
Committee of the City Council based on the relevant facts available regarding
the real estate transfer in question and the materials presented in
connection with the request for exemption under § 39.159 or for refund under
§ 39.164, as well as materials presented in connection with the Manager’s
review provided under this section. The determination of the Personnel,
Compensation, and Administration Committee shall be final. In connection with
any review or appeal under this section, transfer stamps may be issued upon
paying the real estate transfer tax, but any such tax payment shall not
prevent a person from pursuing such review or appeal.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, an applicant for a refund under
§ 39.164 may appeal to the Personnel, Compensation and Administration
Committee for a variance from the requirements for refunds set forth in §
39.164 upon a showing of hardship such as an act of God or medical necessity.
Such hardship appeal shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of
this section.



(Ord. 06-18, passed 4-20-2006; Ord. 2010-07, passed 3-15-2010; Ord. 2017-30,
passed 4-17-2017)



E-911 SURCHARGE AND ETS BOARD



§ 39.180  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The state has enacted into law the Emergency Telephone System
Act (the “Act”), being 50 ILCS 750, which enables counties and
municipalities to impose a surcharge on telecommunication carriers at a rate
per network connection in order to support and maintain a 911 emergency
telephone system. The Act allows the telecommunication carrier to recover the
surcharge including a 3% collection charge from its subscriber residing
within the corporate limits of the county or municipality imposing the
surcharge, provided that before the surcharge may be imposed, it must be
authorized by a majority of the voters in a referendum by the county or
municipality.



   (B)   Pursuant to the Act, a referendum was placed on the April 4,
1989 ballot asking all legal voters residing in the city to vote upon the
following question:



“Shall the City of Lake Forest impose a surcharge of up to 65 cents per
month per network connection telecommunication carriers, which surcharge
expense (the surcharge plus a statutory accounting charge) will be added to
the monthly bill you receive for telephone or telecommunications charges for
the purpose of installing (or improving) a 911 emergency telephone system?



                        yes                    
no”



   (C)   A majority of the votes approved the referendum question.



   (D)   The City Council deems it to be in the best interest of the
residents of the city to provide an E-911 emergency telephone system and to
impose a surcharge on telecommunication carriers to be passed through to its
subscribers to pay for the costs associated therewith.



(Ord. 2009-05, passed 1-20-2009)



§ 39.181  IMPOSITION OF E-911 SURCHARGE.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, a surcharge
is hereby imposed at a rate per month, as set out in the fee schedule, per
in-service network connection (as hereinafter defined) upon all
telecommunication carriers engaged in the business of transmitting messages
by means of electricity originating within the corporate limits of the city
and terminating within the state for funding of an E-911 emergency telephone
system.



   (B)   A network connection shall not be deemed to be in service
where a subscriber’s account is deemed uncollectible by the
telecommunication carrier.



(Ord. 2009-05, passed 1-20-2009)



§ 39.182  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NETWORK CONNECTIONS. The number of voice grade communications channels
directly between a subscriber and a telecommunications carrier’s public
switched network without the intervention of any other telecommunications
earner’s switched network which would be required to carry the
subscriber’s interpremises traffic.



   TRANSMITTING MESSAGES. The meaning ascribed to the term in 65 ILCS
5/8-11-2.



   TELECOMMUNICATION CARRIER. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court
engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity.



(Ord. 2009-05, passed 1-20-2009)



§ 39.183  EXEMPTIONS.



   The City Clerk shall provide any telecommunication carrier subject to
the surcharge with a certified list of those network connections assigned to
the city to be exempt from imposition of the surcharge. The certified list
may be revised by the city on 60 days’ prior written notice provided to the
telecommunication carriers.



(Ord. 2009-05, passed 1-20-2009)



§ 39.184  REMITTANCE OF SURCHARGE.



   Every telecommunication carrier shall remit to the city the amount of
surcharge due and owing for each calendar month within 30 days following
expiration of each month to which the surcharge applies, net of any network
or other 911 or sophisticated 911 system charge then due the particular
telecommunication carrier as shown on an itemized bill.



(Ord. 2009-05, passed 1-20-2009)



§ 39.185  CARRIER RETURNS.



   Simultaneously with the remittance subscribed in § 39.184, each
telecommunication carrier shall make a return to the city for the period to
which the remittance applies stating as follows:



   (A)   The name of the telecommunication earner;



   (B)   The telecommunication carrier’s principal place of business;



   (C)   The number of network connections to which the surcharge
applies;



   (D)   The amount of surcharge due; and



   (E)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.



(Ord. 2009-05, passed 1-20-2009)



§ 39.186  CREDITS TO CARRIERS.



   If it shall appear that an amount of surcharge has been paid which was
not due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any surcharge due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the
telecommunication carrier who made the erroneous payments; provided that no
amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim
therefore shall be so credited.



(Ord. 2009-05, passed 1-20-2009)



§ 39.187  EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD CREATED; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   An Emergency Telephone System Board is hereby established that
shall consist of the Mayor, all sitting aldermen, the Police Chief, Police
Deputy of Administration and Fire Chief. Members of the Board shall serve
without compensation but shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary
expenses.



   (B)   The powers and duties of the Board shall include, but need not
be limited to the following:



      (1)   Planning a 911 system;



      (2)   Coordinating and supervising the implementation,
upgrading or maintenance of the system, including the establishment of
equipment specifications and coding systems;



      (3)   Receiving moneys from the surcharge imposed under this
subchapter and from any other source, for deposit into the emergency
telephone system account;



      (4)   Authorizing all disbursements from the account; and



      (5)   Hiring, on a temporary basis, any staff necessary for
the implementation or upgrade of the system.



   (C)   All moneys received by the Board pursuant to a surcharge
imposed shall be deposited into an emergency telephone system account. All
interest accruing in the account shall be credited to such account. No
expenditures may be made from such account except upon the direction of the
Board by resolution passed by a majority of all members of the Board.
Expenditures may be made only to pay for the costs associated with the
following:



      (1)   The design of the emergency telephone system to include
the CAD (Computer Aided Dispatch) system;



      (2)   The coding of an initial master street address guide
database, and update and maintenance thereof;



      (3)   The repayment of any moneys advanced for the
implementation of the system;



      (4)   The charges for automatic number identification and
automatic location identification equipment, and maintenance, replacement and
update thereof;



      (5)   The non-recurring charges related to installation of the
emergency telephone system and the ongoing network charges; and



      (6)   Other products and services necessary for the
implementation, upgrade, and maintenance of the ETS and CAD systems. Such
costs may include expenses relating to personnel, equipment or facilities
associated with the answering, dispatching and responding to calls for
emergency service.



(Ord. 2009-05, passed 1-20-2009; Ord. 2013-06, passed 1-22-2013)



MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX



§ 39.200  TAX FOR SALES OF SERVICE.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality
in the business of making sales of service at the rate of 1% of the cost
price of all tangible personal property transferred by said service persons
either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real
estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions
of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5.



(Prior Code, § 23-19)  (Ord. 758, passed 8-16-1969)



§ 39.201  REPORT TO BE FILED.



   Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of this municipality shall file, on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of
Revenue required by § 9 of the Service Occupation Tax Act, enacted by the
Seventy-Second General Assembly.



(Prior Code, § 23-20)  (Ord. 551, passed 8-7-1961)



§ 39.202  PAYMENT OF TAX.



   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.



(Prior Code, § 23-21)  (Ord. 551, passed 8-7-1961)



MUNICIPAL LEASING OCCUPATION TAX



§ 39.215  TAX FOR RENTING OR LEASING PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the city in the
business of renting or leasing tangible personal property to the users
thereof at the rate of 0.5% of the gross receipts from such renting or
leasing made in the course of such business while this subchapter is in
effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-6.



(Prior Code, § 23-28)  (Ord. 682, passed 4-4-1966)



§ 39.216  REPORT TO BE FILED.



   Every person engaged in such business in this municipality shall file
with the State Department of Revenue the return in the manner as required by
§ 5 of the Leasing Occupation Tax Act as adopted by the Seventy-Fourth
General Assembly.



(Prior Code, § 23-29)  (Ord. 682, passed 4-4-1966)



§ 39.217  PAYMENT OF TAX.



   At the time such return is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
receipts from renting or leasing tangible personal property during the
preceding month.



(Prior Code, § 23-30)  (Ord. 682, passed 4-4-1966)



TAXPAYERS’ RIGHTS



§ 39.230  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY TAX. A tax imposed, and collected or administered, by the city.
CITY TAX does not include a tax imposed upon real property under the State
Property Tax Code or fees collected by the city, except, however, that CITY
TAX does include the city’s infrastructure maintenance fees. In addition,
fees due to the city from a franchisee under a franchise agreement with the
city shall be treated in the same manner as a city tax under this subchapter
(except where otherwise provided in the franchise agreement), but shall not
be considered a tax for any other purpose.



   CITY TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The city’s Finance Director or his or her
authorized designee.



   TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any city tax. The term TAXPAYER
generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and, with respect to consumer taxes, includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the city tax to the city.



(Prior Code, § 39-80)  (Ord. 00-47, passed 12-4-2000; Ord. 2009-06, passed
3-2-2009)



§ 39.231  APPLICATION OF PAYMENTS.



   The city shall apply any payment or remittance received pursuant to a
city tax for a tax period in the following order:



   (A)   First: to the tax due for that period;



   (B)   Second: to interest due for the period; and



   (C)   Third: to penalties due for the period.



(Prior Code, § 39-81)  (Ord. 00-47, passed 12-4-2000)



§ 39.232  LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Limitation on determination of tax or assessment. Subject to
the provisions of division (B) below, and unless a specific section of the
city code provides for a shorter time period, the city shall not issue a
determination of tax due or assessment:



      (1)   More than four years after the end of the calendar year
that the return for the period was filed, or the end of the calendar year
that the return for the period was due, whichever occurs later; or



      (2)   More than six years after the end of the calendar year
that the return for the period was due or the end of the calendar year that
the return for the period was filed, whichever occurs later, if a taxpayer
failed to file a tax return, or if the taxpayer paid or remitted less than
75% of the tax due during any four-year period that the city may issue a
notice of tax determination or assessment.



   (B)   Exception if fraud. Notwithstanding the provisions of division
(A) above, there shall be no time limitation imposed on a determination or
assessment of a city tax if the taxpayer filed a fraudulent tax return.



(Prior Code, § 39-82)  (Ord. 00-47, passed 12-4-2000)



§ 39.233  AUDIT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Notice. The city shall notify a taxpayer in writing of a
proposed city audit of that taxpayer’s books and records.



   (B)   Content of notice. Such notice shall specify the tax and time
period to be audited and shall detail the minimum documentation or books and
records that the taxpayer must make available to the city-appointed auditor.



   (C)   Audit timing. Audits shall be held only during reasonable
times of the day and, unless impracticable, at times agreed to by the
taxpayer.



   (D)   Overpayments. A city-appointed auditor who determines that
there has been an overpayment of tax during the course of the audit shall
identify the overpayment to the taxpayer so that the taxpayer can take the
necessary steps to recover the overpayment. If the overpayment is the result
of the application of some or all of the taxpayer’s tax payment to an
incorrect city entity, then the auditor shall notify the correct city entity
of the taxpayer’s application error.



(Prior Code, § 39-83)  (Ord. 00-47, passed 12-4-2000; Ord. 2009-06, passed
3-2-2009; Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



§ 39.234  NOTICE OF TAX ASSESSMENT.



   (A)   Notice of rights. Whenever the city sends a protestable notice
of tax due, or a bill, or a claim denial or a notice of claim reduction
regarding any tax to a taxpayer, such notice shall include a written
statement of rights, which shall include the following information:



      (1)   The reason for the assessment;



      (2)   The amount of the city tax liability proposed;



      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment;



      (4)   The obligations of the city during the audit appeal,
refund and collection process;



      (5)   A statement that the taxpayer shall have 45 days after
service of the notice to protest a notice of tax determination or notice of
tax liability; and



      (6)   A statement that the taxpayer may request a hearing with
the City Tax Administrator.



   (B)   Delivery; receipt. The city shall send such notice by United
States registered or certified mail. Such notice shall be deemed received by
the taxpayer upon actual receipt or on the third business day after the city
deposits the notice in any main or branch United States post office.



   (C)   Time extension if good cause. Upon a showing of good cause by
the taxpayer satisfactory to the City Tax Administrator, the City Tax
Administrator may extend the 45-day protest period by an additional period of
time not exceeding 30 days. The City Tax Administrator, upon a showing of
good cause, also may open up any closed protest period, but only for a period
of time not exceeding 30 days.



(Prior Code, § 39-84)  (Ord. 00-47, passed 12-4-2000)



§ 39.235  APPEALS PROCESS FOR CREDITS, REFUNDS AND PROTEST.



   (A)   Appeal; procedure. Any taxpayer who desires to seek a credit
or a refund or desires to appeal a determination of tax due or an assessment
pursuant to a city tax shall adhere to the following procedures:



      (1)   File a request for credit or refund with the City Tax
Administrator on a form provided by the city or, within 45 days after receipt
of the city’s protestable notice, file a written protest on a form provided
by the city;



      (2)   Provide any supportive documents or other evidence that
may display that the city’s assessment of the tax was unauthorized, and
direct such protest or request to the City Tax Administrator; and



      (3)   Make any books or records of its business or activity
available for audit or inspection upon the written request of the city.



   (B)   Hearing. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a
request for credit or refund or a timely written protest, and has requested a
hearing, the City Tax Administrator shall conduct a hearing in the following
manner.



      (1)   The City Tax Administrator shall fix the time and place
for a hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing
shall be scheduled for a date within 14 days after receipt of the request for
the hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all
parties.



      (2)   No continuances of the hearing shall be granted after it
has been scheduled, except in cases when a continuance is absolutely
necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days.



      (3)   The City Tax Administrator shall preside at the hearing
and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit, or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply.



   (C)   City determination. The City Tax Administrator, by United
States registered or certified mail, shall send to the taxpayer the Tax
Administrator’s written determination regarding the taxpayer’s protest
within 45 days after receiving the taxpayer’s written protest or credit or
refund form if the taxpayer does not request a hearing, or within 30 days
after the conclusion of a hearing. Such determination shall include:



      (1)   A ruling as to whether the city tax as a whole or any
portion of it was unauthorized;



      (2)   A written determination as to why the city tax or any
portion of it was authorized; and



      (3)   If appropriate, a certified check equaling the
unauthorized amount paid by the taxpayer and the applicable amount of
interest.



   (D)   No refund if voluntary payment. The city shall not be required
to refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the
time of payment in the event that a city tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid a city tax voluntarily if the taxpayer
lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the city taxes at the
time of payment or if the taxpayer paid such taxes under duress.



   (E)   No credits or refunds if no remittance. The city shall not be
required to grant a credit, refund of taxes, interest or penalties to a
person who has not paid or remitted the amounts directly to the city.



   (F)   Four-year limitation. Unless otherwise specifically provided
in this city code or other city ordinance authorizing a city tax, no claim
for a credit or refund shall be made more than four years after the date of
the erroneous payment.



   (G)   Interest if overpayment. The city shall pay interest for a
taxpayer’s overpayment of tax. The interest rate to be applied shall be
based upon the Chicago-area Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers
(CPI-U).



(Prior Code, § 39-85)  (Ord. 00-47, passed 12-4-2000; Ord. 2016-02, passed
1-19-2016)



§ 39.236  INTEREST.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, or as otherwise provided pursuant
to the terms of a franchise agreement, interest in the amount of 9% per year
shall be assessed against all late payments, underpayments and non-payments
of a city tax.



(Prior Code, § 39-86)  (Ord. 00-47, passed 12-4-2000; Ord. 2009-06, passed
3-2-2009)



§ 39.237  INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.



   (A)   If the city shall enter into an agreement allowing a taxpayer
to make payments by installments, then the city shall not cancel such
installment agreement except if:



      (1)   The taxpayer fails to pay any amount due on time and
fails to cure the delinquency in the allowable time provided by the city; or



      (2)   The taxpayer fails to demonstrate good faith in
restructuring the installment agreement.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed or applied to
require the city to enter into any installment agreement.



(Prior Code, § 39-87)  (Ord. 00-47, passed 12-4-2000)



§ 39.238  VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.



   (A)   Application. A taxpayer may file an application, on a form
prepared by the city, with the City Tax Administrator for a voluntary
disclosure of the tax due for any city tax that a taxpayer has not received a
written notice of an audit, investigation or assessment from the City Tax
Administrator.



   (B)   Payment and interest required. A taxpayer who files a
voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of the city tax
due, plus interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior to the filing of
the application, but not more than four years before the date of filing the
application.



   (C)   No extra liability. Except for the payment of the full amount
of tax and interest due under this section, a taxpayer filing a valid
voluntary disclosure application shall not be liable for any additional tax,
interest or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed;
provided, however, that if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid
the amount of tax due as provided in this section, then the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax. If the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer,
then the application shall be deemed invalid and void.



   (D)   Time limitation for payment. The payment of tax and interest
required under this section shall be made within 90 days after the filing of
the voluntary disclosure application, or the date agreed to in writing by the
City Tax Administrator, whichever is longer. However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under
this section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed, or the date agreed
to by the City Tax Administrator, whichever is longer.



(Prior Code, § 39-88)  (Ord. 00-47, passed 12-4-2000)



§ 39.239  REVIEW OF LIENS.



   The City Tax Administrator shall establish, by administrative order of
the city, a process of reviewing liens filed by the city against taxpayers.
If any lien is determined to be improper, then the City Tax Administrator
shall cause such lien to be removed at the city’s own expense, shall
correct the taxpayer’s credit record, and shall correct any public
disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.



(Prior Code, § 39-89)  (Ord. 00-47, passed 12-4-2000)



§ 39.240  PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.



   (A)   The city shall publish its taxing ordinances and shall make
copies of its taxing ordinances readily available to the public on request.
The posting of such tax ordinances on the internet shall be deemed to satisfy
the publication requirement of this section.



   (B)   For fees due under a franchise agreement and governed by this
subchapter, the provision of a fully executed copy of the franchise agreement
to the franchisee shall be deemed sufficient notice of the fees.



(Prior Code, § 39-90)  (Ord. 00-47, passed 12-4-2000; Ord. 2009-06, passed
3-2-2009)



§ 39.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Telecommunications provider. Any telecommunications provider
who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the
provisions of §§ 39.105 through 39.112 shall be subject to the penalties
provided in division (D) below.



(Prior Code, § 39-65)



   (C)   Hotel tax. The failure to collect and remit to the city any
tax imposed by § 39.125 or any part thereof shall be a violation punishable
by a fine not to exceed $750 and each failure shall be deemed a separate
offense.



(Prior Code, § 39-70)



   (D)   Taxpayers’ rights.



      (1)   Late filing and payment penalty. If a return is filed
late, then the taxpayer shall pay a penalty for such late filing of 5% of the
amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return. If the taxpayer makes
a late payment, then the taxpayer shall pay a penalty of 5% of the tax due
and not timely paid or remitted. Late filing and payment penalties shall not
apply to a particular taxpayer if, but only if, a failure to file penalty is
imposed on that taxpayer by the city. The City Tax Administrator may
determine, in the sole exercise of his or her sound judgment, that the late
filing or late payment was due to a reasonable cause and abate some or all
the penalty.



      (2)   Failure to file penalty. If no return is filed before
the issuance of a notice of tax deficiency or of tax liability to the
taxpayer, then the penalty for such failure to file shall be 25% of the total
tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required
to have been filed. A City Tax Administrator may determine, in the sole
exercise of his or her sound judgment, that the failure to file a return was
due to reasonable cause and abate some or all of the penalty.



      (3)   Additional penalties. In the event that any taxpayer
noncompliance with the provisions of a city tax is a result of willful or
fraudulent disregard of the city tax laws, such taxpayer shall be
additionally subject to the general penalty provisions of the city code
(including any criminal penalties) and, in addition, shall be liable in a
civil action for the full amount of the tax due plus the applicable amount of
interest.



(Prior Code, § 39-91)



   (E)   Real estate transfer tax.



      (1)   Whenever any person required under the terms of §§
39.155 through 39.166 to pay the taxes or any portion thereof required to be
paid as provided in §§ 39.155 through 39.166 shall fail to pay any such
taxes, or whenever any purchaser or grantee shall accept a deed of conveyance
where the applicable tax imposed by §§ 39.155 through 39.166 has not been
paid, said person shall be subject to a fine of not less than:



         (a)   Two hundred and fifty dollars per day for the
first ten days after recordation of the deed;



         (b)   Five hundred dollars per day for the eleventh
through twentieth days after recordation of the deed; and



         (c)   One thousand dollars per day for every day
thereafter.



      (2)   Any person who fails to file a declaration or
notification as required under §§ 39.155 through 39.166 or who makes a
materially false statement in such declaration, notification or any other
application or submittal under §§ 39.155 through 39.166 shall be subject to
a fine of $750 per violation, and each day that passes without making a
required filing or correcting a material false statement shall be deemed a
separate violation of this code. The City Corporation Counsel shall, upon
request of the City Manager, bring or cause to be brought an action to
enforce the payment of said tax, including interest and penalties as provided
in §§ 39.155 through 39.166, on behalf of the city in any court of
competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 97-54, passed 11-20-1997; Ord. 98-13, passed 5-21-1998; Ord. 00-47,
passed 12-4-2000; Ord. 06-18, passed 4-20-2006; Ord. 2008-39, passed
11-17-2008)



CHAPTER 40:  GOVERNMENTAL ETHICS



Section



General Provisions



   40.01   Policy and purpose



   40.02   Definitions



   40.03   Interest in contracts or transactions



   40.04   Disclosure of information



   40.05   Appearance before city agencies, boards and the like



   40.06   Duties to uphold ethics policy



   40.07   Private use of public property



   40.08   Special treatment of others



   40.09   Disclosure of interest



   40.10   Annual disclosure statements



   40.11   Interpretation



Gift Ban and Prohibited Political Activities



   40.25   Definitions



   40.26   Gifts



   40.27   Prohibited political activities



   40.28   Ethics Officer



   40.29   Ethics Commission



   40.30   Interpretation



 



   40.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 40.01  POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is essential to the proper operation of democratic
government that public officials be independent and impartial; that
governmental decisions and policy be made through proper channels; and in
accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, being 5 ILCS 120, and other
statutes and laws governing conduct by public officials; and public office
not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the
integrity of government. Public officials and employees must serve their
government in a fiduciary capacity and must not bestow special consideration
upon any person merely because of that person’s relationship to an official
or employee. The attainment of these ends is impaired whenever there exists
conflict between the private interests of a public official or employee and
his or her duties as such. The public interest therefore requires that the
law protect against such conflicts of interest and establish appropriate
ethical standards with respect to the conduct of elected officials and
government employees in situations where conflicts exist, as well as in
situations where conflicts might develop.



   (B)   It is also essential to the proper operation of government
that those best qualified be encouraged to serve the government. Accordingly,
legal safeguards against conflicts of interest must be so designed as not
unnecessarily or unreasonably to impede the recruitment and retention by the
government of those men and women who are best qualified to serve it. The
right of each official and employee to privacy in his or her financial
affairs must not, therefore, be limited beyond that disclosure necessary to
ensure the integrity of government. Moreover, because an essential principle
underlying the staffing of our government is that its officials and employees
should not be denied the opportunity, available to all other citizens, to
acquire and retain private economic and other interests, such opportunity
should not be limited unless conflicts with the responsibility of such
officials and employees to the public cannot be avoided.



   (C)   It is the policy and purpose of this chapter to implement
these objectives of protecting the integrity of the city and of facilitating
the recruitment and retention of qualified personnel by prescribing essential
restrictions against conflicts of interest in city government without
creating unnecessary barriers to public service and by establishing a Code of
Ethics for officials and employees of the city.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)



§ 40.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      COMPENSATION. Any money, thing of value or other pecuniary
benefit received or to be received in return for, or as reimbursement for,
services rendered or to be rendered.



      CONTRIBUTION, CANDIDATE and AUTHORIZED POLITICAL COMMITTEE. As
used herein shall be defined as provided in 10 ILCS 5/9-1.3 of the Illinois
Election Code.



      FINANCIAL INTEREST. Any economic interest or relationship,
whether by ownership, trust, purchase, sale, lease, contract, option,
investment, employment, gift, fee or otherwise; whether present, promised, or
reasonably expected; whether direct or indirect, including interests as a
consultant, representative or other person receiving (or who may be
receiving) remuneration, either directly or indirectly, as a result of a
contract, transaction or activity; whether or not legally enforceable;
whether in the person itself or in a parent or subsidiary corporation, or in
another subsidiary of the same parent. An INDIRECT FINANCIAL INTEREST shall
include, but is expressly not limited to, any economic interest, as set forth
above, of a spouse, minor child or relative, as well as any economic interest
held by an agent on behalf of an official or employee, his or her spouse or
minor child, by a business entity managed or controlled by, or by a trust
which an official or employee has a substantial interest. A business entity
is controlled by an official or employee when he or she, his or her spouse,
minor child or relative, singly or in the aggregate, possess a majority
ownership interest in the entity. An official or employee has a substantial
interest in a trust when he or she, his or her spouse or his or her minor
child, singly or in the aggregate, have a present or future interest worth
more than $1,000. FINANCIAL INTEREST shall not include ownership through
purchase at fair market value of less than 1% of the shares of a parent,
subsidiary or other affiliated corporation whose shares are registered on a
national securities exchange pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
FINANCIAL INTEREST shall also not include authorized compensation or salary
paid to an official or employee for services rendered to the city, or any
economic benefit provided equally to all residents of the city.



      OFFICIAL or EMPLOYEE. Any person elected or appointed to any
office, board or commission of or employed by the city, whether paid or
unpaid and whether part-time or full-time.



      PERSON. Any individual, entity, corporation, proprietorship,
partnership, firm, association, trade union, trust, estate or group, as well
as any parent or subsidiary of any of the foregoing entities, whether or not
operated for profit.



      PROHIBITED ACTIVITY. The bestowing of special consideration upon
any person merely because of that person’s relationship to an official or
employee.



   (B)   As used throughout this chapter, all masculine terms shall
include their feminine counterparts and all singular terms shall include
their plural counterparts.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004; Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)



§ 40.03  INTEREST IN CONTRACTS OR TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   No public official or employee shall perform or participate in
an official act or action with regard to a transaction in which he or she has
or knows he or she will thereafter acquire an interest.



   (B)   No public official or employee shall acquire an interest in or
be affected by any transaction or the subject matter thereof at a time when
the public official or employee believes or has reason to believe that such
transaction will directly or indirectly be affected by an official act or
action.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)  Penalty, see § 40.99



§ 40.04  DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION.



   No public official or employee with respect to any transaction which is
or which is reasonably expected to become the subject of an official act or
action, shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential
information concerning the property, government or affairs of the city or use
of such information to advance the interest of such public official or
employee or his or her family members.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)  Penalty, see § 40.99



§ 40.05  APPEARANCE BEFORE CITY AGENCIES, BOARDS AND THE LIKE.



   No public official or employee and no member of any agency, board,
committee or commission on any matter within the jurisdiction of such agency,
board, committee or commission shall appear on behalf of any person or entity
(other than the city itself) before any city agency, board, committee or
commission. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an official or employee may appear
before a city agency, board, committee or commission on behalf of himself,
herself or an immediate family member with respect to such person’s
property.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)  Penalty, see § 40.99



§ 40.06  DUTIES TO UPHOLD ETHICS POLICY.



   Public officials have the affirmative duty to maintain their neutrality
in a public hearing before any city board or commission. The chair of the
board or commission has the affirmative duty to report any perceived
violation of this chapter to the Audit Committee for its timely review and
recommendation of action to the City Council. In addition, any official or
employee should report any circumstances that may give rise to a violation of
this chapter to the Mayor, City Manager or the Chairperson of the Audit
Committee for review. No person who makes a good faith report of an actual or
perceived violation, or of circumstances that may give rise to any such
violation, shall face any discipline or other retaliation as a consequence of
such report.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)  Penalty, see § 40.99



§ 40.07  PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No public official or employee shall request or permit the use of city
owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or
profit except as allowed by administrative order of the city.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)  Penalty, see § 40.99



§ 40.08  SPECIAL TREATMENT OF OTHERS.



   No public official or employee shall grant any special consideration,
treatment or advantage to any person or business entity beyond that which is
available to every other citizen.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)  Penalty, see § 40.99



§ 40.09  DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST.



   Any public official or employee who has (or whose family members have)
an interest is a transaction which is the subject of an official act or
action shall disclose on the record of the board or commission which performs
such official act or to the City Manager, in the case of employees, the
nature and extent of such interest.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)  Penalty, see § 40.99



§ 40.10  ANNUAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS.



   (A)   For purpose of this chapter, each elected and appointed
official of the city, as well as each appointee and employee who is required
by 5 ILCS 420/4A-101 to file statement of economic interest shall file such
statement with the city as herein provided.



   (B)   By May 1 of each year, such statement must be filed by each
person whose position at that time requires him or her to file, unless he or
she has already filed a statement in that calendar year. Such statement shall
be a signed photocopy or signed duplicate of the statement of economic
interest as required by 5 ILCS 420/4A-101 that is required to be filed with
the County Clerk. Such statement shall be filed with the City Clerk. If a
person required to file such statement fails to file by May 1 of any year,
the City Clerk shall notify such person within seven days after May 1 or his
or her failure to file and such person shall not be considered in violation
of this chapter for failure to file such statement until the later of seven
days after delivery of such notice from the City Clerk or May 15 of any year.
Upon any request to review these statements, the City Clerk will follow the
same procedures followed by the County Clerk and notify the person filing the
statement.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004; Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016)  Penalty,
see § 40.99



§ 40.11  INTERPRETATION.



   It is recognized that no written Code of Ethics of this nature can
provide specifically for all possible contingencies. Any questions regarding
the propriety of any transaction or the proper interpretation of this chapter
may be brought to the City Council at any time. The Council shall submit any
question of impropriety or alleged violation of this chapter to the Audit
Committee for investigation and review. The Audit Committee shall notify the
individual who is the subject of such investigation that such investigation
is taking place, the originator of the accusation and the specific charges,
and shall report to the City Council, upon determination by a majority of the
committee, that there is reason to believe that a violation of this chapter
has occurred, that no violation has occurred, or that some other legislative
action is required to address the alleged violation. The City Council shall
then either uphold, reject or modify the recommendation of the Committee.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)  Penalty, see § 40.99



GIFT BAN AND PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES



§ 40.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any activity in furtherance of an effort
to influence the selection, nomination, election or appointment of any
individual to any federal, state or local public office or office in a
political organization, or the selection, nomination or election of
Presidential or Vice Presidential electors, but does not include activities:



      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative or administrative action, as those terms are defined in § 2 of
the Lobbyist Registration Act, 25 ILCS 170/2;



      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining, as defined in § 3 of
the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act, 5 ILCS 315/3; or



      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s
official duties.



   CANDIDATE. Any person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to
fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the
ballot at either a general primary election or general election.



   COMPENSATED TIME. With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to an employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment but, for purposes of this
chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer or employee is
on the premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the
officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of
location.



   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF. Any authorized time off earned by or awarded to
an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of
the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.



   EMPLOYEE. All full-time, part-time and contractual employees of the
city.



   GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan,
forbearance or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value
including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for
speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or
the official position of an officer or employee.



   INTER-OFFICE GIFT. Any gift given to an officer or employee of the city
from a member of the State General Assembly; or from the Governor, the
Lieutenant Governor, the Attorney General, the Secretary of State, the
Controller, the Treasurer or the Auditor General of the state; or from a
member, officer, appointee or employee of any state agency as defined in the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., or of any
federal agency, or of any unit of local government or school district.



   INTRA-OFFICE GIFT. Any gift given to an officer or employee of the city
from another officer or employee of the city.



   LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive:



      (1)   Compensation for employment;



      (2)   Service credit towards pension benefits; and



      (3)   Health insurance benefits paid for by the city.



   OFFICER. All appointed and elected officials of the city, regardless of
whether the official is compensated.



   POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with
any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:



      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative or administrative action;



      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or



      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s
official duties.



   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a
statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk
under § 9-3 of the Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/9-3, but only with regard to
those activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a
county clerk.



   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.



      (1)   Preparing for, organizing or participating in any
political meeting, political rally, political demonstration or other
political event;



      (2)   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to,
the purchase of, selling, distributing or receiving payment for tickets for
any political fundraiser, political meeting or other political event;



      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of or preparing
any document or report regarding any thing of value intended as a campaign
contribution;



      (4)   Planning, conducting or participating in a public
opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf
of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any
referendum question;



      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or
actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection
with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization
for political purposes or for or against any referendum question;



      (6)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any
political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question;



      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective
office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question
or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls;



      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating,
reviewing or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office
or for or against any referendum question;



      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for
elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for
elective office;



      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate
questionnaires in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf
of a political organization for political purposes;



      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing
campaign literature, campaign signs or other campaign material on behalf of
any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question;



      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against
any referendum question;



      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office
or for or against any referendum question;



      (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a
political party convention; and/or



      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the
outcome of any election.



   PROHIBITED SOURCE. Any person or entity who:



      (1)   Is seeking official action by the city or by an officer
or employee of the city;



      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business with the city or
with an officer or employee of the city;



      (3)   Conducts activities regulated by the city or by an
officer or employee of the city;



      (4)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the
performance or non-performance of the official duties of the city or an
officer or employee of the city; or



      (5)   Is registered or required to be registered with the
Secretary of State under the Lobbyist Registration Act, being 25 ILCS 170,
except that an entity does not become a prohibited source merely because a
registered lobbyist is one of its members or serves on its board of directors.



   RELATIVE. Those people related to the officer or employee as father,
mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle,
first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother,
grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-
in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson,
stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister and
including the father, mother, grandfather or grandmother of the officer’s
or employee’s spouse and the officer’s or employee’s fiancé or
fiancée.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)



§ 40.26  GIFTS.



   (A)   Gifts prohibited. Except as otherwise provided in division (B)
below, no officer or employee, spouse of an officer or employee, or immediate
family member living with an officer or employee, shall intentionally solicit
or accept any gift from any prohibited source or in violation of any federal
or state statute, rule or regulation. No prohibited source shall
intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this chapter.



   (B)   Exceptions. The restrictions set forth in division (A) above
shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Opportunities, benefits and services that are available
on the same conditions as for the general public;



      (2)   Anything for which the officer or employee pays the
market value or anything not used and promptly disposed of as provided in
division (C) below;



      (3)   A contribution, as defined in Article 9 of the Illinois
Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/9-1 et seq., that is lawfully made under that Code
or under the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, or activities
associated with a fundraising event in support of a political organization or
candidate;



      (4)   Educational materials and missions;



      (5)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss city business;



      (6)   A gift from a relative of an officer or employee;



      (7)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a
personal friendship unless the officer or employee has reason to believe
that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official
position or employment of the officer or employee and not because of the
personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis
of personal friendship, the officer or employee shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:



         (a)   The history of the relationship between the
individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any
previous exchange of gifts between those individuals;



         (b)   Whether to the actual knowledge of the officer or
employee the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or
sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and



         (c)   Whether to the actual knowledge of the officer or
employee the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees.



      (8)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in
value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are:



         (a)   Consumed on the premises from which they were
purchased or prepared; or



         (b)   Purchased ready to eat and delivered by any means.



      (9)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other
benefits resulting from the outside business or employment activities (or
outside activities that are not connected to the duties of the officer or
employee as an office holder or employee) of the officer or employee, or the
spouse of the officer or employee, if the benefits have not been offered or
enhanced because of the official position or employment of the officer or
employee and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.



      (10)   Intra-office and inter-office gifts;



      (11)   Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death; and



      (12)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during
any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.



   (C)   Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee that is a
recipient of a gift that is given in violation of this chapter may, at his or
her discretion, return the item to the donor or give the item or an amount
equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income
taxation under § 501(c)3 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or
hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)  Penalty, see § 40.99



§ 40.27  PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any
prohibited political activity during any compensated time. No officer or
employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the city in
connection with any prohibited political activity.



   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require
any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity:



      (1)   As part of that employee’s duties;



      (2)   As a condition of employment; or



      (3)   During any compensated time off.



   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to
participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that
officer or employee being awarded any additional compensation or any benefit,
whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off,
continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be
awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for the
officer’s or employee’s participation in any prohibited political
activity.



   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are
otherwise permissible an officer or employee to engage in as a part of his or
her official or employment duties or activities that are undertaken by an
officer or employee on a voluntary basis as permitted by law.



   (E)   No person shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure
solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee,
of a political party, or of a political organization or club that is either:



      (1)   In a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment; or



      (2)   In a position the salary for which is paid in whole or
in part by federal funds and that is subject to the Federal Standards for a
Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)  Penalty, see § 40.99



§ 40.28  ETHICS OFFICER.



   (A)   The City Manager ,or his or her designee, shall be designated
the Ethics Officer for the city.



   (B)   The Ethics Officer’s duties and responsibilities shall
include:



      (1)   Providing guidance to officers and employees in
completing statements of economic interest before they are filed with the
appropriate office;



      (2)   Providing guidance to officers and employees in the
interpretation and implementation of this chapter and the requirements of 5
ILCS 430/5-15 and Article 10; and



      (3)   Providing guidance to officers and employees in the
interpretation and implementation of other applicable statutes, ordinances,
rules or regulations of the city, the state or the federal government dealing
with ethics, conflicts of interest, interests in contracts, jobs, work or
materials, or the profits thereof, or services to be performed for or by the
city.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)



§ 40.29  ETHICS COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established in the city an
Ethics Commission, consisting of the City Council. Commission members shall
be non-salaried, except that they may be reimbursed for their reasonable
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The Ethics Commission
may contract for services that cannot be satisfactorily performed by the city
staff.



   (B)   Powers and duties.



      (1)   The Ethics Commission shall have the following powers
and duties:



         (a)   To promulgate such procedures and rules governing
the performance of its duties and the exercise of its powers as deemed
necessary or appropriate;



         (b)   Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written
complaint, to investigate, conduct research, conduct closed hearings and
deliberations, issue findings, decisions and recommendations and impose a
fine when warranted;



         (c)   To act only upon the receipt of a written
complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, and not upon its own
prerogative;



         (d)   To receive information from the public pertaining
to its investigations and to require additional information and documents
from persons who may have violated this chapter as the Commission deems
appropriate;



         (e)   When necessary, to subpoena witnesses and compel
the production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation authorized
by this chapter;



         (f)   When necessary, to request that the State’s
Attorney provide legal advice without charge to the Commission;



         (g)   To prepare and publish such manuals and guides as
the Commission deems appropriate explaining the duties of individuals covered
by this chapter;



         (h)   To prepare such public information materials as
the Commission deems appropriate to facilitate compliance, implementation and
enforcement of this chapter;



         (i)   To prepare periodic statistical reports consisting
of:



            1.   The number of complaints filed;



            2.   The number of complaints deemed to
sufficiently allege a violation of this chapter;



            3.   The recommendation, fine or decision issued
for each complaint;



            4.   The number of complaints resolved; and



            5.   The status of pending complaints.



         (j)   The Commission may delegate to a subcommittee of
the Commission or to the Audit Committee its authority to conduct
investigations pursuant to this section, and require a report of the
subcommittee’s findings to the full Commission for final action;



         (k)   In the event that a member of the Commission is
the subject of a claimed violation of this chapter, such Commissioner shall
immediately recuse himself or herself from the investigation of such claimed
violation, and shall take no part in the final action of the Commission
regarding such claimed violation.



      (2)   The powers and duties of the Commission are limited to
matters clearly within the purview of this chapter.



   (C)   Complaint procedure.



      (1)   Complaints alleging the violation of this chapter shall
be filed as follows. If the complaint alleges a violation by an employee,
appointed officer or elected officer of the city, then the complaint shall be
filed with the Ethics Officer. In the event that the subject of the complaint
is the Ethics Officer, such complaint shall be filed with the Mayor. Any
complaint received by, or incident reported to, an employee alleging the
violation of this chapter, shall be forwarded to the Ethics Officer or Mayor
as provided above. Upon receipt of any such complaint, the Ethics Officer, or
the Mayor, as the case may be, shall forward the complaint to each member of
the Ethics Commission.



      (2)   Within three business days after the filing of an ethics
complaint, the Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against
him or her and a copy of the complaint. The Commission shall send by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of
the complaint to the complainant within three business days after the
submittal to the Commission. The notices to the respondent and the
complainant shall also advise them of the date, time and place of the meeting
on the sufficiency of the complaint and probable cause, which meeting shall
be held within 14 business days after receiving the complaint.



      (3)   Upon at least 48 hours’ public notice of the session,
the Commission shall meet in a closed session to review the sufficiency of
the complaint and, if the complaint is deemed to sufficiently allege a
violation of this chapter, to determine if there is probable cause, based on
evidence presented by the complainant, to proceed. The Commission shall issue
notice to the complainant and the respondent of the Commission’s ruling on
the sufficiency of the complaint, and, if necessary, on probable cause. If
the complaint is deemed to sufficiently allege a violation of this chapter
and there is a determination of probable cause, then the Commission’s
notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled within four
weeks after the issuance of the Commission’s ruling on the sufficiency of
the complaint. If the complaint is deemed not to sufficiently allege a
violation or if there is no determination of probable cause, then the
Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice
to the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint and that notice shall
be made public.



      (4)   On the scheduled date and upon at least 48 hours’
public notice of the hearing, the Commission shall conduct a closed meeting
on the complaint and allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony
and evidence.



      (5)   (a)   Within two weeks after the conclusion of the
hearing on the complaint, the Commission shall:



            1.   Dismiss the complaint;



            2.   Issue a preliminary recommendation to the
alleged violator and to the violator’s ultimate jurisdictional authority or
impose a fine upon the violator; or



            3.   Both.



         (b)   The particular findings in the instant case, the
preliminary recommendation and any fine shall be made public.



      (6)   Within seven business days after the issuance of the
preliminary recommendation or imposition of a fine, or both, the respondent
may file a written demand for a public hearing on the complaint. The filing
of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the preliminary recommendation or
fine. Within two weeks after receiving the demand, the Commission shall
conduct a public hearing on the complaint after at least 48 hours’ public
notice of the hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to present
testimony and evidence. Within five business days after such public hearing,
the Commission shall publicly issue a final recommendation to the alleged
violator and to the violator’s ultimate jurisdictional authority or impose
a fine upon the violator, or both.



      (7)   If the complaint is filed during the 60 days preceding
the date of any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the
Commission shall render its decision as required under division (C)(6) above
within seven days after the complaint is filed, and during the seven days
preceding that election, the Commission shall tender such decision before the
date of that election, if possible.



      (8)   The Commission may levy a fine of up to $750 against any
person who knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a violation of this
chapter.



      (9)   A complaint alleging the violation of this chapter must
be filed within one year after the alleged violation.



   (D)   Enforcement.



      (1)   The Commission may recommend to a person’s ultimate
jurisdictional authority disciplinary action against the person it determines
to be in violation of this chapter. The recommendation may prescribe the
following courses of action:



         (a)   A reprimand;



         (b)   An order to cease and desist the offensive action;



         (c)   An return or refund of money or other items, or an
amount of restitution for services received in violation of this chapter;



         (d)   Dismissal, removal from office or expulsion; and



         (e)   Donation to a charity of an amount equal to the
gift.



      (2)   The Ethics Commission may impose a fine of up to $750
per violation to be deposited into the General Fund of the city.



      (3)   (a)   The city, through the ultimate jurisdictional
authority of an officer or employee, may take disciplinary action against any
such officer or employee:



            1.   Who the Ethics Commission finds is in
violation of this chapter;



            2.   Who is the subject of a recommendation by the
Ethics Commission; or



            3.   Described by both divisions (D)(3)(a)1. and
(D)(3)(a)2. above.



         (b)   The city may take disciplinary action as
recommended by the Ethics Commission, if any, or as it deems appropriate, to
the extent it has constitutional and statutory authority to take that action.



         (c)   The city shall make its action, or determination
to take no action, available to the public.



      (4)   If after a hearing, the Commission finds no violation of
this chapter, the Commission shall dismiss the complaint.



   (E)   Review. The Ethics Commission’s decision to dismiss a
complaint or its recommendation is not a final administrative decision, but
its imposition of a fine is a final administrative decision subject to
judicial review under the Administrative Review Law of the Code of Civil
Procedure.



   (F)   Exemption. The proceedings conducted and documents generated
under this chapter are exempt from the provisions of the Open Meetings Act
and the Freedom of Information Act, except as expressly provided.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)



§ 40.30  INTERPRETATION.



   It is the intent of the city that the provisions of this chapter shall
be substantially in accordance with the requirements of 5 ILCS 430/5-15 and
Article 10. To the extent that § 5-15 or Article 10 of the State Officials
and Employees Ethics Act may be more restrictive than the requirements of
this chapter, the provisions of § 5-15 and Article 10 of the State Officials
and Employees Ethics Act shall apply and control. This chapter does not
repeal other relevant personnel rules or regulations adopted by the city
(“existing regulations”). To the extent that the existing regulations are
less restrictive than § 5-15 or Article 10 of the State Officials and
Employees Ethics Act and this chapter, the provisions of § 5-15 and Article
10 of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act and this chapter shall
apply and control.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)



§ 40.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General penalty. Any person violating any provision of this
chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   In general.



      (1)   Any person found guilty of knowingly violating,
disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the
provisions of §§ 40.01 through 40.11, except when otherwise specifically
provided, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine up to $750 per
violation. All action seeking the imposition of fines only shall be filed as
other non-criminal violations of the city code.



      (2)   Prosecutions for violation of the provisions of §§
40.01 through 40.11 shall be initiated and prosecuted by the City Attorney.



      (3)   The penalties provided in section do not limit either
the power of the City Council to discipline its own members or the power of
any other city department, agency or commission to otherwise discipline its
members or its employees.



      (4)   Nothing in §§ 40.01 through 40.11 is intended to or is
to be construed as repealing in any way the provisions of any other law of
the states or ordinance by the city.



   (C)   Failure to file statement of financial interests. Any person
who is required to file a statement of financial interests pursuant to this
chapter or state law and who fails to file such as provided therein, shall,
in addition to any other penalty provided herein, be subject to immediate
ineligibility for, or forfeiture of, office or employment, provided that no
forfeiture shall result if a statement is filed within 30 days after notice
of the failure to file.



   (D)   Void contracts; invalid licenses, permits, actions. Any
contract negotiated, entered into or performed in violation of any of the
provisions of this §§ 40.01 through 40.11 shall be void as to the city. Any
permit, license, ruling, determination or other official action of the City
Council, a committee or other subdivision thereof, or of any city department,
agency, board, commission, other body, applied for or in any other manner
sought, obtained or undertaken in violation of any of the provisions of §§
40.01 through 40.11 shall be invalid and without any force or effect
whatsoever.



   (E)   Disgorging corporate opportunity. Any official or employee
shall, upon demand of the City Attorney, account for all benefits accruing to
such official or employee as a result of any violation of the provisions of
§§ 40.01 through 40.11. Any official or employee receiving any such
benefits in violation of any of the provisions of §§ 40.01 through 40.11
shall disgorge such benefits, and, in addition to any other penalty provided
herein, shall be subject to a penalty equal to two times the amount of such
benefits. In the event that any such official or employee refuses to account
for benefits received in violation of any of the provisions of this section,
the City Attorney may seek an accounting in a court of law.



   (F)   Gift ban and prohibited political activities. An individual
who knowingly violates §§ 40.25 through 40.30 is guilty of a business
offense and subject to a fine of up to $750.



(Ord. 2004-27, passed 6-7-2004)



CHAPTER 41:  FEE SCHEDULE



Section



   41.01   Adoption by reference



§ 41.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The city fee schedule, copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as
fully as if set out at length herein. Wherever in this code a fee, rate, fine
or penalty amount, or other charge is set forth, the applicable fee, rate,
fine or penalty amount, or charge shall be the greater of the amount set
forth in the code or city fee schedule.



(Ord. 03-58, passed 11-20-2003; Ord. 04-20, passed 3-18-2004; Ord. 04-23,
passed 4-15-2004; Ord. 04-85, passed 12-6-2004; Ord. 05-01, passed 1-20-2005;
Ord. 05-12, passed 5-9-2005; Ord. 2005-44, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 2006-17,
passed 4-20-2006; Ord. 2006-84, passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 2007-24, passed
5-21-2007; Ord. 2007-45, passed 12-3-2007; Ord. 2008-40, passed 12-1-2008;
Ord. 2009-16, passed 5-4-2009; Ord. 2009-32, passed 12-7-2009; Ord. 2009-38,
passed 12-7-2009; Ord. 2010-13, passed 4-19-2010; Ord. 2010-51, passed
12-6-2010; Ord. 2010-52, passed 12-6-2010; Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-18-2011;
Ord. 2011-11, passed 5-2-2011; Ord. 2012-09, passed 4-16-2012; Ord. 2012-11,
passed 4-16-2012; Ord. 2012-46, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2012-47, passed
12-3-2012; Ord. 2012-48, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2013-16, passed 4-15-2013;
Ord. 2013-28, passed 6-3-2013; Ord. 2013-076, passed 12-2-2013; Ord.
2013-077, passed 12-2-2013; Ord. 2013-078, passed 12-2-2013; Ord. 2013-079,
passed 12-2-2013; Ord. 2013-080, passed 12-2-2013; Ord. 2014-03, passed
2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-09, passed 4-21-2014; Ord. 2014-49, passed 12-1-2014;
Ord. 2014-50, passed 12-1-2014; Ord. 2014-51, passed 12-1-2014; Ord. 2014-52,
passed 12-1-2014; Ord. 2015-75, passed 12-7-2015; Ord. 2015-76, passed
12-7-2015; Ord. 2015-77, passed 12-7-2015; Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-19-2016;
Ord. 2016-10, passed 2-16-2016; Ord. 2016-73, passed 12-5-2016; Ord. 2016-74,
passed 12-5-2016; Ord. 2016-75, passed 12-5-2016; Ord. 2016-76, passed
12-5-2016; Ord. 2017-14, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 2017-39, passed 6-19-2017;
Ord. 2017-61, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2017-62, passed 12-18-2017)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   SOLID WASTE



      51.   WATER



      52.   SEWER USE CHARGES AND RATES



CHAPTER 50:  SOLID WASTE



Section




General Provisions




   50.001   Definitions




Refuse




   50.015   Preparation for collection



   50.016   Containers



   50.017   Storing of refuse



   50.018   Points of collection



   50.019   Refuse



   50.020   Combustible refuse



   50.021   Refuse collection fee




Collection




   50.035   Collection by the city



   50.036   Supervision enforcement



   50.037   Appeals from decision of City Manager



   50.038   Frequency of collection



   50.039   Limitation on quantity



   50.040   Special refuse problems



   50.041   Collection by actual producers and licensed collectors



   50.042   Establishment of rules and regulations



   50.043   Commercial and contractor use



   50.044   Use of Route 60 Drop off Compost and Recycling Center




Scavengers




   50.055   Permit required; fee



   50.056   Application for permit



   50.057   Vehicles



   50.058   Disposal of refuse



   50.059   Hour of operation




Hazardous Materials




   50.070   Responsibility



   50.071   Definitions



   50.072   Nuisance



   50.073   Liability for abatement of nuisance



   50.074   Use, storage or production of hazardous materials



   50.075   Movement of hazardous materials



   50.076   Procedure for assignment of hazardous materials access route



   50.077   Disposal of hazardous materials



   50.078   Right to know; disclosure requirements



   50.079   Post of notices



   50.080   Severability



 



   50.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 50.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASHES. The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials.



   BULKY WASTE. Large items including, but not limited to, appliances,
furniture, tires, large auto parts, logs and stumps, whose size complicates
their handling by normal collection, processing or disposal methods.



   CITY. The City of Lake Forest, in Lake County, Illinois.



   COMMERCIAL WASTE. All garbage or other refuse from an establishment
engaged in business, including stores, markets, office buildings,
restaurants, shopping centers, theaters and schools.



   COMPOSTING. A controlled process of microbial degradation of organic
material into a stable, humus-like product.



   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. Waste building materials, dirt, gravel and rubble
resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operation on
houses, commercial buildings or other structures or pavement.



   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The duly appointed and acting Director of
Public Works for the City of Lake Forest.



   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, processing, storage, packaging, preparation, cooking, serving and
sale of food (also refuse).



   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Solid and liquid waste which is either corrosive,
flammable, explosive or toxic. These include, but are not limited to, medical
waste, paints, caustics, oils, solvents and similar chemicals and materials.



   MIXED REFUSE. A mixture of solid wastes containing both putrescible and
non-putrescible materials.



   PARKWAY. The part of a street or highway, on each side of the roadway
or pavement thereof, lying between the outer edge of the pavement or roadway
and the property lines bounding the street.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, political subdivision, state agency or organization of any kind.



   PUTRESCIBLE WASTE. Waste which undergoes progressive chemical
decomposition of organic matter, resulting in the production of foul smelling
matter.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Brown, green and clear glass, aluminum, tin and
bi-metal cans, plastics #1 - #5 and #7, newspapers, office paper, paperback
books, wrapping paper, phonebooks, and cardboard.



   REFUSE. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, processing, storage, packaging, preparation, cooking, serving and
sale of food (also garbage).



   SPECIAL PICKUP.



      (1)   A service entitled as a SPECIAL PICKUP is required for
the collection of large and difficult to handle items.



      (2)   Such a pickup must be scheduled in advance of collection.



      (3)   Such a pickup must be placed on the parkway along the
pavement edge on the scheduled collection day before 7:00 a.m.; however, such
a pickup shall not be placed on the parkway more than 24 hours prior to the
scheduled collection day.



      (4)   A fee may be assessed for the collection of bulky
materials, as more fully described in the Sanitation Rules and Regulations.



   YARDWASTE. Grass clippings, leaves, shrub and tree trimmings of less
than six inches in diameter.



(Prior Code, § 18-1)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)




REFUSE




§ 50.015  PREPARATION FOR COLLECTION.



   (A)   Bulky waste.



      (1)   Items defined as bulky waste shall not be eligible for
regular twice-weekly collection. The collection of these items must be
scheduled in advance as a special pickup.



      (2)   Logs, large branches or stumps exceeding six inches in
diameter shall be scheduled in advance and collected as a special brush
pickup through the Forestry Section.



   (B)   Construction debris. Those items defined as construction
debris shall not be eligible for a regular twice-weekly collection. The
collection of construction debris must be scheduled in advance as a special
pickup.



   (C)   Garbage or other refuse. All garbage, or other refuse, before
being placed in garbage cans for collection, shall have drained from it all
liquids and shall be placed in a plastic or paper trash bag.



   (D)   Recyclables. All recyclable materials shall be prepared as
directed by the Sanitation Rules and Regulations. All recyclables must be
placed in approved carts or bins.



   (E)   Yardwaste. Leaves and lawn clippings shall be deposited in
biodegradable paper bags. Each biodegradable bag must have a city yard waste
sticker affixed to it. Tree trimmings of less than six inches in diameter,
hedge clippings and similar material shall be cut to a length not to exceed
four feet in length and securely tied in bundles not to exceed two feet in
thickness before being deposited on the parkway for collection. Each bundle
must have a city yard waste sticker affixed to it. Christmas trees are pickup
curbside on scheduled recycling days during the month of January. Trees must
be cut in six-foot lengths, free of all lights and ornaments. Trees that are
placed out for collection cannot be placed in plastic bags. Trees must be
placed at the curb on the scheduled day by 7:00 a.m. and no more than 24
hours prior to the scheduled collection.



   (F)   Compliance. No garbage or other refuse shall be collected by
the city’s collectors under any circumstances unless the materials to be
collected are prepared in accordance with the provisions of this section.



(Prior Code, § 18-8)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.016  CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Duty to provide and maintain in sanitary condition. Containers
for garbage or other refuse shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee or
occupant of the premises. One recycling container will be provided by the
city, at no charge, to each household in the city. Containers shall be
maintained in good condition. Any non-city issued recycling container or
private waste container that does not conform to the provisions of this
subchapter, or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable
to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof, shall be
promptly replaced upon notice. The Director shall have the authority to
refuse collection services for failure to comply herewith.



   (B)   Garbage or other refuse. All residential garbage containers
shall be of water-tight construction and be provided with a lid or cover and
suitable handles. The containers shall be kept covered at all times except
when depositing waste or removing same. Containers shall have a capacity of
not more than 32 gallons, and shall weigh not more than 80 pounds when
filled. Up to four containers for garbage re allowed per household per
collection.



   (C)   Recyclables. Residential recyclables shall be stored in the
city-provided 65-gallon or 35- gallon recycling cart. Designated areas within
the city may continue to use the city-provided open rectangular bin with
Director approval. One cart shall be provided by the city, at no charge, to
each household in the city. Additional carts or replacement carts shall be
available from the city for a fee.



   (D)   Yard waste. Leaves and lawn clippings shall be deposited in
biodegradable paper bags. Each bag must have a city yard waste sticker
affixed to it.



(Prior Code, § 18-9)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.017  STORING OF REFUSE.



   (A)   Public places. No person shall cast, place or deposit any
refuse in any street, parkway, alleyway, park or other public place, or upon
any private property, whether owned by such person or not, within the city,
except it be in proper containers for collection or under express approval
granted by the Director. Nor shall any person throw or deposit any refuse in
any stream or other body of water.



   (B)   Unauthorized accumulation. Any unauthorized accumulation of
refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
Failure to remove any accumulation of refuse within ten days after notice by
the Director, any of his or her duly authorized assistants or subordinates,
or any other officer of the city empowered to enforce the ordinances thereof,
shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter.



   (C)   Scattering of refuse. No person shall cast, place, sweep or
deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be
carried or deposited by the elements in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley,
sewer, parkway, park or other public place, or into any occupied premises
within the city.



(Prior Code, § 18-10)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.018  POINTS OF COLLECTION.



   (A)   Garbage or other refuse. Containers of garbage shall be placed
for collection at or near ground level on the property, and at or near the
garage of the principal building or buildings on the premises. Collectors
shall not be permitted to enter houses, enclosed porches, garages or similar
enclosures to make collections. Containers of refuse shall not be placed
within the right-of-way of any street or alley. Lids on garbage cans need to
be secured from the effects of wind and wildlife.



   (B)   Recyclables. Carts or bins containing recyclable materials
shall be placed on the parkway within five feet of the public pavement edge.
The carts or bins shall be placed on the parkway prior to 7:00 a.m. on the
scheduled collection day; however, carts nor bins shall not be placed on the
parkway more than 24 hours prior to the scheduled collection time, nor shall
carts or bins remain on the parkway for more than 24 hours after collection
has occurred.



   (C)   Yard waste. All yard waste must be placed on the parkway along
the pavement edge for collection. The yard waste bags shall be placed on the
parkway prior to 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection day for yard waste.



   (D)   Exception. Where circumstances warrant, exceptions may be made
to the above, but only upon express authorization by the Director of Public
Works.



(Prior Code, § 18-11)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.019  REFUSE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
deposit anywhere in the city a pile of refuse, garbage, offal or carcasses of
dead animals, except as directed by the Director of Public Works.



   (B)   Any uncovered pile of refuse is declared to be a nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 18-12)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.020  COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE.



   It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such
a way as to create a fire hazard, or to store or throw any refuse of any kind
on any street, alley or other public place.



(Prior Code, § 18-13)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.021  REFUSE COLLECTION FEE.



   A refuse collection fee shall be assessed quarterly for residential
(single-family attached and single-family detached dwelling units) and
included on the quarterly water bills in accordance with the amount set out
in the fee schedule.



(Ord. 2015-56, passed 10-5-2015)




COLLECTION




§ 50.035  COLLECTION BY THE CITY.



   All garbage or other refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected,
conveyed and disposed of by the city, or by persons authorized and licensed
by the city to perform such collection, conveyance and disposal service. No
person shall collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city,
or dispose of, any refuse accumulated in the city without being licensed and
authorized to do so by the city.



(Prior Code, § 18-20)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.036  SUPERVISION ENFORCEMENT.



   All garbage or other refuse collected, conveyed and disposed of by the
city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of under the direction and
supervision of the City Manager or the Director Public Works as the City
Manager’s designated representative. The City Manager shall have the
authority to make regulations concerning the days of collection, type and
location of waste containers and other matters pertaining to the collection,
conveyance and disposal of garbage as he or she shall find necessary, and to
enforce such regulations; and to change and modify regulations after notice
as required by law, provided that such regulations are not contrary to, or
inconsistent with, the provisions hereof, and shall be approved by the City
Council.



(Prior Code, § 18-21)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 1283, passed
6-7-1982; Ord. 2015-56, passed 10-5-2015)



§ 50.037  APPEALS FROM DECISION OF CITY MANAGER.



   Any person aggrieved by a regulation of, or fee charged by, the City
Manager shall have the right to appeal to the Public Works Committee of the
City Council, who shall have the authority to confirm, modify or revoke any
such regulation or fee.



(Prior Code, § 18-22)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 1283, passed
6-7-1982; Ord. 2015-56, passed 10-5-2015)



§ 50.038  FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.



   Garbage accumulated on premises shall be collected by the city’s
collection crews on such schedule and in such manner, with or without charge,
as may be prescribed by the regulations for such collection services made by
the City Manager and approved by the City Council, all in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (A)   Residential (single-family attached and single-family detached
dwelling units only.) Garbage and yard waste accumulated on residential
premises shall be collected by the city’s collection crews on a twice
weekly basis, except where equipment breakdowns, holidays, weather
conditions, road conditions or other circumstances beyond the control of the
city shall interfere with the prescribed collection schedule.



   (B)   Public school districts. Garbage or other refuse and recycling
accumulated on public school district premises shall be collected by the
city’s collection crews on a schedule agreeable to the city and the school
district, as listed within the service contract.



   (C)   Commercial, institutional and residential (other than
single-family attached and single-family detached dwelling units, and public
school districts). The collection of garbage or other refuse from stores,
offices, restaurants, hotels, clubs and such other establishments and
institutions by city sanitation crews shall be allowed as determined by the
City Manager.



   (D)   Recyclables. Recyclable materials shall be collected by the
city’s collection crews on a once a week basis, except where equipment
breakdowns, holidays, weather conditions, road conditions or other
circumstances beyond the control of the city shall interfere with the
prescribed collection schedule.



(Prior Code, § 18-23)  (Ord. 1283, passed 6-7-1982; Ord. 1518, passed
6-15-1985; Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed 10-5-2015) 
Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.039  LIMITATION ON QUANTITY.



   (A)   Residential (single-family attached and single-family detached
dwelling units only). The quantity of garbage or other refuse to be collected
at any single collection without special charge shall not exceed the contents
of four 32-gallon containers.



   (B)   Commercial, institutional and residential (other than
single-family attached and single-family detached dwelling unit). Shall be
subject to the regulations made by the City Manager.



   (C)   Special charges. Special charges made for collections of
quantities in excess of those stated in this subchapter shall be established.



(Prior Code, § 18-24)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.040  SPECIAL REFUSE PROBLEMS.



   (A)   Contagious disease refuse. The removal of wearing apparel,
bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious or
contagious diseases have prevailed shall be performed as directed  by, and
under the supervision of the Fire Chief. Such refuse shall not be placed in
containers for regular collections.



   (B)   Inflammable, explosive or other dangerous refuse. Highly
inflammable or explosive materials, acids, highly corrosive materials and
other materials, the handling or disposal of which would present a hazard to
the city’s collectors or to the public, shall not be placed in containers
for regular collection but shall be disposed of as directed by the Fire Chief
at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof.



(Prior Code, § 18-25)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.041  COLLECTION BY ACTUAL PRODUCERS AND LICENSED COLLECTORS.



   (A)   Requirements for vehicles. The actual producers of refuse or
the owners or occupants of premises upon which refuse is accumulated who
desire personally to collect and dispose of such refuse, persons who desire
to collect and dispose of waste material not included in the definition of
refuse, and collectors of refuse licensed by the city to make such
collections who desire to haul refuse over the streets of the city, shall use
a water-tight vehicle provided with a tight cover and so operated as to
prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and refuse from being blown,
dropped, spilled from the vehicle.



   (B)   Disposal. Disposal of refuse by persons so permitted under
division (A) above shall be made as specifically authorized by the Director.
The Director shall have the authority to permit the disposal of such material
at the Route 60 Drop Off Compost and Recycling Center, provided the required
charges or fees are paid by the person or persons proposing to dispose of
refuse under the provisions of division (A) above.



   (C)   Recyclables property of city. Ownership of recyclable
materials set out for collection by the city’s collectors or deposited at
the Route 60 Drop Off Compost and Recycling Center shall be vested in the
city.



   (D)   Refuse property of the city. Ownership of refuse material set
out for collection by the city’s collectors or deposited at the Route 60
Drop Off Compost and Recycling Center shall be vested in the city.



(Prior Code, § 18-26)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 93-52, passed
8-2-1993; Ord. 2015-56, passed 10-5-2015)



§ 50.042  ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to make,
establish and enforce reasonable regulations pertaining to the accumulation,
storage, collection and disposal of garbage and other refuse, subject to
approval of such rules and regulations by the City Council.



   (B)   (1)   Such rules and regulations shall be subject to
revision, modification and supplementation from time to time as may be deemed
necessary.



      (2)   Such rules and regulations, and any revisions thereof,
shall be published in such form as the City Council may direct, and copies
thereof shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and in the office of
the Director of Public Works for the use of, and examination by, the public
during the regular business hours of those offices.



(Prior Code, § 18-27)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.043  COMMERCIAL AND CONTRACTOR USE.



   The Route 60 Drop Off Compost and Recycling Center is prohibited for
use by commercial businesses and contractors.



(Prior Code, § 18-28)  (Ord. 93-52, passed 8-2-1993; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.044  USE OF ROUTE 60 DROP OFF COMPOST AND RECYCLING CENTER.



   (A)   The center is limited to Lake Forest residents only.



   (B)   Acceptable proof of residency shall be either a current Lake
Forest vehicle sticker or a Lake Forest resident permit branch.



(Prior Code, § 18-29)  (Ord. 93-52, passed 8-2-1993)




SCAVENGERS




§ 50.055  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)   It shall be an unlawful offense for any person, firm or
corporation to remove any item placed in a recycling cart or bin which has
been placed on the parkway for collection.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
engage in the business of private scavenger, or the disposal of human, animal
or vegetable refuse, or offal, without having first secured a permit
therefor. The annual fee for such permit shall be as set out in the fee
schedule for each vehicle used or operated within the city for the
transportation of refuse.



   (C)   (1)   No license shall be issued before the payment of the
fee.



      (2)   Each such license shall terminate on the May 31 next
following its issuance.



      (3)   The fee to be paid for a fraction of a fiscal year shall
be reduced in proportion to the number of full calendar months which may have
expired in the year prior to the issuance of the license.



(Prior Code, § 18-34)  (Ord. 565, passed 4-11-1962; Ord. 1160, passed
3-3-1980; Ord. 1495, passed 4-13-1985; Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord.
03-37, passed 7-7-2003; Ord. 2015-56, passed 10-5-2015)  Penalty, see §
50.999



§ 50.056  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Applications for such permits shall be made annually to the Community
Development Department.



(Prior Code, § 18-35)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.057  VEHICLES.



   Any vehicle used by such scavenger in his or her business shall be
water-tight, and equipped with air-tight covers for such portions as are used
for the transportation of refuse.



(Prior Code, § 18-36)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.058  DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.



   It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or store any
refuse in any place within the city limits or within one mile therefrom,
excepting with the permission of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 18-37)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.059  HOUR OF OPERATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to collect any refuse in any
place within the city limits before 7:00 a.m., excepting with the permission
of the City Manager of Lake Forest, Illinois.



(Prior Code, § 18-38)  (Ord. 1562, passed 11-4-1985; Ord. 91-59, passed
9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed 10-5-2015)  Penalty, see § 50.999



HAZARDOUS MATERIALS



§ 50.070  RESPONSIBILITY.



   The Fire Department of city is charged with the administration of the
provisions of this subchapter and shall enforce the same in coordination with
the Fire Chief and the Chief of Police of the city.



(Prior Code, § 18-39)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.071  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISCHARGE. Leakage, seepage or a release.



   FACILITY, EQUIPMENT OR VEHICLES. Includes private, governmental or
commercial in nature whether by motor vehicle, truck, aircraft, railroad,
boats, ships or any means of transportation, storage or use.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. A substance or material in a quantity and form
determined by the State Department of Transportation, the United States
Department of Health and Human Services, or by the United States Department
of Transportation to be capable of posing an unreasonable risk to health and
safety or property.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ACCESS ROUTE. Any street which has been designated
pursuant to this subchapter for the purpose of providing vehicular access
from the primary hazardous material route to locations within the city where
hazardous materials are used, produced or stored. The following named streets
are hereby designated as HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ACCESS ROUTES:



      (1)   Western Avenue;



      (2)   McKinley Road;



      (3)   Illinois Road;



      (4)   Laurel Avenue;



      (5)   Spruce Avenue;



      (6)   Westmoreland Road;



      (7)   Knollwood Road;



      (8)   Old Elm Road west of U.S. Route 41 to Ridge Road;



      (9)   Ridge Road south of Old Elm Road to Old Mill Road; and



      (10)   Old Mill Road east of Ridge Road to city limits.



   PERSON. Any natural person or individual, governmental body, firm,
association, partnership, copartnership, joint venture, company, corporation,
joint stock company, trust, estate or any other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent or assigns and includes public or private utilities,
governmental bodies or agencies other than the city, common carriers,
railroads, airplanes and ships and boats.



   PRIMARY HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ROUTE. Includes only the following streets
in the city:



      (1)   U.S. Route 41 (Skokie Highway);



      (2)   Illinois State Route 43 (Waukegan Road);



      (3)   Illinois State Route 60 (Kennedy Road);



      (4)   Deerpath Road east of Waukegan Road to Sheridan Road;



      (5)   Sheridan Road;



      (6)   Westleigh Road east of U.S. Route 41 to Sheridan Road;
and



      (7)   Westleigh Road east of Illinois State Route 43 to the
east side of the Skokie drainage ditch.



   TOXIC SUBSTANCE. Any substance, mixture, or compound containing a
substance which is listed in:



      (1)   The Code of Federal Regulations, 29 C.F.R. §§
1910.1000 through 1910.1500, inclusive and all amendments thereto;



      (2)   The Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 48, par. 2515, and all
amendments thereto;



      (3)   The United States Department of Health and Human
Services, Public Health Service National Toxicology Program, Second Annual
Report on Carcinogens - December 1981, and its periodic updates;



      (4)   A list of toxic substances promulgated by the Director
of the State Department of Labor pursuant to Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 48, par.
2503 and 2504, and all amendments thereto.



(Prior Code, § 18-40)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.072  NUISANCE.



   (A)   The actual or threatened discharge of hazardous materials
within the city is hereby declared a nuisance.



   (B)   The actual discharge of hazardous materials outside the
corporate limits of the city which permeates or discharges into any portion
of the city is hereby declared a nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 18-41)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.073  LIABILITY FOR ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.



   (A)   Any person who owns, leases, operates or controls any facility
or equipment, whether by railway, air, land or water, or vehicles including
private, governmental or commercial, from which a discharge of hazardous
materials has occurred or threatened to occur in the city, shall be liable
jointly and severally to the city for any expenses incurred by the city in
connection with preventing, cleaning up or disposing of or attempting to
prevent, clean up or dispose of any such discharge or threatened discharge.
This provision shall not release the owner of the hazardous material from a
simultaneous liability for cleanup or disposal.



   (B)   Any person who owns, leases, operates or controls any
facility, equipment or vehicles from which a discharge of hazardous materials
has occurred outside of the city and which permeates or discharges in any
part of the city shall be liable jointly and severally to the city for any
expenses incurred by the city in connection with preventing, cleaning up or
disposing of or attempting to prevent, clean up or dispose of any such
discharge. This provision shall not release the owner of the hazardous
material from a simultaneous liability for cleanup or disposal.



(Prior Code, § 18-42)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.074  USE, STORAGE OR PRODUCTION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.



   Every person who uses, produces or stores hazardous materials or toxic
substances at any location within the city shall abide by and operate in
conformance with all of the requirements and provisions of the regulations
and directives therefor promulgated by the Fire Prevention Code of the city
as set forth in § 94.01 of this code of ordinances, as amended, and shall
abide by and operate in conformance with all of the provisions of Title III
(Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know) of the Super Fund Amendment
and Reauthorization Act (SARA) of the United States Code.



(Prior Code, § 18-43)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.075  MOVEMENT OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to move or transport, in any way, any
hazardous materials as defined herein within the city, except upon the
streets heretofore designated as primary hazardous materials routes or
hazardous materials access routes.



   (B)   Every person who uses, produces or stores hazardous materials
at a location within the city shall request from the Lake Forest Fire
Department a hazardous materials access route to and from such location.



   (C)   Every motor vehicle which displays or is required to display a
hazardous materials placard shall be operated within the city only on the
primary hazardous materials routes established pursuant to the provisions of
this subchapter.



   (D)   Every operator of a motor vehicle which displays or is
required to display a hazardous materials placard, who does not know the
primary hazardous materials routes of the city or the hazardous material
access route to and from the location in the city from which he or she is
coming or to which he or she is destined, shall request directions concerning
said routes from the Lake Forest Fire Department, before operating said
vehicle in the city.



   (E)   No motor vehicle which displays or is required to display a
hazardous materials placard shall be operated on any street within the city
other than U.S. Route 41 (Skokie Highway), or Illinois State Route 43
(Waukegan Road), Illinois State Route 60 (Kennedy Road), or Deerpath Road
east of Waukegan Road to Sheridan Road, unless such vehicle is coming from or
destined for a location within the city on an approved access route as
provided for herein.



   (F)   The following types of vehicles are exempt from this section:



      (1)   Placarded vehicles making residential deliveries of home
heating fuel;



      (2)   Placarded vehicles making residential deliveries of
medical supplies; and



      (3)   Placarded vehicles which are not required under the
provisions of this subchapter to request a hazardous materials access route
that are picking up or delivering non-hazardous materials at a location
within the city may use the most direct route to and from the location as
close as possible to said location on the primary hazardous materials route
or a hazardous materials access route assigned to a business in the vicinity
of said location.



(Prior Code, § 18-44)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.076  PROCEDURE FOR ASSIGNMENT OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ACCESS ROUTE.



   Any person who uses, produces or stores hazardous materials at a
location within the city shall be assigned a hazardous materials
transportation route after he or she has submitted a request for such a route
to the City Fire Department on a form provided by the Fire Department. Upon
receipt of such a request, the Fire Department shall assign to such a person,
a route which, in the judgment of the Fire Department and all other
interested departments, is consistent with and implements the purpose of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 18-45)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.077  DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.



   (A)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of
hazardous materials within the city unless such disposal is conducted in
accordance with applicable local, state and federal rules and regulations
pertaining to the disposal of such materials.



   (B)   Declaration of nuisance. The unlawful disposal of hazardous
materials within the city is hereby declared a nuisance.



   (C)   Liability for abatement of nuisance. Any person who engages in
the unlawful disposal of hazardous materials within the city shall be liable
to the city for any and all expenses in connection with cleaning up and
lawfully disposing of said materials.



(Prior Code, § 18-46)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.078  RIGHT TO KNOW; DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.



   Every person who uses, produces, transports or stores hazardous
materials or toxic substances at a location within the city shall provide the
Fire Chief of  the city with all information concerning the use, production
and storage of such materials which such a person is required to provide a
local fire department under all governing laws and regulations enacted or
promulgated from time to time by either the state or the United States of
America and departments thereof.



(Prior Code, § 18-47)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.079  POST OF NOTICES.



   The City Manager shall cause the posting of notices at each entrance to
the city giving notice to vehicular traffic of the regulations contained in
this subchapter. Said notice shall be by signs erected in accordance with the
standards and specifications as required by law or the statutes of the state
or any other regulatory body having jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 18-48)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.080  SEVERABILITY.



   The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed severable,
and the invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the
validity of the remainder.



(Prior Code, § 18-49)  (Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 2015-56, passed
10-5-2015)



§ 50.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the
provisions of §§ 50.035 through 50.080 of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined according to the fee schedule adopted by the City of
Lake Forest for each such violation. Each day that a violation exists or
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense which, upon conviction
thereof, shall subject the violator thereof to a fine as indicated in the fee
schedule adopted by the City of Lake Forest. In addition, any cost of
collection of fines or other amounts due to the city under this section may
be assessed in accordance with § 10.99 of this code.



(Prior Code, § 18-30)



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of § 50.055 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to
a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $750. In addition, any cost of
collection of fines or other amounts due to the city under § 50.055 of this
chapter may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99 of this code.



(Prior Code, § 18-34)



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the
provisions of §§ 50.070 through 50.080 of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined in an amount of not less than $50 and no more than $750
for each such violation. Each day that a violation exists or continues to
exist shall constitute a separate offense which, upon conviction thereof,
shall subject the violator thereof a fine of not less than $50 and no more
than $750. In addition, any cost of collection of fines or other amounts due
to the city under this section may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99 of
this code.



(Prior Code, § 18-50)



(Ord. 1855,  passed 7-31-1989; Ord. 91-59, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 03-37,
passed 7-7-2003; Ord. 2015-56, passed 10-5-2015)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER



Section




General Provisions




   51.001   Definitions




Hydrants




   51.015   Public hydrants




Connections




   51.030   Tapping mains; permits



   51.031   Water services



   51.032   Responsibility of city



   51.033   Cross-connections; service termination procedures




Meters




   51.045   Water meters



   51.046   Water wells




Rates and Charges




   51.060   Customer classes



   51.061   Water rates inside the city limits



   51.062   Water rates outside the city limits



   51.063   Other rates



   51.064   Delinquencies



   51.065   Changes in ownership of property; billing account
transfers; compliance inspections



   51.066   Supplemental charge for fee related to public safety
pension obligations



   51.067   Application of payments




Miscellaneous Provisions




   51.075   Repairs; leaks



   51.076   Lawn sprinkling



   51.077   Water shutoff valve access




Use of Groundwater as a Potable Water Supply




   51.090   Definitions



   51.091   Water use prohibition



 



   51.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Sediment grading, drainage and erosion control, see Ch. 151



   Sewer use charges and rates, see Ch. 52




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 51.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CUSTOMER. The word “customer” wherever used in this chapter, shall
be held to mean and include any person, entity, or premises receiving potable
water from the city or the city’s public water supply system.



   PREMISES. The word “premises” wherever used in this chapter, shall
be held to include a lot or part of a lot, a building or part of a building,
or any parcel of land.



(Prior Code, § 44-1)  (Ord. 07-13, passed 3-19-2007)




HYDRANTS




§ 51.015  PUBLIC HYDRANTS.



   (A)   All hydrants erected in the streets of the city for the
purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared to be public hydrants and
no person or persons (other than those especially authorized by the City
Council) shall open or attempt to draw water from, or in any way interfere
with any of said hydrants.



   (B)   No person, except a regularly authorized agent of the city,
shall take water from any public or private plug, hose pipe or fountain, or
in any way use or take any water for private use (drinking at public
fountains excepted) unless such person shall pay for the use of the same and
receive a permit from the city.



(Prior Code, § 44-23)  Penalty, see § 51.999




CONNECTIONS




§ 51.030  TAPPING MAINS; PERMITS.



   (A)   Any person or corporation desiring city water service shall
make application to the city. Such application shall state fully the location
of the lot, block, subdivision and street name and number, giving the size of
the tap or connection desired, and also the name of the plumber employed to
complete the work. The applicant shall in such application agree that all
work done in completing the service is to be governed in all respects by all
water rules, regulations and ordinances of the city, and by all general
rules, regulations and ordinances of the city.



   (B)   If the applicant shall have complied with all application
requirements and paid the tapping and construction fee, a permit shall be
issued granting the applicant the right of connection with the water
distributing mains in accordance with the terms set forth in the application.
In no case shall the tap be made or the corporation cock inserted until the
signature of the owner or the authorized agent shall have been obtained.



   (C)   All applicants and other customers (including transferees of
existing water accounts) of the city’s water system shall also agree as a
condition to receiving water service that such applicant or customer shall
continue to abide by all water rules, regulations, and ordinances of the
city, and to use and maintain the premises served by the water system in
accordance with all general rules, regulations, and ordinances of the city.



   (D)   The water supply may be cut off from any premises:



      (1)   If the permit therefor was obtained through
misrepresentation;



      (2)   If an unauthorized use or willful waste of water is
found; or



      (3)   If the customer or premises receiving water service is
violating the terms of such service.



   (E)   Water service to any premises shall be disconnected in
accordance with the provisions of § 51.033(E), which requires reasonable
notice to the occupant of the property; provided, however, that the
Superintendent of Public Works may effect such disconnection without prior
notice if the Superintendent determines that imminent danger of harmful
contamination of the public water supply exists and provided further that the
City Manager or the Manager’s designee may defer discontinuance of service
if such discontinuance itself may create a hazard to other persons or
property in the vicinity of the premises in question.



   (F)   In no case shall the above application be granted until a
permit issued by the city granting permission for opening of city streets has
been given.



   (G)   Authorized employees of the city shall make or supervise all
services connected to the city water mains and all such services shall
conform to the requirements of this chapter and the rules and regulations
applicable hereto.



(Prior Code, § 44-30)  (Ord. 01-32, passed 11-15-2001; Ord. 2008-41, passed
12-1-2008)



§ 51.031  WATER SERVICES.



   (A)   The type and grade of material for water services and the
installation thereof shall be in accordance with this ordinance and rules and
regulations established by the city.



   (B)   Should it become necessary to replace or repair old water
service pipes, the rules and regulations for new services shall apply to such
repairs or replacements. In cases of replacements of the service pipe between
the curb stop and the meter, the portion between the city main and the curb
stop shall also be replaced if required by the Superintendent of Public Works.



(Prior Code, § 44-31)  (Ord. 2015-57, passed 10-5-2015)



§ 51.032  RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY.



   In the installation of plumbing and heating equipment by a consumer,
ample provision shall be made (by providing proper supply tanks, checks,
relief or vacuum valves) for the safety of such equipment, in the event of
the stopping of the water supply or pressure and to prevent the contamination
of household water supply, or damage to water meters by expansion from
heating apparatus. The city shall not be liable for any damage that may
result to any plumbing or heating equipment from stopping of the water or
pressure on account of the shutting off the water supply to the premises, or
the loss of pressure in the mains through any cause beyond its control, or
for purposes made necessary in connection with the maintenance and operation
of the water works system.



(Prior Code, § 44-32)



§ 51.033  CROSS-CONNECTIONS; SERVICE TERMINATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   All plumbing installed within the city shall be installed in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. If, in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Public Works, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the
Superintendent of Public Works will give notice to the water customer to
install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his
or her own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a
manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, IEPA and all applicable
local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved
devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code, IEPA
and local regulations.



   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the city may enter the supply or distribution system of said
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and
the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by
the Superintendent of Public Works and the IEPA.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works to
cause surveys and investigations to be made of commercial, industrial and
other properties served by the public water supply to determine whether
actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such
surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall
be conducted and repeated as often as the Superintendent of Public Works
shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and
available for review for a period of at least five years.



   (D)   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the city for
the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, and
that the Superintendent of Public Works or his or her authorized agent shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the city for
the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the
required cross-connection control inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or
occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the Superintendent of
Public Works any information which he or she may request regarding the piping
system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such
information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the
Superintendent of Public Works, be deemed evidence of the presence of
improper connections as provided in this ordinance.



   (E)   (1)   The Superintendent of Public Works of the city is
hereby authorized to terminate the water service to any property wherein any
connection in violation of the provisions of this subchapter or any ordinance
of the city is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures
as he or she may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of
the public water supply distribution mains.



      (2)   Unless there is an immediate threat to public health or
the safety of the city’s water system, the Superintendent of Public Works
or the Superintendent’s designee shall send the customer by certified mail
or personal delivery a notice of the impending termination of water service.
Such notice shall be sent not less than seven calendar days prior to the
termination of service, and the notice shall be substantially in the
following form:



      The city intends to terminate water service to your premises at
                                            on or after
  (date)    for the following reasons:           . Following such
termination, water service will not be resumed at your premises until any
conditions giving rise to such termination have been cured, all penalties or
fines have been paid, and a re-connection fee of $          is paid.



      You have the right to meet with the City Manager or a person
designated by the City Manager to discuss the reasons that your service is to
be terminated. The official you meet with will have the power to order that
your service be continued if you demonstrate that the city’s reasons for
cutting off service are improper or inadequate. You may provide the official
with any evidence you think is relevant.



      To schedule a hearing, please call the City Clerk at
847-234-2600, or appear in person to schedule a hearing with the City Clerk
at the City Hall, 220 East Deerpath, before the termination date noted above.
For more information about the reasons your service is being cut off, you may
wish to review the City Code. To review a copy of the City Code, please
contact the City Clerk.



      (3)   If the customer makes a timely request to meet with the
City Manager or the Manager’s designee, no action shall be taken on the
pending termination of the customer’s water service until after the
scheduled meeting between the customer and the Manager or the Manager’s
designee. If the Manager or Manager’s designee determines that, based on
the evidence presented by the customer, the basis for terminating the
customer’s water service is improper or inadequate in light of the
requirements of the city code, then the Manager or the Manager’s designee
shall revoke the termination notice and so advise the Superintendent of
Public Works. If the basis for the pending termination notice is justified,
the Manager or Manager’s designee shall so inform the customer at the time
of the hearing and:



         (a)   Advise the customer of the customer’s right to
file for an appeal before the City Council, which appeal shall be delivered
to the City Clerk in writing before the close of business on the business day
following the meeting with the City Manager or the Manager’s designee; and



         (b)   Either:



            1.   If an appeal has been timely filed, notify
the City Council, the Superintendent of Public Works and the customer of the
date of the appeal before the City Council; or



            2.   If an appeal has not been timely filed,
notify the Superintendent of Public Works to terminate the customer’s water
service. In the event of an appeal, the appeal shall proceed before the City
Council on the date prescribed. Such appeal shall be conducted in accordance
with the general rules for appeal as established by the Council from
time-to-time. The Council’s determination on the appeal shall be final, and
the City Manager shall inform the customer and the Superintendent of Public
Works in writing of the decision of the Council.



      (4)   If, after adequate notice of a meeting, the customer has
not met with the Manager or the Manager’s designee or if, after the meeting
(and any appeal as provided above), the Manager or the Manager’s designee
directs the Superintendent of Public Works that water service should be
terminated, the Superintendent shall order the termination of water service.
Water service to the customer’s property shall not be restored until
conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, all penalties and fines have been paid, and until
a reconnection fee is paid to the city. Such reconnection fee shall be set
from time-to-time by the City Council.



      (5)   Immediate termination of water service can be effected
with verbal notice when the Superintendent is assured that an imminent risk
of harmful contamination of the public water supply exists. Such action shall
be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate
disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual
or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply,
provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the Superintendent or the IEPA,
such action is required to prevent a danger to public health or the city’s
water system through an actual or potential contamination or pollution of the
public water supply. Written notification shall follow such action within a
reasonable time period. Any customer whose water service has been
disconnected pursuant to this section shall, upon the filing of a written
request with the City Clerk, have the opportunity to appeal such
disconnection to the City Manager. If the City Manager finds that there were
not adequate grounds for such disconnection, the customer’s water service
shall be restored immediately without charge; otherwise, the customer’s
water service shall not be restored until all violative conditions on the
customer’s property have been corrected, all penalties and fines (if any)
have been satisfied, and a reconnection fee has been paid.



      (6)   Neither the city, the Superintendent or their agents or
assigns shall be liable to any customer for injury, damages or lost revenues
that may result from termination of the customer’s water supply in
accordance with the terms of this code, whether or not the termination was
with or without notice.



   (F)   The consumer responsible for back siphon or back pressured
material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable
water supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an
improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has
been bypassed, shall bear the cost of clean up of the potable water supply
system.



(Prior Code, § 44-33)  (Ord. 92-18, passed 5-4-1992; Ord. 02-03, passed
2-21-2002)




METERS




§ 51.045  WATER METERS.



   (A)   All services shall be provided with a water meter, the type
and size of which shall be approved by the Superintendent of Water.



   (B)   No water meter shall be permitted to remain in service after
it shall fail to correctly register all flows of water passing through it.
The city will repair or replace all meters which fail to correctly register
such flows, if such failure is due to wear or defective working parts.



   (C)   The owner of the property on whose service the meter is
installed shall bear all risk of failure of the meter to correctly register
when such failure is due to improper installation, damage from freezing,
overheating or physical damage to said meter.



   (D)   Meters shall be installed by the owner in accordance with the
rules and regulations established by the city.



   (E)   No person other than the duly authorized officer or employee
of the city shall repair or in any way alter or interfere with any water
meter installed in any building, structure or premises for the control of the
water thereto; if it shall be found that such water meter is being tampered
with, by an unauthorized person, the owner of such building, structure or
premises in which said meter is installed or located or the person in
possession, charge or control thereof shall be held responsible for such
unauthorized tampering or interference, and the water supply to such
building, structure or premises may be cut off; and if such water supply is
cut off for such cause, it shall not be again turned on until the owner or
person in charge of such building, structure or premises in which the meter
is located shall have paid to the city the cost and expense of cutting off
and turning on such water supply and the further sum as set out in the fee
schedule as liquidated damages for and on account of such unauthorized
tampering or interference.



   (F)   The city shall retain ownership of all meters installed on
inside city services and shall retain the right to enter any buildings,
structures or premises where said meters are located, for the purpose of
inspecting, checking, repairing, removing or replacing such meters.



(Prior Code, § 44-40)



§ 51.046  WATER WELLS.



   To protect the public water supply of the city from contamination from
private wells, preserve the integrity and viability of the entire public
water system, and to protect the health, safety and public welfare of the
community:



   (A)   Permitted, minimum requirements. Wells are permitted on
properties that meet one of the following minimum standards:



      (1)   The property is a minimum of five  acres.



      (2)   Contiguous properties, in common ownership, meeting the
definition of a zoning lot as defined in § 159.002, which together total a
minimum of five acres.



      (3)   The property or zoning lot is a minimum of three acres
and:



         (a)   Protected in whole or part by a recorded
conservation easement(s) or other recorded easement established for the
purpose of preserving and protecting trees, landscaping or open space; or



         (b)   Included in a Local Historic District or
designated, in whole, or in part, or is designated as a local landmark; or



         (c)   A variance to allow the installation of a water
well is granted for the property, under the provisions of § 159.042, based
on unique garden or natural features of the site.



   (B)   Permitted, general requirements. All of the following minimum
requirements shall be met:



      (1)   Only one well is permitted on a zoning lot.



      (2)   Wells and all associated structures shall be located
wholly on private property and in conformance with applicable zoning setbacks.



      (3)   Wells shall be separated from any habitable residential
structure by a minimum distance of 20 feet.



      (4)   Notice shall be posted within five  feet of the well
structure stating that water from the well is safe for irrigation only and is
not treated for human consumption.



      (5)   The property owner must sign a hold harmless agreement,
in a form approved by the city, to hold the city harmless in the case of any
claim arising from the use of well water. The document shall be recorded on
the property deed.



      (6)   Any manholes or other above-ground openings located
below the BFE must be watertight.



   (C)   Prohibitions.



      (1)   Wells shall not be used for obtaining or storing water
for human consumption.



      (2)   Water from a well shall not be piped in to any habitable
structure.



      (3)   Water from a well shall not be used in irrigation
systems located within ten feet of a habitable residential structure.



      (4)   No physical connection or cross connection is permitted
between an irrigation system which is connected to a well and:



         (a)   The public water system, or



         (b)   A residential potable water system.



      (5)   Hose connections are prohibited on any portion of an
irrigation system which is connected to a well.



      (6)   No well may draw water from a deep aquifer, as
determined by the State of Illinois or the Director of Public Works.



   (D)   Application process. Application for a private well shall be
made on a form provided by the city and submitted to the city’s Community
Development Department. The application shall include the following:



      (1)   Legal survey of the property.



      (2)   A detailed plan indicating the proposed location and
depth of the well, the location of any existing or proposed irrigation
systems, details of all proposed water connections, pump houses and tanks.



      (3)   Information on the size of the proposed well.



      (4)   Application for an electrical permit and electrical
contractor information.



      (5)   Documentation of approval, or pending approval from the
Lake County Health Department.



      (6)   Demonstration of prior approval from all required State
of Illinois regulatory agencies.



      (7)   If a pond is proposed, all required permit applications
and documentation must be submitted to allow review of the proposed pond. All
necessary permits must be obtained.



      (8)   Any additional materials or information deemed necessary
by the Director of Public Works or Director of Community Development.



   (E)   Approval process. Applications that are determined to meet the
standards and requirements of this section may be approved subject to the
following requirements being satisfied in the determination of the Director
of Public Works and Director of Community Development:



      (1)   The property owner authorizes the city to, from time to
time, at all reasonable hours, as deemed necessary to assure the public
health and safety, to conduct on site inspections.



      (2)   Documentation of final approvals from all applicable
State of Illinois and Lake County agencies are filed with the city.



      (3)   Prior to authorization to operate the well, a report
from the well drilling contractor must be submitted and will be subject to
review and approval by the Director of Public Works.



      (4)   Submittal, on an annual basis, of satisfactory results
from RPZ testing shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development
verifying no cross connections or other threats to the public water system
exist.



   (F)   Non-use; change of use.



      (1)   If a well ceases to be used for a minimum of two
consecutive years, the city may require the well to be decommissioned or
abandoned at the sole cost of the property owner.



      (2)   If application is made for subdivision of property on
which a well is located, the application shall demonstrate that the minimum
standards for water wells will continue to be fully satisfied. If the minimum
standards are not met, the well shall be decommissioned or abandoned as a
condition of the subdivision and prior to the recording of the subdivision
plat.



   (G)   Decommissioning; abandonment. The following minimum
requirements shall be met during the process of decommissioning or
abandonment:



      (1)   Prior to decommissioning or abandonment, a notice of
intent to decommission or abandon must be filed with the Director of
Community Development.



      (2)   All decommissioning or abandonment shall be done in
accordance with all applicable requirements of all appropriate regulatory
agencies of the State of Illinois and Lake County. Prior to the abandonment
of a well, the well owner must obtain permission from these regulatory
agencies to do such work and in turn, notify the city of his or her intention
to abandon a well prior to the actual work.



      (3)   Upon completion of the decommissioning or abandonment,
the city shall conduct an on-site inspection and upon a determination that
all applicable requirements are satisfied, the city will issue a notice of
closure.



      (4)   After a notice of closure is issued, the property owner
shall file all required documents with the appropriate regulatory state and
county agencies and with the city.



   (H)   General prohibition. Except as otherwise expressly authorized
in this section, no new water well shall be permitted in the city.



   (I)   Violations; penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any
provision of this section shall be subject to fines and penalties in the
maximum amount authorized under the city code for each violation. Each
instance of non-compliance with separate provisions of this section shall be
deemed a separate violation. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate violation.



(Prior Code, § 44-41)  (Ord. 1514, passed 6-3-1985; Ord. 2015-25, passed
4-20-2015; Ord. 2015-57, passed 10-5-2015)




RATES AND CHARGES




§ 51.060  CUSTOMER CLASSES.



   Water customers shall be grouped into customer classes determined by
the size of the meter serving the customers’ premises as follows:



 


Customer Class

 

Size of meter




Small

 

Less than 2-inch meter




Medium

 

2-inch to 4-inch meter




Large

 

Meters over 4 inches




 



(Ord. 07-13, passed 3-19-2007)



§ 51.061  WATER RATES INSIDE THE CITY LIMITS.



   (A)   It shall be required that all service lines be equipped with
meters furnished by the city as hereinafter provided to correctly measure all
water used, and the following rates for water consumption are hereby adopted
and established for services within the city limits effective for all usage
billed after May 1, 2007: as set out in the fee schedule.



   (B)   In addition to charges for water consumption as set forth in
division (A) above, a fixed customer charge, based solely on customer class,
shall be assessed quarterly against all service meters inside the city limits
of the city as set out in the fee schedule.



   (C)   Water bills shall be rendered quarterly and shall be due
within 30 days after issuance by the city. A penalty of 5% shall be added to
the total bill if a bill is not paid within 30 days of the date of such bill.



   (D)   For customers located within the city, the city will furnish a
satisfactory master meter for the service desired. Special type meters,
submeters or multiple meters may be installed after the master meter, if
requested by the customer, at his or her expense.



   (E)   If a meter fails to register the quantity of water consumed,
the amount shall be estimated and the charge otherwise due pursuant to
division (A) above shall be based on such estimate for a similar period of
time and condition. If the meter accuracy is questioned by a customer, the
customer may have the meter tested by a certified meter testing company. If
the meter is found to be correct, the customer will pay the entire testing
charge. If the meter is found to be incorrect, the city will pay the entire
testing charge.



   (F)   Property owners shall be held responsible as the customer for
any failure or inability of tenants of premises to pay water accounts.



   (G)   The charges and fees set forth in this section shall be
minimum charges and may be changed from time to time, by motion, as the
Council deems necessary.



   (H)   The rates shall be charged for all domestic water customers
within the city limits. Customers desiring special rates for other than
domestic uses shall be charged at rates to be determined by the City Council,
which determination may be modified from time to time in the sole discretion
of the city.



(Prior Code, § 44-47)  (Ord. 07-13, passed 3-19-2007; Ord. 2014-52, passed
12-1-2014; Ord. 2015-57, passed 10-5-2015)



§ 51.062  WATER RATES OUTSIDE THE CITY LIMITS.



   (A)   It shall be required that all service lines for furnishing
water to customers outside the city limits shall be equipped with a water
meter, to be furnished by the customer, to correctly measure all water used
and the following rates are hereby adopted and established for such services
effective for all usage billed after May 1, 2007 except as authorized by
contract approved by the City Council: as set out in the fee schedule.



   (B)   In addition to charges for water consumption as set forth in
division (A) above, a fixed customer charge, based solely on customer class,
shall be assessed quarterly against all service meters outside the city
limits as set out in the fee schedule.



   (C)   Water bills shall be rendered quarterly and shall be due
within 30 days after issuance by the city. A penalty of 5% shall be added to
the total bill if a bill is not paid within 30 days of the date of such bill.



   (D)   A deduction, as set out in the fee schedule, per customer per
bill shall be applied to all customers who participate in the direct debit
program for payment of their water bills.



   (E)   The rates shall be charged for all domestic water customers
outside the city limits. Customers desiring special rates for other than
domestic uses shall be charged at rates to be determined by the City Council.



   (F)   (1)   When a subdivider of property outside the city limits
desires water service, the subdivider shall submit to the city a plat of said
subdivision showing the size and location of all proposed water main
improvements to be installed by the subdivider at his or her expense.



      (2)   Upon approval by the City Council of the plan, the
signing of a proper agreement with the city, the subdivider may make the
suitable connection with the water mains of the city.



      (3)   Fees shall be set by the City Council, by motion, and
may be changed from time to time, by motion, as the Council deems necessary.



   (G)   If the water service is to serve property lying within the
limits of the adjoining municipality, the subdivider shall provide letter of
approval of the installation from such adjoining municipality. Rates, tapping
permits, deposits and other conditions pertaining to the service shall be as
provided by ordinance or set forth in special agreement approved by the City
Council.



(Prior Code, § 44-48)  (Ord. 07-13, passed 3-19-2007)



§ 51.063  OTHER RATES.



   (A)   Rates to municipal corporations. Municipal corporations
desiring to purchase water from the city may, upon application to and with
the approval of the City Council, be supplied with water at a rate, subject
to such conditions, as shall be determined by the City Council.



   (B)   Rates to private golf courses. The Onwentsia, Conway Farms and
Knollwood Private Golf Courses may be allowed to draw water from the city’s
public water supply for emergency purposes to fill ponds on the premises of
the courses, which water shall be charged at a rate of 125% of the applicable
volume charge rate set forth in §§ 51.061 and 51.062 of this chapter (as
applicable) for all water taken. Approval to draw water must be given by the
Superintendent of Public Works.



(Prior Code, § 44-49)  (Ord. 07-13, passed 3-19-2007)



§ 51.064  DELINQUENCIES.



   All water accounts must be paid when due. If any user or customer shall
fail to make payment before the fifteenth day of the month in which payment
is due (or the date stated on a bill), a final notice shall be sent out,
unless a payment plan is agreed upon between the city and such user or
customer. In any case in which payment is not made after the time of the
final notice limit is reached or pursuant to an agreed upon payment plan, the
city shall reserve the right to shut off and disconnect the service. Once
water service to a user or customer has been shut-off, the water may not be
turned on again until the user or customer (or anyone that has assumed the
account and account obligations of a user or customer under § 51.065) pays
all outstanding amounts attributable to such water account plus a charge of
as set out in the fee schedule for turning the water off and a fee as set out
in the fee schedule for reconnection or a fee for both. If the water shut-off
or reconnection is accomplished utilizing staff on overtime, then the charge
is as set out in the fee schedule for turning the water off and a fee as set
out in the fee schedule for turning it back on, or a fee for both.



(Prior Code, § 44-50)  (Ord. 2008-41, passed 12-1-2008)



§ 51.065  CHANGES IN OWNERSHIP OF PROPERTY; BILLING ACCOUNT TRANSFERS;
COMPLIANCE INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever a person, firm, corporation or entity
occupying any premises requests or obtains potable water service from the
city’s water system, and irrespective of whether the city obtains a deposit
to secure payments for such potable water service, there shall be established
a water account for such premises that shall remain in effect unless and
until a final water bill is requested and paid, and a certified receipt of
final payment is issued from the city relating to such account. In the event
of a transfer of interest in or occupancy of a premises, the account holder
must notify the city in writing before the date of the transfer and the name
of the entity to which the premises is to be transferred. Absent such
notification, no final water bill may be issued, and the account holder will
remain responsible for any and all fees, charges, rates, penalties, fines,
obligations and liabilities accrued until such time that notice is given and
the final water bill is issued. Whenever a premises has an active water
account with the city, any person, firm, corporation or entity to whom an
interest in or occupancy of a premises is transferred has the obligation to
notify the city in writing no later than the time of such transfer of their
interest or occupancy, which notice must request a change in the water
account and identify the premises, the date of the transfer and the name of
the entity from whom the premises is being transferred.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever a person, firm, corporation or entity
occupying any premises requests or obtains potable water service from the
city’s water system, and irrespective of whether the city obtains a deposit
to secure payments for such potable water service, there shall be established
a water account for such premises that shall remain in effect unless and
until a final water bill is requested and paid, and a certified receipt of
final payment is issued from the city relating to such account. In the event
of a transfer of interest in or occupancy of a premises, the account holder
must notify the city in writing before the date of the transfer and the name
of the entity to which the premises is to be transferred. Absent such
notification, no final water bill may be issued, and the account holder will
remain responsible for any and all fees, charges, rates, penalties, fines,
obligations and liabilities accrued until such time that notice is given and
the final water bill is issued and paid.



      (2)   Whenever a premises has an active water account with the
city, any person, firm, corporation or entity to whom an interest in or
occupancy of a premises is transferred has the obligation to notify the city
in writing no later than the time of such transfer of their interest or
occupancy, which notice must request a change in the water account and
identify the premises, the date of the transfer and the name of the entity
from whom the premises is being transferred. A transferee who fails to so
notify the city as provided in this division (A) and thereafter uses water
from the premises will be deemed to have an assumed, and to become jointly
and severally responsible for, the pre-existing water account for the
premises and all obligations thereof, irrespective of the water usage by the
transferee, except with respect to lessees in accordance with division (A)(3)
below.



      (3)   A lessee who is a responsible party under an existing
water account may be relieved of further responsibility for such water
account as follows:



         (a)   Whenever an existing water account is being
terminated due to a transfer of ownership, any such person, firm, corporation
or entity responsible for such account under this section shall first make a
request for a certificate of compliance. If a notice of violation is issued
pursuant to division (E) below, a lessee responsible for such account may
file a request for termination of water service to the premises on forms
provided by the city, which request shall also be served upon the lessor and
owner of the premises. Within seven business days after the filing of such
request, the Superintendent of Water or the Superintendent’s designee shall
render a final bill for water services to the lessee. After the lessee
delivers final payment to the city relating to such account (including any
and all fines, penalties, late fees and interest that may be due), water
service to the premises shall be terminated until a certificate of compliance
is obtained and a reconnection fee is paid in accordance with this section.
The lessee shall be relieved of any further responsibility for such water
account upon final payment and termination of such service to such premises.
If more than one person, firm, corporation or entity has occupied or owned
the premises during the pendency of such account, each such person, firm,
corporation and entity shall be jointly and severally liable for all matters
and charges relating to such account.



         (b)   If a lessee’s lease and occupancy of premises is
concluding without the transfer of ownership of the premises, a lessee may
file a request for release from the water service account for the premises on
forms provided by the city, which request shall also be served upon the
lessor and owner of the premises. Within seven business days after the filing
of such request (unless the lessor or owner of the premises objects in
writing within that time), the Superintendent of Water or the
Superintendent’s designee shall render a final bill for water services to
the lessee. After the lessee delivers final payment to the city relating to
such account (including any and all fines, penalties, late fees and interest
that may be due) and ceases use and occupancy of the premises, such lessee
shall be released from further responsibility for such account, but the
owner, lessor, and any occupant of the premises shall be and remain
responsible for such water service account as otherwise provided in this
section.



   (B)   Whenever an existing water account for any premises improved
with a single-family or two-family dwelling is being terminated due to a
transfer of ownership, as a condition of receiving a certified receipt of
final payment from the city with respect to the water account for such
premises (except as otherwise provided pursuant to division (A)(3) above), a
person, firm, corporation or entity that owns or occupies the premises to
which the account relates shall obtain an inspection of such premises by the
Director of Community Development or the Director’s designee to verify
compliance with the provisions of the city code and other applicable laws,
rules and regulations governing or relating to sanitary sewer or water
service connections to said premises. If the Director of Community
Development or the Director’s designee, based on such inspection of the
premises, identifies no violations of the city code or applicable laws, rules
or regulations, or any outstanding fines, fees or charges governing or
relating to sanitary sewer or water service connections to said premises, the
Director of Community Development or the Director’s designee shall issue a
certificate of compliance to the person, firm, corporation or entity
requesting such inspection. Any certificate of compliance issued pursuant to
this division (B) shall expire upon 120 days of its issuance date, unless
delivered to the Superintendent of Water as provided in division (C) below,
or unless otherwise extended or renewed by the Director of Community
Development.



   (C)   Final water billing.



      (1)   Transfer of one- and two- family dwellings.



         (a)   With respect to premises improved with a
single-family or two-family dwelling for which a transfer of ownership is
impending, any person, firm, corporation or entity that owns or occupies the
premises seeking a certified receipt of final payment shall:



            1.   A.    Deliver the certificate of
compliance (as issued pursuant to division (B) above) to the Superintendent
of Water (or the Superintendent’s designee); and



               B.    Request a final water meter reading;



            2.   Both to occur within 120 days after the
issuance of such certificate of compliance.



         (b)   Upon receipt of such certificate of compliance and
request for a final water meter reading, the Superintendent of Water shall
cause a final bill for water services to be rendered based on an actual meter
reading. Upon payment of such bill (and any late charges, interest, penalties
or fines that may be applicable), the Superintendent of Water shall cause a
certified receipt of final payment to be issued to such person, firm,
corporation or entity.



      (2)   Other water service premises. Any person, firm,
corporation or entity that owns or occupies premises (except those improved
with a single-family or two-family dwelling in connection with an impending
transfer of ownership) and seeking a certified receipt of final payment shall
request the Superintendent of Water to undertake a final water meter reading
and cause a final bill for water services to be rendered based on an actual
meter reading. Upon payment of such bill (and any late charges, interest,
penalties or fines that may be applicable), the Superintendent of Water shall
cause a certified receipt of final payment to be issued to such person, firm,
corporation or entity.



   (D)   Whenever a person, firm, corporation or entity occupying or
owning a premises requests a final water meter reading for such premises, the
city shall have the right to terminate water service to such premises
following the issuance of a final bill for water services for such premises,
unless the city receives a request to establish a new water account for a
premises. If water service is terminated before a request for a new water
account is received, the applicable re-connection fee or charge must be paid
to the city before water service to such premises will be re-activated.



   (E)   In the event that any inspection conducted pursuant to
division (B) above results in a finding of any violation of the city code or
other applicable law, rule or regulation governing or relating to sanitary
sewer or water service connections to said premises, or any outstanding
fines, fees or charges relating to said premises, the Director of Community
Development shall cause to be issued a written notification of such violation
or violations (the “notice of violation”), within five days after such
inspection, to the person, firm, corporation or entity owning or occupying
such premises (based on water billing information or other information
available to the city). Such notice of violation shall set forth with
reasonable particularity the nature of each violation identified in such
inspection, or any outstanding fines, fees or charges, and shall direct that
each such violation be corrected, or that any outstanding fines, fees, or
charges be promptly paid. Upon correction of any such violation or
violations, the person, firm, corporation or entity owning or occupying the
premises shall request the Director of Community Development to conduct a
re-inspection of the premises’ sanitary sewer or water service connection
for purposes of obtaining a certificate of compliance; provided, however,
that no certificate of compliance shall be issued unless all violations
identified in the notice of violation have been corrected, the re-inspection
shall identify no other violations with the premises’ sanitary sewer or
water service connection, and all other conditions of a certificate of
compliance shall be satisfied; and, provided further, that no certificate of
compliance shall be issued unless any outstanding fines, fees or charges
relating to said premises have been paid.



   (F)   The fee for any inspection or any re-inspection conducted
pursuant to this section shall be as established and published from time to
time by the Director of Community Development or as otherwise set by the city.



   (G)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, and in
accordance with the city’s governmental functions to protect the public
health, safety and welfare and to protect and preserve its water, sanitary
sewer and other public service systems, the City Council shall have the
power, in its sole and absolute discretion, to designate areas of the city
from time to time for inspection by the Director of Community Development or
the Directors designee of all premises within any such area to verify
compliance with the provisions of the city code and other applicable laws,
rules and regulations governing or relating to sanitary sewer and water
service connections to said premises (“inspection area”). In the event
that the City Council shall designate an inspection area, the following
procedures shall be followed:



      (1)   The City Manager shall cause notice to be served by
personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon each
owner within such inspection area. For purposes of this division (G), OWNER
shall be the person to whom the tax bill for the general taxes for the last
preceding year was sent. All notices shall be served no less than five days
prior to the first scheduled inspection in any inspection area.



      (2)   The Director of Community Development or the
Director’s designee is hereby empowered to enter each premises within any
inspection area, after proper notice has been made, to inspect each premises
to verify compliance with the provisions of the city code and other
applicable laws, rules and regulations governing or relating to sanitary
sewer and water service connections to each such premises. Any person, firm,
corporation or entity that refuses to allow the Director or the Director’s
designee reasonable access to his, her or its premises following receipt of
notice shall be in violation of this division (G)(2) and subject to
penalties, fines and other remedies that the city may pursue under the code.



      (3)   In the event that such inspection of a premises, does
not identify any violations of the city code or applicable laws, rules or
regulations governing or relating to sanitary sewer or water service
connections to said premises, or any outstanding fines, fees or charges
relating to said premises connection to sanitary sewer or water service, the
Director of Community Development or the Director’s designee shall issue a
certificate of compliance to the owner. Such certificate of compliance shall
not have an expiration date, but its issuance to any owner within an
inspection area shall not relieve any such owner of the requirements set
forth in division (B) above, except as may be permitted under division (H)
below.



      (4)   In the event that such inspection of a premises results
in a finding of any violation of the city code or other applicable law, rule
or regulation governing or relating to sanitary sewer or water service
connections to said premises, or any outstanding fines, fees or charges
relating to said premises’ connection to sanitary sewer or water service,
the Director of Community Development shall cause to be issued a notice of
violation within five days after such inspection, to the owner. Such notice
of violation shall set forth with reasonable particularity the nature of each
violation identified in such inspection, or any outstanding fines, fees or
charges, and shall direct that each such violation be corrected, or that any
outstanding fines, fees or charges be promptly paid. The owner shall be
required to follow the corrective procedures and re-inspection provisions set
forth in  division (E) above. Issuance of a certificate of compliance to an
owner after any violations have been corrected shall not relieve any such
owner of the requirements set forth in division (B) above, except as may be
permitted under division  (H) below.



      (5)   Each owner within an inspection area shall be
responsible for all applicable fees established pursuant to division (F)
above.



   (H)   The Director of Community Development or the Director’s
designee may, in the Director’s reasonable discretion, waive the need for
an inspection and certificate of compliance for any premises improved with a
single-family or two-family dwelling if such premises had received a
certificate of compliance within three years prior to a request for a final
water bill or a notice issued pursuant to division (G)(2) above. No such
waiver shall be valid unless in writing and signed by the Director.



   (I)   Nothing in this section shall limit the city’s authority
with respect to securing compliance with or enforcing any applicable city
code or other applicable law, rule or regulation. In addition, inspections or
certificates of compliance undertaken or issued under this section are solely
for the benefit of the city as part of its governmental functions to protect
the public health, safety and welfare and to protect and preserve its water,
sanitary sewer and other public service systems. No person shall rely on such
inspections or certificates for any other purpose.



   (J)   The Director of Community Development shall have the authority
to establish rules and standards for inspections conducted pursuant to
divisions (B), (E) and (G) consistent with the objectives of this section as
well as personnel and budgetary capabilities.



(Prior Code, § 44-51)  (Ord. 03-09, passed 2-20-2003; Ord. 2008-41, passed
12-1-2008; Ord. 2015-57, passed 10-5-2015)



§ 51.066  SUPPLEMENTAL CHARGE FOR FEE RELATED TO PUBLIC SAFETY PENSION
OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Establishment of fee related to public safety pension
obligations. There is hereby established a fee related to public safety
pension obligations. The amount of such fee shall be established from



time-to-time by the City Council as part of the City Fee Schedule.



   (B)   Purpose. The fee related to public safety pension obligations
is intended to supplement other city revenues in support of the public safety
services provided in the city for the benefit of city residents and
properties. Such public safety services are provided, inter alia, through the
city’s Police Department, Fire Department, and its public water supply
system (the “water system”). The fee related to public safety pension
obligations is hereby imposed to defray in part costs related to public
safety services resulting from the city’s pension obligations associated
with the Police Pension Fund and Fire Pension Fund.



   (C)   Use of revenue. The revenue collected from the fee related to
public safety pension obligations shall be used to offset the city’s
obligatory contributions to the Police Pension Fund and Fire Pension Fund in
the manner determined by the City Council.



   (D)   Collection and implementation. The fee related to public
safety pension obligations shall be charged to all customers of the water
system and invoiced as part of the periodic bills issued to customers of the
water system (a “utility bill”).



(Ord. 2017-45, passed 8-7-2017)



§ 51.067  APPLICATION OF PAYMENTS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of moneys from any utility bill, such moneys
shall be applied as follows:



      (1)   First to any penalties due for delinquent payments on
prior utility bills;



      (2)   Next to any late fee or interest accrued as a result of
any late or delinquent payments from prior utility bills;



      (3)   Next to the fee related to public safety pension
obligations;



      (4)   Next to any sanitary sewer, sanitation, and any other
service charges or fees invoiced through a utility bill; and



      (5)   Finally to water charges, with the oldest charges being
paid first.



   (B)   In the event of any underpayment of a utility bill by a
customer, the underpayment shall be deemed to affect first amounts due for
service from the city’s water system, and such underpayments may, subject
to the provisions of this code, result in termination of customer’s service
from the water system.



(Ord. 2017-45, passed 8-7-2017)




MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS




§ 51.075  REPAIRS; LEAKS.



   (A)   Property owners will be held liable for the maintenance of and
repairs to (i) all plumbing within or on their property, and (ii) private
service lines leading from any city water main to their property, including
such parts of any service lines lying within a city street, alley, easement
or across other private property. Known leakage or loss of water will not be
permitted and failure of the property owner or user to make immediate repairs
upon the discovery of such leakage shall be cause for the city to restrict or
shut off water service until the necessary repair or replacement is made,
under § 51.031 of this chapter; all plumbing must be kept in proper
condition in such manner as to prevent any unnecessary wastage of water.



   (B)   (1)   In the event leakage occurs where water is taken from
the public water mains for private consumption after passing through a meter,
the owner or user may, within 90 days from the receipt by him or her of any
water bill from the city, make application for an adjustment of that water
bill in writing stating the conditions causing the excessive water bill and
stating that the source of the leakage has been repaired. The owner or user
must supply the city with a sworn affidavit executed by a duly licensed
plumber that such leak has been repaired and that there are no other leaks on
the premises. Said affidavit must include copies of paid receipts
accompanying the request. It approved, the adjustment will be calculated
based on the city policy averaging the three previous year’s consumption
during the corresponding period. The calculated adjustment will be 50% of the
amount that the water bill in question exceeds the three-year average.



      (2)   No adjustments will be made in instances where, in the
judgment of the City Manager or the Manager’s designee, the leak would have
been discovered by the owner or user upon exercise of ordinary care and
diligence; and/or the leak was apparent to and/or within the knowledge of the
owner or user for ten or more days.



(Prior Code, § 44-58) (Ord. 2015-57, passed 10-5-2015)



§ 51.076  LAWN SPRINKLING.



   (A)   Water use for irrigation, including without limitation
watering plants and lawn sprinkling, is subject to certain restrictions
during the period of May 15 through September 15 of each year as hereinafter
set forth.



   (B)   (1)   Recognized authorities have found that established
lawns do not require daily sprinkling. Therefore, a system of alternate day
irrigation is hereby instituted as follows.



         (a)   Irrigation is not permitted on Mondays.



         (b)   For even numbered addresses, irrigation is allowed
on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays.



         (c)   For odd numbered addresses, irrigation is allowed
on Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays.



      (2)   For example, “809 Smith Road” is allowed to irrigate
on Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays.



   (C)   In addition to the limitations set forth in division (B)
above, in order to reduce evaporate water loss during the heat of the day,
irrigation is not permitted between 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. The city
reserves the right to direct major water users, including without limitation
schools and golf courses, to schedule their irrigation activities during
hours when the evaporative water loss is less severe.



   (D)   Newly installed lawns and plant materials may be irrigated on
an unrestricted basis for a reasonable period from the date of installation
until such new plantings are established. At the end of such period as
determined by the city, these restrictions shall apply. In drought
conditions, establishment of new lawns is discouraged, as no water supply for
irrigation can be guaranteed.



   (E)   In case of an emergency water shortage a temporary ban may be
placed on specific and/or all irrigation and other outdoor water uses by the
City Manager.



   (F)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall have the
authority to make such rules and regulations as required for the
implementation of this section, as well as guidelines with respect to the
observance of the standards set forth in this section with respect to city
properties.



   (G)   The City Manager or any designee of the City Manager shall
cause the provisions of this section to be enforced. Any violation of this
provision shall be subject to a fine in accordance with § 10.99 of the City
Code. Each day that a violation of this section shall occur shall be deemed a
separate violation.



(Prior Code, § 44-59)  (Ord. 90-23, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 14-18, passed
5-5-2014)



§ 51.077  WATER SHUTOFF VALVE ACCESS.



   (A)   Water shutoff valve. As a condition of water service, each
customer must have a functioning water shutoff valve, commonly known as a
“Buffalo box” or “b-box,” which provides a means of turning off
entirely water service to the customer’s premises. For purposes of this
section, a CUSTOMER is any person owning, controlling or occupying any
premises that is served by the city’s water system; for any premises that
is served by a single water shutoff valve affecting multiple independent
units on such premises, then each customer on such premises shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the water shutoff valve as set forth in this
section.



      (1)   Be a violation of this section; and



      (2)   Authorize the city to undertake such maintenance,
repair, removal, or replacement, the cost of which shall be deemed an
additional cost of water service. If, pursuant to this chapter, water service
to a property ceases for any reason, the city may charge a reasonable fee for
the re-establishment of water service to that property. Any outstanding
costs, charges, taxes, fixed fees, fees related to water consumption,
penalties, or other amounts relating to water service, the re-establishment
of water service, or water shutoff valves associated with a property shall be
deemed to be costs attributable to the property irrespective of ownership or
occupancy, and payment of any such outstanding amounts is a condition of
re-establishing water service to that property, whether or not the customer
who incurred such costs, charges, taxes, fees, penalties, or other amounts
currently owns the property, previously owned the property, or is a current
or previous tenant upon the property.



   (C)   City access. Each customer must maintain the water shutoff
valve for any premises in an area to which the city has access. Any customer
receiving water service from the city has, by acceptance of water service,
granted the city an easement and license to access the water shutoff valve
when required, as may be determined by the city.



      (1)   Should the water shutoff valve be located in an area to
which the city’s access is impaired by any landscaping or other
improvements installed by or on behalf of a customer, the city may still
access the water shutoff valve, but the city shall have no responsibility to
restore the premises other than to fill any excavation and return it to the
surrounding grade.



      (2)   No person may interfere with the city’s access to a
water shutoff valve, including, but not limited to, camouflaging or otherwise
concealing the location of a water shutoff valve.



      (3)   To the extent that the customer has directly or
indirectly concealed or permitted the concealment, or otherwise interfered
with access to a water shutoff valve in a manner that causes the city to
incur additional costs when accessing a water shutoff valve, the city has the
discretion to charge the customer for such additional costs as a cost of
water service.



      (4)   In the event that a customer fails to maintain a water
shutoff valve in a functional manner and the city has a need to utilize such
shutoff valve, the city shall have the right to undertake the repair or
removal and replacement of the shutoff valve, and all costs relating to such
repair, removal, and replacement of a shutoff valve shall be deemed
additional costs of water service  payable with the customer’s next water
bill. Failure to pay such costs will be treated in the same manner as a
failure to pay any other water service charges relating to the city’s water
system.



      (5)   In the event any customer interferes with the city’s
access to a water shutoff valve, such interference shall be a violation of
this section and shall:



         (a)   Subject the customer to fines in an amount not
less than $250, but not more than $750, per occurrence, and each day a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate occurrence; and



         (b)   Be grounds for terminating such customer’s water
service.



   (D)   Other sections. Nothing in this section shall alter provisions
in this code of ordinances:



      (1)   Regarding responsibility for all maintenance and repairs
to all plumbing and private service lines leading from any city water main to
any premises, including such part of any service lines lying within a city
street, alley, easement or across other private property; or



      (2)   That establish procedures for water shutoff or
restoration. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this section shall control over
any inconsistent provisions in this code of ordinances.



(Ord. 11-23, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 2015-57, passed 10-5-2015)




USE OF GROUNDWATER AS A POTABLE WATER SUPPLY




§ 51.090  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision or any other legal entity, or their
legal representatives, agents or assigns.



   POTABLE WATER. Any water used for human or domestic consumption,
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes or preparing foods.



(Ord. 2011-27, passed 11-7-2011; Ord. 2014-42, passed 11-3-2014)



§ 51.091  WATER USE PROHIBITION.



   (A)    Except for such uses or methods in existence before the
effective date of Ordinance No.  2011-27, the use or attempt to use as a
potable water supply groundwat er from within the area of the corporate
limits of the city as depicted below, as a potable water supply, by the
installation or drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby
prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes the city







 



   (B)   Except for such uses or methods in existence before the
effective date of Ordinance No. 2014-42, the use or attempt to use as a
potable water supply groundwater from within the area of the corporate limits
of the city as depicted below, as a potable water supply, by the installation
or drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited. This
prohibition expressly includes the city.







 



(Ord. 2011-27, passed 11-7-2011; Ord. 2014-42, passed 11-3-2014)



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of § 51.090 of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to $750 for each violation.



(Ord. 2011-27, passed 11-7-2011; Ord. 2014-42, passed 11-3-2014)



CHAPTER 52:  SEWER USE CHARGES AND RATES



Section




General Provisions




   52.01   Definitions




Service Charges and Collection




   52.15   Sewer use service charges



   52.16   Revenues



   52.17   Accounts



   52.18   Effective date of rates



   52.19   Access to records



   52.20   Access to site



   52.21   Sewer permits



   52.22   Notice of rates



   52.23   Validity




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen used in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at 20°C, determined by
standard laboratory test procedures and expressed in mg/l.



   CITY. The City of Lake Forest of Lake County, Illinois.



   COMMERCIAL USER. Includes, but not be limited to, offices, retail and
wholesale establishments, and other establishments engaged in selling
merchandise or rendering services.



   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure specifically designed and constructed for
sampling and metering industrial wastes discharged to a public sewer.



   CUSTOMER CHARGE. The amount to be paid each quarterly billing period by
all public sanitary sewer users based solely on customer class.



   CUSTOMER CLASS. The type of customer categorized by the size of the
water meter serving the customer’s premises as set forth in § 51.060.



   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§
1251 et seq.) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of
Amendments of 1972 (Pub. Law No. 92-500 and Pub. Law No. 93-343) and the
Clean Water Act of 1977 (Pub. Law No. 95-217).



   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. Schools, hospitals and users
associated with federal, state and local governments.



   INDUSTRIAL USER. Establishments discharging industrial wastewater (wet
industries). Those industrial establishments which have no industrial
wastewater discharge (dry industries) shall be classified as commercial users
for the purposes of this chapter.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The wastewater discharged, permitted to flow or
escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business
establishment or process, or from the development, recovery or processing of
any natural resource as distinct from employees’ wastes or wastewater from
sanitary convenience.



   MAINTENANCE. All manner of activity required, including, but not
limited to, labor, supply, contract repair work and administrative
requirements to maintain the works, assets and property of the city for the
purpose of insuring its continued and uninterrupted operation.



   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



   mg/l. Means milligrams per liter.



   OPERATION. All manner of activity required, including, but not limited
to, labor, electrical power, fuel, chemicals, supplies, machinery, physical
structure, depreciation and administrative requirements, to conduct properly
the functions of collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal of waste
waters generated within the city.



   ORDINANCE. This chapter.



   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any
individual, firm, company, public or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.



   POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial
or other wastes on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is
100 gallons of sewerage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20
pounds of suspended solids.



   REPLACEMENT. The provision for and the installation of replacement
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the
service life of the sewerage works to maintain the capacity and performance
for which such works were designed and constructed.



   RESIDENTIAL USER. Each dwelling unit discharging wastewater to the
sewerage works of the city and shall include, but not be limited to, houses,
mobile homes, apartments and units within multi-family dwellings.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage and polluted industrial
wastes, and to which stormwater, surface drainage, groundwater or unpolluted
wastewater are not intentionally admitted.



   SANITARY SEWER USER SERVICE CHARGE. The total amount to be paid each
billing period by public sanitary sewer users including the basic user charge
and the customer charge, plus penalties, if applicable.



   SEWAGE. A combination of the wastewater from residential, commercial,
industrial and institutional buildings together with such groundwater
infiltration and surface water inflow that may be in the sewers.



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other wastewater,
including stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.



   SEWERAGE REVENUE FUND. The principal accounting designation for all
revenues received in the operation of the sewerage works.



   SEWERAGE WORKS. All facilities of the city for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage and industrial wastes.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastewaters; the
quantity of which is determined by standard laboratory filtering test
procedures and referred to as nonfilterable residue expressed in mg/1.



   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Public Works of the city or his
or her duly authorized deputy or representative.



   USER CLASS. The type of user categorized as follows: residential user,
commercial user, industrial user, institutional/governmental user.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices, structures and
processes for the treating and disposing of sewage.



(Prior Code, § 48-1)  (Ord. 07-13, passed 3-19-2007)




SERVICE CHARGES AND COLLECTION




§ 52.15  SEWER USE SERVICE CHARGES.



   (A)   There shall be and there are hereby established sanitary sewer
user service charges for the use of and for the service supplied by the
sewerage works of the city which shall consist of a customer charge, plus a
fixed customer charge, for operation and maintenance, plus replacement and
penalties if applicable.



   (B)   The city shall prepare annually, prior to the close of the
fiscal year, an estimate of anticipated costs of operation, maintenance and
replacement for the forthcoming fiscal year, specifically including direct
operation and maintenance, administration, equipment replacement and
depreciation costs, which estimate shall be submitted to the City Council to
be considered amended if necessary and adopted for the subsequent year by
ordinance.



   (C)   Each user will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction
with a regular bill, of the sanitary sewer user charge and the customer
charge.



   (D)   Water usage shall be determined from readings taken from
approved water meters during the winter quarter period to provide equitable
accounting for water not returned to the sanitary sewers during other
quarters of the year. The total annual water use for the purpose of
establishing the customer charge rate shall be equal to four times the winter
quarter use.



   (E)   (1)   The rates to be used in the computation of the
sanitary sewer user service charge shall be as set out in the fee schedule.



      (2)   A fixed customer charge, based solely on customer class,
shall be assessed quarterly against all users of the sanitary sewer system as
set out in the fee schedule.



      (2)   The fees set forth in this section shall be minimum
amounts and such fees may be changed from time to time by motion, as Council
deems necessary.



   (F)   The adequacy of the sewer user service charges shall be
reviewed annually by the certified public accountants for the city in their
annual audit report. The service charges shall be revised periodically to
reflect changes in operation and maintenance costs including replacement
costs.



   (G)   Meter usage shall be read to the lowest even increment of 100
cubic feet, bill per 1,000 gallons. Sewer users who obtain any portion of
their water service, from other than public water supply sources shall
install and maintain, at no expense to the city, water meters of a type
approved by the Superintendent for the purpose of metering the water usage
obtained from such other sources. Wherever required by the Superintendent,
sewage metering devices shall be installed and maintained, at no expense to
the city, when the volume of wastewater discharged to the public sewer cannot
be otherwise determined by use of water meters. Metering devices shall not be
removed without the consent of the Superintendent unless sewer use service is
cancelled.



   (H)   The city shall read water meters located in meter pits. All
other metered water users shall receive a mail-in card on which the user
shall record the water meter reading and return said card to the city within
ten days of receipt. Failure to return said card properly filled out within
ten days of receipt shall result in a penalty assessment, as set out in the
fee schedule, for the billing period, and the service charges shall be based
upon an estimated water use consistent with previous usage.



   (I)   Sewer user service charges shall be payable quarterly on the
first day of each month. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and
the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the
service on such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the
city upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of
the service are jointly and severally liable therefore to the city. All user
charges levied under the provisions of this section shall be a lien upon the
lands within the sewerage system service area. All bills for service shall be
rendered quarterly and shall be payable not later than the close of business
on the twentieth day following posting. If payment of the full amount of the
bill is made after said period, then a penalty of 5% of the amount of the
bill shall be added thereto.



   (J)   In the event the charges for service are not paid within the
30 days after the date of billing for such service, such charges shall be
deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such
delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which such
service is supplied and the City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to
file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Lake County, Illinois, the filing of such statements
shall be deemed notice for the payment of such charges for service, in the
event that any user fails to pay the billed charge within 60 days after the
date of billing, the city shall serve termination notice upon such user and
proceed to terminate service, as provided below.



   (K)   (1)   It is hereby declared to be a policy of the city that
in the event that any person or other legal entity whose residence or other
building is connected to sewers which are tributary to the works of the
system fails to pay the user charges as assessed under this chapter, they
shall, upon the due process, be disconnected.



      (2)   The following procedure, in the event of non-payment of
user charges, shall constitute the procedure to be utilized by the city in
terminating service of such user:



         (a)   In the event that the payment of the user charge,
after having been billed in accordance with this chapter, remains unpaid 60
days thereafter, the following notice shall be forwarded by registered mail,
return receipt requested, certified mail or personal service to the occupants
at the address of the building being serviced by the city:



NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY



You are hereby notified that the sewer user charges billed to you under date
of     (insert date)      under the Sewer User Charge Ordinance of The
City of Lake Forest for the building located at         (insert
address)        have not been paid and remain delinquent, In the event
that you fail to pay said user charges within 30 days hereafter, and unless
you have applied for a hardship payment delay, your service will be
disconnected and your building will be red-tagged as unfit for human
occupancy on the fourth-fifth day after date of this notice.



Date:                  



THE CITY OF LAKE FOREST, ILLINOIS



BY:                                                
     



      City Clerk



         (b)   The City Council hereby declares that it is
against public policy for a building to be occupied by human inhabitants
which has been red-tagged by the city after appropriate notice has been given
that the building is “unfit for human occupancy.”



         (c)   In the event that such user charge remains unpaid
on the thirtieth day after the posting of the aforesaid notice, the following
notice shall be forwarded by registered mail, return receipt requested,
certified mail, or personal service to the occupants of the building and also
thumb-tacked or taped to the front door of the building or housing unit
within a building:



NOTICE OF TERMINATION



You are hereby notified that there has been no response to the notice of
delinquency in the payment of the sewer user charge and the 30 day period
therein stated has lapsed. You are hereby notified that on     (here insert
date 45 days after service of notice of delinquency)  , the city will
physically disconnect the sewer system of your building from the lateral
sewer to which it is connected and will red-tag the building located at  
(here insert address)  as “unfit for human occupancy.”



Date:                



THE CITY OF LAKE FOREST, ILLINOIS



BY:                                                
       



City Clerk



         (d)   The manner of severance and procedure for
disconnection shall be determined by the city. Upon completion of said
disconnection, the city shall forward to the occupant of the building by
registered mail, return receipt requested, certified mail or personal
service, a bill for the costs of making the disconnection, including all
costs for labor and materials, and a service charge as set out in the fee
schedule for city supervision.



         (e)   In the event of severance of service, the service
may be reinstated in the following manner:



   (L)   Upon payment to the city of the full delinquency, plus
penalties, plus the cost of the disconnection and the city supervision fee,
as set out in the fee schedule, the city will issue a permit for reconnection
of the building service line to the works of the system. Such reconnection
costs, plus inspection fees in accordance with city ordinances, shall be at
the sole expense of the user.



   (M)   Upon reconnection and payment of all costs described above,
the city through its agents, shall remove the red-tag from the building and
the building shall, so far as the city is concerned, be “fit for human
occupancy.”



   (N)   Where the ownership of property changes, by sale, foreclosure
or otherwise, and sewer rates and charges are unpaid, it shall be the duty of
the Superintendent to accept payment of current rates and charges from the
new owner or owners, and to proceed to collect the unpaid rates and charges
from the person or persons liable therefor; provided, the party offering to
pay sewer charges subsequent to his or her purchase shall be required to make
affidavit as to the time of purchase, stating in his or her affidavit the
date of the deed, and the name of the grantor, together with a record of the
deed, as shown by the Recorder’s office in which such deed is recorded.



(Prior Code, § 48-2)  (Ord. 1580, passed 4-7-1986; Ord. 07-13, passed
3-19-2007)



§ 52.16  REVENUES.



   The City Treasurer shall receive all revenues from the sewer user
service charges and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of
the sewerage works as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the
same in the account of the fund designated as the “Sewerage Fund of The
City of Lake Forest,” combined with the Water Fund. Said Treasurer shall
administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided in 65 ILCS
5/Art. 11, and all other laws amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto.



(Prior Code, § 48-3)



§ 52.17  ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts
and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and
correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage
system, and at regular annual intervals, he or she shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts
and disbursements of the sewerage system.



   (B)   (1)   In addition to the customary operating statements,
the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating
expenses of the sewerage system, including a replacement cost, to indicate
that sewer service charges under the user charge system do in fact meet these
regulations.



      (2)   In this regard, the financial information to be shown in
the audit report shall include the following:



         (a)   Billing data to show total number of gallons
billed;



         (b)   Number of users connected to the system; and



         (c)   A list of users discharging non-domestic wastes
(industrial users) and volume of waste discharged.



(Prior Code, § 48-4)



§ 52.18  EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES.



   The rates and charges established for sanitary sewer user service in §
52.15(E)(1) shall be effective as of May 1, 2007, and on bills to be rendered
for each succeeding quarter thereafter.



(Prior Code, § 48-5)  (Ord. 07-13, passed 3-19-2007)



§ 52.19  ACCESS TO RECORDS.



   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or it authorized
representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records
of the city which are applicable to the city system of user charges for the
purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to
insure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to the
state.



(Prior Code, § 48-6)



§ 52.20  ACCESS TO SITE.



   (A)   The Superintendent of Public Works and other duly authorized
employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identifications shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly
negotiated easement of the purposes of, inspection, observation,
measurements, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage
works lying within said easement.



   (B)   All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall
be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.



(Prior Code, § 48-7)



§ 52.21  SEWER PERMITS.



   (A)   A building sewer permit will be issued and a sewer connection
shall be allowed only if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
works, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities,
have sufficient reserve capacity to handle the additional anticipated waste
load adequately and efficiently.



   (B)   The city may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result
of any violation of any provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 48-8)



§ 52.22  NOTICE OF RATES.



   A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the City Clerk shall be
filed in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lake County, and shall be
deemed notice to all owners of real estate of their liability for service
supplied to any user of the service of the sewerage system of said city on
their properties.



(Prior Code, § 48-9)



§ 52.23  VALIDITY.



   (A)   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed insofar as the conflicting portions thereof are concerned.



   (B)   The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision
of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other part of this
chapter which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.



(Prior Code, § 48-10)  (Ord. 1418, passed 4-14-1984)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      72.   PEDESTRIANS



      73.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



      74.   VEHICLE EQUIPMENT



      75.   BICYCLES



      76.   MOTOR VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY FEE



      77.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      78.   PARKING AND LOADING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   70.001   Short title



   70.002   Definitions




Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws




   70.015   Required obedience to traffic laws



   70.016   Obedience to police officers



   70.017   Fleeing or attempting to elude police officer



   70.018   Public officers and employees to obey act; exceptions



   70.019   Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving
animal-drawn vehicles



   70.020   Powers of municipalities and counties; contract with school
boards, hospitals, shopping center and apartment complex owners for
regulation of traffic



   70.021   Powers of municipalities and counties; regulation of
traffic on private roads, streets and the like



   70.022   Reserved



   70.023   This title not to interfere with rights of owners of real
property with reference thereto




Miscellaneous Provisions




   70.035   Unattended motor vehicle left illegally



   70.036   Limitations on backing



   70.037   Improper riding on motorcycle



   70.038   Riding on motorized pedalcycles



   70.039   Riding motorcycle without special equipment



   70.040   Illegal handlebars on motorcycles



   70.041   Driver’s view or driving mechanism obstructed



   70.042   Unsafe opening of vehicle doors



   70.043   Riding in towed vehicle



   70.044   Coasting



   70.045   Following fire apparatus (illegally)



   70.046   Crossed fire hose



   70.047   Driving on sidewalk



   70.048   Depositing injurious material on highway



   70.049   Passed school bus; loading or unloading



   70.050   Illegal school bus operation



   70.051   School buses; stopping, loading and discharging passengers



   70.052   Obstructing person in highways



   70.053   Reserved



   70.054   Funeral processions



   70.055   Reserved



   70.056   Reserved



   70.057   Reserved



   70.058   Blocking intersections or grade crossings



   70.059   Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances and
structures



   70.060   Permits for parades and processions



   70.061   Weight limits restricted on certain streets; through
traffic and high impact traffic



   70.062   Roller skates and toy vehicles prohibited in street



   70.063   Unlawful riding



   70.064   Boarding or alighting from vehicles



   70.065   Obstructing traffic



   70.066   Snow vehicles, go-carts and the like on public property



   70.067   Motor vehicles prohibited in parks and other public property



   70.068   Failure to maintain control of vehicle



 



   70.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 70.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This title shall be known as the “Lake Forest Traffic Code.”



(Prior Code, Ch. 40, Art. I)



§ 70.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY. A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear
of lots or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation.



   ANTIQUE VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is more than 25 years of age or a
bona fide replica thereof and which is driven on the highways only going to
and returning from an antique auto show or an exhibition, or for servicing or
demonstration, or a firefighting vehicle more than 20 years old which is not
used as firefighting equipment but is used only for the purpose of exhibition
or demonstration.



   ARTERIAL STREET. Any United States or state numbered route, controlled
access highway or other major radial or circumferential street or highway
designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part
of a major arterial system of streets or highway.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal
departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by
proper local authorities; police vehicles; vehicles of the Fire Department
and ambulances.



   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two or more tandem wheels.



   BUS. Every motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for
carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons;
and every motor vehicle other than a taxicab, designed and used for the
transportation of persons for compensation.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway,
when within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use for
business or industrial, purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels,
banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which
occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on
both sides of the highway.



   CAMPER. A recreational motor vehicle of the Second Division converted
or equipped and primarily used for living quarters or for human habitation,
rather than for the transportation of freight, goods, wares and merchandise
and not used as a commercial vehicle.



   CANCELLATION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE. The annulment or termination by
formal action of the Secretary of State of a person’s driver’s license
because of some error or defect in the license or because the licensee is no
longer entitled to such license, but the cancellation of a license is without
prejudice and application for a new license may be made at any time after
such cancellation.



   CHAUFFEUR.



      (1)   All persons employed by another for the principal
purpose of driving a motor vehicle;



      (2)   All persons who drive a school bus transporting children;



      (3)   All persons employed in connection with the operation of
any school, day camp, summer camp or nursery school, who drive any motor
vehicle transporting children to or from any school, day camp, summer camp or
nursery school;



      (4)   All persons who drive any motor vehicle when in use for
the transportation of persons or property for compensation; and



      (5)   All persons who drive a commuter van while transporting
persons to and from their place of employment.



   CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street or roadway in respect
to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no
legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in
such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction
over such highway, street or roadway.



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of
persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial
enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire, not including, however, a commuter van
or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially.



   COMMUTER VAN. A motor vehicle having a capacity of 12 to 15 persons
owned or leased by a company or an employee organization and operated on a
non-profit basis with the primary purpose of transporting employees of the
company between the employees’ homes and the company’s place of business
or a public transportation station and in which the operating,
administrative, maintenance and reasonable depreciation costs are paid
principally by the persons utilizing the van.



   CROSSWALK.



      (1)   The part of a roadway at an intersection included within
the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the
edges of the traversable roadway; and



      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on
the surface placed in accordance with the provisions in the Manual adopted by
the Department of Transportation.



   DEALER. Every person engaged in the business of acquiring or disposing
of vehicles or their essential parts and who has an established place of
business for such purpose.



   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.



   ESSENTIAL PARTS. All integral and body parts of a vehicle of a type
required to be registered hereunder, the removal, alteration or substitution
of which would tend to conceal the identity of the vehicle or substantially
alter its appearance, model, type or mode of operation.



   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which
contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such
proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by
concussion, by percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or
mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the
resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on
contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb.



   FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing wagons, plows, mowing machines and other implements of
husbandry, and every implement of husbandry which is self propelled.



   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 700°F or less,
as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test device.



   FLEET. One or more commercial motor vehicles.



   FLEET SAFETY VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle which is used to supervise
operations of vehicles of the Second Division on the highway so as to promote
safety and legal operations of such Second Division vehicle.



   FOR-HIRE. The operation of a vehicle for compensation and subject to
federal regulation by the Interstate Commerce Commission or to state
regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission.



   FOREIGN VEHICLE. Every vehicle of a type required to be registered
hereunder brought into this state from another state, territory or country
other than in the ordinary course of business by or through a manufacturer or
dealer and not registered in this state.



   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle whether operated singly or in
combination without load plus the weight of the load thereon.



   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.



   HOUSE CAR. A recreational motor vehicle of the First Division converted
or equipped and primarily used for living quarters or for human habitation,
rather than as a passenger car and not used as a commercial vehicle.



   HOUSE TRAILER.



      (1)   A recreational trailer or semi-trailer equipped and used
for living quarters or for human habitation (temporarily or permanently)
rather than for the transportation of freight, goods, wares and merchandise;
or



      (2)   A house trailer or a semi-trailer which is used
commercially (temporarily or permanently), that is, for the advertising,
sales, display or promotion of merchandise or services, or for any other
commercial purpose except the transportation of property for hire or the
transportation of property for distribution by a private carrier.



   IDENTIFYING NUMBER. The numbers and letters, if any, on a vehicle
designated by the Secretary of State for the purpose of identifying the
vehicle.



   IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY. Every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively
for agricultural, horticultural or livestock raising operations, including
farm wagons, wagon trailers or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or
for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry provided that no farm
wagon, wagon trailer or like vehicle having a capacity of more than 400
bushels or a gross weight of more than 30,000 pounds, shall be included
hereunder.



   IMPROVED HIGHWAY. Any roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam and
crushed stone or gravel.



   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection
of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of
the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
roadways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.



      (1)   Where a highway includes two roadways 40 feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.



      (2)   The junction of an alley with a street or highway does
not constitute an intersection.



   INTERSTATE or INTERSTATE COMMERCE. Transportation between two or more
states or transportation originating in one state, and passing into or
through other states for delivery in another state, and which is not
intrastate.



   INTRASTATE OR INTRASTATE COMMERCE. Transportation originating at any
point or place within this state and destined to any other point or place
within this state, irrespective of the route, highway or highways traversed,
and including transportation which passes into or through another state
before delivery is made within this state, and including any act of
transportation which includes or completes a pickup within Illinois for
delivery within the state.



   LANE-CONTROL SIGNAL. An official traffic control device consisting of
an electrically controlled and illuminated signal of a square or rectangular
design and employing distinctive colors or symbols used to control the
direction of vehicular flow on the particular lane to which the indication
applies.



   LEASE. A written document vesting exclusive possession, control of and
responsibility over the operation of the vehicle in the lessee for a specific
period of time as if such lessee were the legal owner.



   LICENSE TO DRIVE. Any driver’s license or any other license or permit
to operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of this state including:



      (1)   Any temporary license or instruction permit;



      (2)   The privilege of any person to drive a motor vehicle
whether or not such person holds a valid license or permit; or



      (3)   Any nonresident’s driving privilege as defined herein.



   MANUFACTURER. Every person engaged in the business of manufacturing and
assembling vehicles or reconstructed vehicles, or engine and driveline
components for vehicles.



   MERGING TRAFFIC. A maneuver executed by the drivers of vehicles on
converging roadways to permit entry into the junction thereof, wherein the
driver of each vehicle involved is required to adjust his or her vehicular
speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with any other vehicle.



   METAL TIRE. Every tire the surface of which in contact with the highway
is wholly or partly of metal or other hard, nonresilient material.



   MOTOR CARRIER. An operator of for-hire vehicles pursuant to the
Illinois Motor Carrier of Property Law, being 625 ILCS 5/Ch. 18, subch. 4.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires,
but not operated upon rails. For this chapter, MOTOR VEHICLES are divided
into two divisions:



      (1)   First Division: those motor vehicles which are designed
for the carrying of not more than ten persons.



      (2)   Second Division: those motor vehicles which are designed
for carrying more than ten persons, those designed or used for living
quarters and those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying
freight or cargo, and those motor vehicles of the First Division remodeled
for use and used as motor vehicles of the Second Division.



   MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle and every motor scooter with less
than 150 cubic centimeter piston displacement including motorized pedalcycles.



   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of
the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.



   MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLE. A bicycle type vehicle, which has tires with an
overall inflated diameter of 19 inches or more, with fully operative pedals
for propulsion by human power, equipped with a power drive system that
functions directly or automatically only and not requiring clutching or
shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged, and a helper
motor with a cylinder capacity not exceeding 50 cubic centimeter
displacement, which produces no more than 2.0 brake horsepower, and is
capable of propelling the vehicle at a maximum speed of no more than 30 mph
on level ground.



   MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. A passenger carrying vehicle which is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off-road operation.



   NONCOMMERCIAL, VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is not a commercial vehicle.



   NON-FOR-HIRE. Operation of a commercial vehicle in furtherance of any
commercial or industrial enterprise but not for-hire.



   NONRESIDENT. Every person who is not a resident of this state.



   NONRESIDENTS DRIVING PRIVILEGE. The privilege conferred upon a
nonresident by the laws of this state pertaining to the operation by such
person of a motor vehicle, or the use of a vehicle owned by such person, in
this state.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and
devices which conform with the State Manual and not inconsistent with this
chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.



   OWNER. A person who holds legal title of a motor vehicle, or in the
event a motor vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale
or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the
conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession
vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of
such motor vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or
lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this chapter.



   PARK or PARKING.  The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.



   PASSENGER CAR. A motor vehicle of the First Division including a
multipurpose passenger vehicle, that is designed for carrying not more than
ten persons.



   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.



   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.



   PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSON. Every natural person who has permanently
lost the use of a leg or both legs or an arm or both arms or any combination
thereof or any person who is so severely disabled as to be unable move
without the aid of crutches or a wheelchair.



   PNEUMATIC TIRE. Every tire in which compressed air is designed to
support the load.



   POLE TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn
by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or
pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and
ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as
poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.



   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic
or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.



   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS. The place where any person transacts his
or her principal business, or where he or she makes up and approves his or
her payroll, maintains a central file of records and maintains his or her
principal executive offices. In the event that not all of these functions are
performed in one place, then that place where a majority of such functions
are performed or the place where such person does in fact principally
transact and control his or her business affairs.



   PRIVATE LIVING COACH. A recreational motor vehicle of the Second
Division equipped and primarily used for living quarters, human habitation or
for mobile living, rather than for the transportation of persons with direct
access to the living quarters from the driver’s seat and not used as a
commercial vehicle.



   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place, in private ownership and
used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.



   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than
streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.



   RAILROAD-HIGHWAY GRADE CROSSING. The intersection of stationary rails
owned or used in the operation of a railroad corporation across a highway.



   RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal or device other than an
official traffic control device erected in accordance with the laws governing
same and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the
approach of a railroad train.



   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.



   RECONSTRUCTED VEHICLE. Every vehicle of a type required to be
registered hereunder materially altered from its original construction by the
removal, addition or substitution of essential parts, new or used.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Every vehicle originally designed or permanently
converted and primarily used for living quarters or for human habitation and
not used as a commercial vehicle, including any house car, house trailer,
camper or private living coach.



   REGISTRATION-REGISTRATION STICKER-REGISTRATION. The registration
certificate or certificates, registration plates and registration stickers
issued under the laws of this state pertaining to the registration of
vehicles.



   REGISTRATION STICKER. A device to be attached to a registration plate
that will renew the registration and registration plate or plates for a
predetermined period not to exceed one year.



   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION BUS.



      (1)   Every motor vehicle, except as provided in division (2)
below, owned or operated by or for a religious organization or denomination
for the transportation of persons to or from any activity of the religious
organization or denomination.



      (2)   This definition does not include:



         (a)   A bus operated by a public utility, municipal
corporation or common carrier authorized to conduct local or interurban
transportation of passengers when such bus is on a regularly scheduled route
for the transportation of other fare paying passengers or furnishing charter
service for the transportation of groups on special trips or in connection
with special events and not over a regular or customary religious
organization bus route;



         (b)   A motor vehicle licensed or required to be
licensed as a school bus; or



         (c)   A motor vehicle designed for carrying not more
than nine persons, including the driver, which is not registered as a
religious organization bus under 625 ILCS 5/3-808.



   RESCUE SQUAD. A voluntary association of individuals or a fire
department dedicated to saving lives through the rescue of persons entrapped
in wrecked vehicles or other hazardous circumstances and associated with some
unit of government.



   RESCUE SQUAD VEHICLE. A vehicle specifically designed, configured and
equipped for the performance of access and extrication from hazardous or
life-endangering situations. Such vehicles may or may not have emergency
medical transport capability.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway
not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a
distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.



   RESIDENT.



      (1)   Every natural person who resides in this state shall be
deemed a resident of this state.



      (2)   In the case of a firm, copartnership or association, if
the principal place of business of such firm, copartnership or association is
located in the state, then such firm, copartnership or association shall be
deemed a resident of the state.



      (3)   In the case of a corporation, if the corporation was
incorporated under the laws of the state or if the principal place of
business of such corporation is in the state, then such corporation shall be
deemed a resident of the state.



   RETAIL SALE. The act or attempted act of selling vehicles or otherwise
disposing of a vehicle to a person for use as a consumer.



   REVERSIBLE LANE. A lane of a two or more laned roadway upon which
traffic may be directed to move in either direction by means of lane-control
signals or other devices, in conjunction with official signs.



   REVOCATION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.  The termination by formal action of
the Secretary of a person’s license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle
on the public highways, which termination shall not be subject to renewal or
restoration except that an application for a new license may be presented and
acted upon by the Secretary after the expiration of at least one year after
the date of revocation.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching
under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to
danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.



   ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.



   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
highway includes two or more separate roadways, the team ROADWAY as used
herein shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such
roadways collectively.



   RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE. Every vehicle used to deliver United
States mail on a rural mail delivery route.



   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while
set apart as a safety zone.



   SCHOOL BUS.



      (1)   Every motor vehicle, except as provided in division (2)
below, owned or operated by or for any of the following entities for the
transportation of persons regularly enrolled in any such entity as students
in grade 12 or below in connection with any activity of the entity:



         (a)   Any public or private primary or secondary school;



         (b)   Any primary or secondary school operated by a
religious institution; or



         (c)   Any public, private or religious nursery school.



      (2)   This definition shall not include the following:



         (a)   A bus operated by a public utility, municipal
corporation or common carrier authorized to conduct local or interurban
transportation of passengers when such bus is not traveling a specific school
bus route but is:



            1.   On a regularly scheduled route for the
transportation of other fare paying passengers;



            2.   Furnishing charter service for the
transportation of groups on field trips or other special trips or in
connection with other special events; or



            3.   Being used for shuttle service between
attendance centers or other educational facilities.



         (b)   A motor vehicle of the First Division; or



         (c)   A multifunction school-activity bus.



   SECRETARY. The Secretary of State of Illinois.



   SECRETARY OF STATE. The Secretary of State of Illinois.



   SEMI-TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.



   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use
of pedestrians.



   SITUS OR BASE OF VEHICLE. The place where a vehicle is principally
garaged, or from whence it is principally dispatched, or where the movements
of such vehicle usually originate.



   SOLID TIRE. Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does
not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.



   SPECIAL MOBILE EQUIPMENT. Every vehicle not designed or used primarily
for the transportation of persons or property and only incidentally operated
or moved over a highway, including, but not limited to, ditch digging
apparatus, well boring apparatus and road construction and maintenance
machinery such as asphalt spreaders, bituminous mixers, bucket loaders,
tractors other than truck tractors, ditches, leveling graders, finishing
machines, motor graders, road rollers, scarifiers, earth moving carry-alls
and scrapers, power shovels and drag lines and self-propelled cranes and
earth moving equipment. The term does not include house trailers, dump
trucks, truck mounted transit mixers, cranes or shovels, or other vehicles
designed for the transportation of persons or property to which machinery has
been attached.



   SPECIALLY CONSTRUCTED VEHICLE. Every vehicle of a type required to be
registered hereunder not originally constructed under a distinctive name,
make, model or type by a generally recognized manufacturer of vehicles and
not materially altered from its original construction.



   SPEED-CHANGE LANE. An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas,
primarily for the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or
leaving the through traffic lanes.



   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.



   STINGER-STEERED SEMI-TRAILER. Every semi-trailer which has its kingpin
on a projection to the front of the structure of such semi-trailer and is
combined with the fifth wheel of the truck tractor at a point not less than
two feet to the rear of the center of the rearmost axle of such tractor.



   STOP. When required, means complete cessation film movement.



   STOP or STOPPING. Any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic
or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control
sign or signal.



   STREET. The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.



   STREETCAR. A car other than a railroad train for transporting persons
or property and operated upon rails principally within a municipality.



   SUBURBAN DISTRICT. The portion of any city, village or incorporated
town other than the business and residence districts.



   SUSPENSION, OF DRIVER’S LICENSE. The temporary withdrawal by formal
action of the Secretary of State of a person’s license or privilege to
operate a motor vehicle on the public highways, for a period specifically
designated by the Secretary of State.



   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular
traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which
vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield
right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a
stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this
title.



   TOW TRUCK. Every truck designed or altered and equipped for and used to
push, tow or draw disabled vehicles by means of a crane, hoist, towbar,
towline or auxiliary axle, and to render assistance to disabled vehicles.



   TRACKLESS TROLLEY COACH. Every motor vehicle which is propelled by
electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires but not operated upon
rails.



   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars
and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.



   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any official traffic control device, whether
manually, electrically mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately
directed to stop and permitted to proceed.



   TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a
pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn
by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon
the towing vehicle.



   TRANSPORTER. Every person engaged in the drive-away or tow-away
business of transporting vehicles, not his or her own, by driving, either
singly or by the towbar, saddle mount or full mount methods or any
combinations thereof or by drawing or towing house trailers, semi-trailers or
trailers, including their coupling devices, and using the public highways of
this state therefor.



   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for
the transportation of property.



   TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a
part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.



   TRUCKSTER. Every motor vehicle or motorcycle with three wheels
designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.



   URBAN AREA. Any incorporated or unincorporated area developed primarily
for residential and/or business purposes.



   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street
which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling
houses situated at intervals of less then 100 feet for a distance of a
quarter of a mile or more.



   USED CAR DEALER. Every person engaged in the business of buying,
selling or exchanging used motor vehicles and who has an established place of
business for such purpose in this state.



   USED MOTOR VEHICLE. Every motor vehicle which has been sold, bargained,
exchanged, given away or title transferred from the person who first acquired
it from the manufacturer or importer, dealer or agent of the manufacturer or
importer and so used as to have become what is commonly known as
“second-hand” within the ordinary meaning thereof: provided, that a new
motor vehicle shall not be considered as a USED MOTOR VEHICLE until it has
been placed in a bona fide consumer use, notwithstanding the number of
transfers of such motor vehicle. The term BONA FIDE CONSUMER USE means actual
operation by an owner who acquired the vehicle for use in business or for
pleasure purposes and who has been granted a certificate of title on such
motor vehicle and has registered such motor vehicle, all in accordance with
the laws of the residence of the owner.



   VEHICLE.  Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and
snowmobiles as defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act, being
625 ILCS 40/1-1. For this chapter, VEHICLES are divided into two divisions:



      (1)   First Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed
for the carrying of not more than ten persons.



      (2)   Second Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed
for carrying more than ten persons, those designed or used for living
quarters and those vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying
property, freight or cargo, those motor vehicles of the First Division
remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the Second Division, and
those motor vehicles of the First Division used and registered as school
buses.



   YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY. When required by an official sign means the act of
granting the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to
traffic within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or
left, but when the roadway is clear may proceed into the intersection.



(Prior Code, Ch. 40, Art. I)




OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS




§ 70.015  REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC LAWS.



   It is unlawful and, unless otherwise declared in this title with
respect to particular offenses, it is a petty offense for any person to do
any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this title.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-202)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.016  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.



   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of any police officer invested by law with authority to
direct, control or regulate traffic.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-203)



§ 70.017  FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE POLICE OFFICER.



   (A)   Any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who, having been
given a visual or audible signal by a peace officer directing such driver or
operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop, willfully fails or refuses to
obey such direction, increases his or her speed, extinguishes his or her
lights, or otherwise flees or attempts to elude the officer, is guilty of
violating this subchapter. The signal given by the peace officer may be by
hand, voice, siren, red or blue light, provided the officer giving such
signal shall be in police uniform, and, if driving a vehicle, such vehicle
shall be marked showing it to be an official police vehicle.



   (B)   Upon receiving notice of such conviction, the Secretary of
State may forthwith suspend the drivers license of the person so convicted
for a period not more than six months.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-204)



§ 70.018  PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY ACT; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this title applicable to the drivers of
vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned
or operated by the United States, this state or any county, city, town,
district or any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided
in this section and subject to such specific exceptions as set forth in this
title with reference to authorized emergency vehicles.



   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding
to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges, set forth in this section, but subject to
the conditions herein stated.



   (C)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:



      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this
title;



      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only
after slowing down as may be required and necessary for safe operation;



      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or she
does not endanger life or property; and



      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.



   (D)   The exceptions herein granted to an authorized emergency
vehicle, other than a police vehicle, shall apply only when the vehicle is
making use of either an audible signal when in motion or visual signals
meeting the requirements of § 74.028.



   (E)   The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor do such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.



   (F)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this
title, except those contained in 625 ILCS 5/Ch. 3, Arts. IV and V, shall not
apply to persons, motor vehicles and equipment while actually engaged in work
upon a highway but shall apply to such persons said vehicles when traveling
to or from such work.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-205)



§ 70.019  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING
ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.



   Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon
a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of
the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those
provisions of this title which by their very nature can have no application.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-206)



§ 70.020  POWERS OF MUNICIPALITIES AND COUNTIES; CONTRACT WITH SCHOOL
BOARDS, HOSPITALS, SHOPPING CENTER AND APARTMENT COMPLEX OWNERS FOR
REGULATION OF TRAFFIC.



   (A)   The corporate authorities of the city and a school board,
hospital or owner of any shopping center or apartment complex which controls
a parking area located within the limits of the city may, by contract,
empower the city to regulate the parking of automobiles and the traffic at
such parking area. Such contract shall empower the city to accomplish all or
part of the following:



      (1)   The erection of stop signs, flashing signals,
handicapped parking area signs or yield signs at specified locations in a
parking area and the adoption of appropriate regulations thereto pertaining,
or the designation of any intersection in the parking area as a stop
intersection or as a yield intersection and the ordering of like signs or
signals at one or more entrances to such intersection, subject to the
provisions of this title;



      (2)   The prohibition or regulation of the turning of vehicles
or specified types of vehicles at intersections or other designated locations
in the parking area;



      (3)   The regulation of a crossing of any roadway in the
parking area by pedestrians;



      (4)   The designation of any separate roadway in the parking
area for one-way traffic;



      (5)   The establishment and regulation of loading zones;



      (6)   The prohibition, regulation, restriction or limitation
of the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified areas of the
parking area;



      (7)   The designation of safety zones in the parking area and
fire lanes;



      (8)   Providing for the removal and storage of vehicles parked
or abandoned in the parking area during snowstorms, floods, fires or other
public emergencies, or found unattended in the parking area where they
constitute an obstruction to traffic, or where stopping, standing or parking
is prohibited, and for the payment of reasonable charges for such removal and
storage by the owner or operator of any such vehicle;



      (9)   Providing that the cost of planning, installation,
maintenance and enforcement of parking and traffic regulations pursuant to
any contract entered into under the authority of this division (A) be borne
by the city, or by the school board, hospital, property owner or apartment
complex owner, or that a percentage of said cost be shared by the parties to
the contract;



      (10)   Causing the installation of parking meters on the
parking area and establishing whether the expense of installing said parking
meters and maintenance thereof shall be that of the municipality or county,
or that of the school bond hospital, shopping center or apartment complex
owner. All moneys obtained from such parking meters as may be installed on
any parking area shall belong to the municipality or county; and



      (11)   Contracting for such additional reasonable rules and
regulations with respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local
conditions may require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the
users of the parking area.



   (B)   No contract entered into pursuant to this section shall exceed
a period of 20 years. No lessee of a shopping center or apartment complex
shall enter into such a contract for a longer period of time than the length
of his or her lease.



   (C)   Any contract entered into pursuant to this section shall be
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in the county in which the
parking area is located, and no regulation made pursuant to the contract
shall be effective or enforceable until three days after the contract is so
recorded.



   (D)   At such time as parking and traffic regulations have been
established at any parking area pursuant to the contract as provided for in
this section, then it shall be a petty offense for any person to do any act
forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by such parking or traffic
regulation.



   (E)   The term SHOPPING CENTER, as used in this section, means
premises having one or more stores or business establishments in connection
with which there is provided on privately-owned property near or contiguous
thereto an area, or areas, of land used by the public as the means of access
to and egress from the stores and business establishments on such premises
and for the parking of motor vehicles of customers and patrons of such stores
and business establishments on such premises.



   (F)   The term PARKING AREA, as used in this section, means an area,
or areas, of land near or contiguous to a school or hospital building, or
shopping center, but not the public highways or alleys, and used by the
public as the means of access to and egress from such buildings and the
stores and business establishments at a shopping center and for the parking
of motor vehicles.



   (G)   The terms OWNER, PROPERTY OWNER, SHOPPING CENTER OWNER and
APARTMENT COMPLEX OWNER, as used in this section, mean the actual legal owner
of the shopping center parking area or apartment complex, the trust officer
of a banking institution having the right to manage and control such
property, or a person having the legal right, through lease or otherwise, to
manage or control said property.



   (H)   The term FIRE LANE, as used in this section, means travel
lanes for the firefighting equipment upon which there shall be no standing or
parking of any motor vehicle at any time so that firefighting equipment can
move freely thereon.



   (I)   The term APARTMENT COMPLEX, as used tn this section, means
premises having one or more apartments in connection with which there is
provided on privately-owned property near or contiguous thereto an area, or
areas, of land used by occupants of such apartments or their guests as a
means of access to and egress from such apartments or for the parking of
motor vehicles of such occupants or their guests.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-209)



§ 70.021  POWERS OF MUNICIPALITIES AND COUNTIES; REGULATION OF TRAFFIC ON
PRIVATE ROADS, STREETS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Upon the filing of the of the written request by an
individual, by the board of directors of any corporation, or by the board of
directors of any association, owning, operating or representing a residential
subdivision, development, apartment house or apartment project containing one
or more apartments or single-family residences, with the corporate
authorities of the city, that the Police Department of the city regulate
traffic and access to the semipublic or private roads, streets, driveways,
trails, terraces, bridle paths, parkways, parking areas or other roadways
open to or used by the public, tenants, owners and employees for the purposes
of vehicular traffic by permission of such individuals, corporations or
associations and not as a matter of public right, the corporate authorities
of the city may establish and enforce regulations applicable to traffic on
and access to such private roads and areas. A written request under this
section must contain the name and post office address of the individual,
corporation or association making it and designate with reasonable accuracy
the semipublic or private roads, streets, driveways, trails, terraces, bridle
paths, parkways, parking areas, or other roadway open to or used by vehicular
traffic to be regulated. All regulations adopted and traffic control devices
employed by the city in the regulation of traffic on private roads and within
private areas pursuant to this section shall be consistent with the
provisions of 625 ILCS 5/Ch. II approved September 29, 1969, as now or
hereafter amended, and shall conform to the State Manual and Specifications.



   (B)   Any individual, corporation or association which has filed a
request under this section may rescind that request by filing with the
corporate authorities of the city a written rescission of the request. The
corporate authorities shall then direct that the regulation of traffic shall
cease to be applicable to the road, street, driveway, trail, terrace, bridle
path, parkway or other roadway used by vehicular traffic, set forth in the
rescission, effective as of January 1 in the year next following the filing
of the rescission. No rescission may, however, be filed within 12 months of
the date when the request was filed under this section.



   (C)   The filing of a written request under this section in no way
constitutes a dedication to public use of any such roads, streets, driveways,
trails, terraces, bridle paths, parkways, parking areas or other roads open
to or used by vehicular traffic, nor does it prevent any such individuals,
corporations or associations as owners of such property open to or used by
the public for purposes of vehicular traffic by permission of such
individuals, corporations or associations and not as a matter of public
right, from prohibiting such use or from requiring other or different or
additional regulations than those specified by the corporate authorities or
otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such individuals,
corporations or associations.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-209.1)



§ 70.022  RESERVED.



§ 70.023  THIS TITLE NOT TO INTERFERE WITH RIGHTS OF OWNERS OF REAL
PROPERTY WITH REFERENCE THERETO.



   Nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent the owner of real
property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of
the owner and not as a matter of right from prohibiting such use, or from
requiring other or different or additional conditions than those specified in
this title, or otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such owner.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-210)




MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS




§ 70.035  UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE LEFT ILLEGALLY.



   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to
stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the brake thereon
and, when standing upon any perceptible grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1401)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.036  LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such
movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic.



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same upon any
shoulder or roadway of any controlled-access highway, or into an intersection
or over a crosswalk.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1402)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.037  IMPROPER RIDING ON MOTORCYCLE.



   (A)   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not
carry any other person nor shall any other person to ride on a motorcycle
unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which
event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed
for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at
the rear or side of the operator.



   (B)   A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting
astride the street, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the
motorcycle.



   (C)   The operator of any motorcycle shall keep at least one hand on
a handlebar grip at all times the motorcycle is in motion.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1403) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016) Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.038  RIDING ON MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLES.



   (A)   The operator of a motorized pedalcycle shall ride only astride
the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and shall not permit two
persons to ride thereon at the same time, unless the motorized pedalcycle is
designed to carry two persons, any motorized pedalcycle designed for two
persons must be equipped with a passenger seat and permanent handgrips and
footrests for use of a passenger.



   (B)   Neither the operator nor any passenger on a motorized
pedalcycle shall be required to wear any special goggles, shield, helmet or
glasses.



   (C)   The provisions of Chapter 75 shall be applicable to the
operation of motorized pedalcycles, except for those provisions which by
their nature can have no application to motorized pedalcycles.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1403.1)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.039  RIDING MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT SPECIAL EQUIPMENT.



   The operator of a motorcycle and every passenger thereon shall be
protected by glasses, goggles or a transparent shield. The Department of
Transportation shall determine the standards for this equipment. These
standards shall establish requirements based upon those set forth in Vehicle
Equipment Safety Commission Regulation VESC-8, Minimum Requirements for
Motorcyclists’ Eye Protection.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1404)



§ 70.040  ILLEGAL HANDLEBARS ON MOTORCYCLES.



   No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebar grips higher than
the height of the head of the operator when the operator is seated in the
normal driving position astride that portion of the seat or saddle occupied
by the operator.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1405) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.041  DRIVER’S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM OBSTRUCTED.



   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when
there are in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to
obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to
interfere with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the
vehicle.



   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle or streetcar shall ride in such
position as to interfere with the driver’s or motorman’s view ahead or to
the sides, or to interfere with his or her control over the driving mechanism
of the vehicle or streetcar.



   (C)   No passenger on a school bus may ride or stand in a position
as to interfere with the driver’s view ahead or to the side or to the rear,
or to interfere with his or her control of the mechanism of the bus.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1406)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.042  UNSAFE OPENING OF VEHICLE DOORS.



   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be
done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic
for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1407)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.043  RIDING IN TOWED VEHICLE.



   No person or persons shall occupy a trailer, semitrailer, farm wagon,
or any other vehicle while it is being towed upon a public highway, unless:



   (A)   The occupancy of the towed vehicle is necessary to avoid an
imminent threat to a person’s safety due to extreme weather conditions or
another emergency situation;



   (B)   The speed of the vehicle does not exceed 15 miles per hour and
the vehicle is used in connection with a parade, farming-related activity, or
similar activity; or



   (C)   The speed of the vehicle does not exceed 15 miles per hour and
the passenger is over the age of 18.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1408) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.044  COASTING.



   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a down
grade shall not coast with the gears or transmission of such vehicle in
neutral.



   (B)   The driver of a truck or bus when traveling upon a down grade
shall not coast with the clutch disengaged.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1410)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.045  FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS (ILLEGALLY).



   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not
follow any fire apparatus traveling, in response to a fire alarm closer than
500 feet or stop such vehicle within 500 feet of any fire apparatus stopped
in answer to a fire alarm.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1411)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.046  CROSSED FIRE HOSE.



   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire
Department when laid down on any street, private road or driveway to be used
at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1412)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.047  DRIVING ON SIDEWALK.



   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk
area except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway. This
section does not apply to any vehicle moved exclusively by human power, to
any electric personal assistive mobility device, nor to any motorized
wheelchair.



   (B)   A person may not operate an electric personal assistive
mobility device upon a public sidewalk at a speed greater than eight miles
per hour.



   (C)   No person, firm, or corporation shall drive any vehicle or
permit the same to be driven, over any curb, shoulder, or public parkway
within the city, except:



      (1)   Upon issuance of a permit from the city’s Director of
Community Development, or Surveyor and Engineer in accordance with the
ordinances of the city permitting public improvement construction vehicles to
be driven over a curb, shoulder, or public parkway; or



      (2)   In the case of an emergency or when authorized by a
police officer.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1412.1) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016; Ord. 2016-29,
passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.048  DEPOSITING INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON HIGHWAY.



   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass
bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to
injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such highway.



   (B)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon
any highway and destructive, dangerous, hazardous or injurious material shall
immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed.



   (C)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from such vehicle.



   (D)   No person shall shovel, plow or otherwise place snow or cause
or permit the shoveling, plowing or placing of snow from a private driveway,
parking lot or other private property upon any highway, street or sidewalk so
as to hinder, obstruct, impede or otherwise interfere in any way with the
movement of traffic upon said street, highway or sidewalk.



      (1)   If said snow is not immediately moved or removed by the
owner, occupant or agent so placing it on the street, highway or sidewalk
after being advised by an authorized official or police officer to do so,
then the city may charge the same with any expenses which may be incurred by
the city in the removal thereof.



      (2)   Such expenses shall be collected by the city by suit or
otherwise in addition to a fine or penalty as set forth in this title.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1413)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.049  PASSED SCHOOL BUS; LOADING OR UNLOADING.



   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway upon meeting or overtaking, from
either direction, any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the
purpose of receiving or discharging pupils shall stop the vehicle before
reaching the school bus when there is in operation on the school bus the
visual signals as specified in 625 ILCS 5/12-803 and 12-805 and the driver
shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion or the driver of the
vehicle is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the visual signals
are no longer actuated.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1414(a))



§ 70.050  ILLEGAL SCHOOL BUS OPERATION.



   The stop signal arm required by 625 ILCS 5/12-803, shall be extended
after the school bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of loading
or discharging pupils and shall be closed before starting out again. The stop
signal arm shall not be extended at any other time.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1414(b))



§ 70.051  SCHOOL BUSES; STOPPING, LOADING AND DISCHARGING PASSENGERS.



   (A)   A school bus traveling on a highway having four or more lanes
for vehicular traffic shall stop for the loading or discharging of passengers
only on the right side of the highway and when so stopped shall load or
discharge only those passengers whose residences are located to the right of
the highway. The routes of school buses shall be so arranged that no child
shall be required to cross such a four or more lane highway to board a school
bus or to reach his or her residence after leaving the bus. This section
shall not apply when children are escorted by competent persons designated by
the school authorities or by law enforcement officers.



   (B)   At all pick-up points where it is necessary for a school bus
passenger to cross the roadway to board the bus, the school bus driver shall
signal the awaiting passenger when it is safe to cross the roadway ahead of
the bus.



   (C)   At all discharge points where it is necessary for a school bus
passenger to cross the roadway, the school bus driver shall direct the
passenger to a point approximately ten feet in front of the bus on the
shoulder and shall then signal the passenger when it is safe to cross the
roadway.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1415) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)



§ 70.052  OBSTRUCTING PERSON IN HIGHWAYS.



   No person shall willfully and unnecessarily hinder, obstruct or delay,
or willfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct any other
person in lawfully driving or traveling along or upon any highway or offer
for barter or sale merchandise on said highway so as to interfere with the
effective movement of traffic.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1416)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.053  RESERVED.



§ 70.054  FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   (A)   Funeral processions have the right-of-way at intersections
when vehicles comprising such procession have their headlights lighted,
subject to the following conditions and exceptions:



      (1)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall
yield the right-of-way upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
giving an audible or visible signal;



      (2)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall
yield the right-of-way when directed to do so by a traffic officer; and



      (3)   The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral
procession shall comply with stop signs and traffic control signals but when
the leading vehicle has proceeded across an intersection in accordance with
such signal or after stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles in
such procession may proceed without stopping, regardless of the sign or
signal and the leading vehicle and the vehicles in procession shall proceed
with due caution.



   (B)   The operator of a vehicle not in the funeral procession shall
not drive his or her vehicle in the funeral procession, except when
authorized to do so by a traffic officer or when such vehicle is an
authorized emergency vehicle giving audible or visible signal.



   (C)   Operators of vehicles not a part of a funeral procession may
not form a procession or convoy and have their headlights lighted for the
purpose of securing the right-of-way granted by this section to funeral
processions.



   (D)   The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may
overtaken and pass the vehicle in such procession if such overtaking and
passing can be accomplished without causing a traffic hazard or interfering
with such procession.



   (E)   The lead vehicle in the funeral procession may be equipped
with a flashing amber light which may be used only when such vehicle is used
as a lead vehicle in such procession. Vehicles comprising a funeral
procession may utilize funeral pennants or flags or windshield stickers to
identify the individual vehicles in such a procession.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1420)



§ 70.055  RESERVED.



§ 70.056  RESERVED.



§ 70.057  RESERVED.



§ 70.058  BLOCKING INTERSECTIONS OR GRADE CROSSINGS.



   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the
other side of the intersection, crosswalk or railroad grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains notwithstanding any
traffic control signal indication to proceed.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1425)



§ 70.059  UNLAWFUL USE OR DAMAGE TO HIGHWAYS, APPURTENANCES AND STRUCTURES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage any public
highway or street or any bridge, culvert, sign, signpost or structure upon or
used or constructed in connection with any public highway or street for the
protection thereof or for protection or regulation of traffic thereon by any
willfully unusual, improper or unreasonable use thereof, or by willfully
careless driving or use of any vehicle thereon, or by willful mutilation,
defacing or destruction thereof.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1426) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.060  PERMITS FOR PARADES AND PROCESSIONS.



   No procession or parade, excepting the forces of the United States Army
or Navy, the military forces of this state, and the forces of the Police and
Fire Departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in
accordance with a permit issued by the City Manager and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1427)



§ 70.061  WEIGHT LIMITS RESTRICTED ON CERTAIN STREETS; THROUGH TRAFFIC AND
HIGH IMPACT TRAFFIC.



   (A)   Vehicles with a registered gross weight over 8,000 pounds are
prohibited from movement upon any streets as outlined in Ch. 77, Sch. VI
which is adopted by reference into this chapter and made a part of this
chapter; when signs are erected indicating such movement is prohibited except
when such movement is necessary to make local delivery.



   (B)   Vehicles or combination of vehicles over a registered gross
weight of 8,000 pounds are prohibited from movement on certain streets and
roads within the city when signs indicating the gross weight are posted at
the entrance of said streets and roads. Those roads and weight limits are set
forth in Ch. 77, Sch. VI.



   (C)   These weight limitations shall not apply to vehicles of the
city, or public utilities, or persons under a contract with the city while in
the normal performance of their work.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle that is required to
obtain an approval of high impact traffic pursuant to § 150.145(H) of the
city code to operate on the streets or roadways of the city.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1429) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)



§ 70.062  ROLLER SKATES AND TOY VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN STREET.



   No person upon roller skates, coaster, skateboard, roller blades or
similar type device shall be permitted in the central business district,
being the area bounded by Illinois Road on the south, Wisconsin Avenue on the
north, Oakwood Avenue on the west, Western Avenue on the east, and the length
of Western Avenue extending from Westminster Avenue North to Woodland Road,
or the western business district, being the area bounded by Everett Road on
the south, Conway Road on the north, Waukegan Road on the east, and Telegraph
Road on the west. For the purpose of this section, the central business
district and the western district shall include all the properties zoned or
used for business and governmental purposes on either side of the streets
described above.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1430)  (Ord. 93-46, passed 7-15-1993)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.063  UNLAWFUL RIDING.



   (A)   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof
not designed or intended for the use of passengers. Except this provision
shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary performance of his or
her duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for
merchandise.



   (B)   No driver of any vehicle shall knowingly permit any person to
ride on any part of a vehicle not designated or intended for the use of
passengers.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1431)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.064  BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such
vehicle is in motion.



   (B)   Persons shall board or alight from any vehicle only when it is
standing or parked and then only at or from the right of said vehicle, except
that a person may board or alight from either side when the vehicle is
lawfully parked.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1432)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.065  OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.



   No person shall willfully or unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder or
obstruct any other person in lawfully driving or traveling along or upon any
street or highway.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1433)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.066  SNOW VEHICLES, GO-CARTS AND THE LIKE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snow vehicle,
go-cart, mini-bike or any similar engine-powered vehicle or device upon any
street, highway, sidewalk, school ground or any other public property within
the city except as may be authorized by the city in areas other than the
streets, highways or sidewalks.



   (B)   No person shall permit the operation of such a vehicle to be
operated upon or within any of the prohibited areas.



   (C)   Such vehicles are authorized to be operated upon any street or
highway provided the vehicle can be and is licensed by the state and bears a
city vehicle license.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1434)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.067  MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN PARKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle or any
motor driving device in addition to those prohibited by § 70.066, in or upon
any park, parkway, school grounds or other public area not designed or
improved or intended to accommodate the regular travel of motor vehicles,
except:



   (A)   In cases of emergency, if the presence of the vehicle on the
roadway would constitute a hazard, or when directed by a police officer; or



   (B)   Vehicles of the city, or public utilities, or persons under a
contract with the city while in the normal performance of their work.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1435)



§ 70.068  FAILURE TO MAINTAIN CONTROL OF VEHICLE.



   The driver of a vehicle shall maintain such control over his or her
vehicle so as to prevent it from colliding with any other vehicle that is
lawfully on the highway and which is either stopped or proceeding in the same
direction or changing direction.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1436)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Whoever violates any provision of any provision in
this title shall, unless otherwise specified herein, be fined in an amount
not less than $20, nor more than $750 for each such offense. In addition, any
cost of collection of fines or other amounts due to the city under this
section may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1600)



   (B)   Illegal operation of ambulance. A person who operates an
ambulance in violation of § 70.055 shall be liable for the penalty
prescribed by the applicable ordinance of this chapter with which he or she
failed to conform, notwithstanding any provision of such law or regulation
exempting therefrom the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call.



(Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section




Traffic Signs, Signals and Markings




   71.001   Authority to designate through highway and stop and yield
intersection



   71.002   Traffic control devices



   71.003   Obedience to and required traffic control devices



   71.004   Avoided traffic control device



   71.005   Traffic control signal legend



   71.006   Pedestrian control signals



   71.007   Lane-control signal



   71.008   Flashing signals



   71.009   Display of unauthorized sign, signal or marking



   71.010   Interfering with official traffic control device



   71.011   Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances and
structures



   71.012   Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker



   71.013   Obedience to no turn




Accidents




   71.025   Reserved



   71.026   Reserved



   71.027   Leaving scene; accident; vehicle damage



   71.028   Failure to give aid or information



   71.029   Failure to give information after striking unattended
vehicle or other property



   71.030   Failure to report accident to police authority



   71.031   False reporting



   71.032   Furnishing copies; fees




Driving While Intoxicated and Reckless Driving




   71.045   Reserved



   71.046   Reserved



   71.047   Reserved



   71.048   Illegal transportation or possession of alcoholic liquor



   71.049   Reckless driving



   71.050   Street racing



   71.051   Negligent driving and squealing tires



   71.052   Use of wireless telephones and electronic devices while
driving




Speed Restrictions




   71.065   General speed restrictions



   71.066   Speeding; residential districts and alleys



   71.067   Speeding; school zone



   71.068   Minimum speed regulation



   71.069   Charging violations and rule in civil actions



   71.070   Maximum attainable operating speed




Driving on Right Side of Roadway, Overtaking and Passing and the Like




   71.085   Driving in wrong lane



   71.086   Improper passing; opposite direction



   71.087   Improper overtaking



   71.088   Failed to yield to audible signal



   71.089   Improper overtaking; two-wheeled vehicle



   71.090   Improper overtaking (on right)



   71.091   Improper overtaking (on right) two-wheeled vehicle



   71.092   Improper overtaking on right; drove off roadway



   71.093   Improper overtaking on left; same direction



   71.094   Further limitations on driving to the left of center of
roadway



   71.095   No-passing zones



   71.096   One-way roadways



   71.097   Driving on roadways laned for traffic; use of shoulder



   71.098   Following too closely



   71.099   Restriction on use of controlled access highway




Turning and Starting and Signals on Stopping and Turning




   71.110   Required position and method of turning at intersections



   71.111   Limitations on U-turns



   71.112   Improper starting of parked vehicle



   71.113   Failure to signal when required; improper signal



   71.114   Improper use of turn signal



   71.115   Signal by hand or arm or signal device



   71.116   Method of giving hand and arm signals




Right-of-Way




   71.130   Vehicles approaching or entering intersection



   71.131   Vehicle turning left



   71.132   Vehicles entering stop crosswalk



   71.133   Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection



   71.134   Merging traffic



   71.135   Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway



   71.136   Operation of vehicles and streetcars on approach of
authorized emergency vehicle



   71.137   Vehicles not to be driven on sidewalks or safety zones



 



   71.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Bicycles, see Chapter 75



   Pedestrians, see Chapter 72




TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS




§ 71.001  AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE THROUGH HIGHWAY AND STOP AND YIELD
INTERSECTION.



   (A)   The city may designate through highways and erect stop signs
or yield signs at specified entrances thereto, or may designate any
intersection as a stop intersection or as a yield intersection and erect stop
signs or yield signs at one or more entrances to such intersection.



   (B)   Every stop sign and yield sign shall conform to the State
Manual and Specifications and shall be located as near as practicable to the
nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if
there is no crosswalk, then as close as practicable to the nearest line of
the intersecting roadway.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-302)



§ 71.002  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   The city authorities in their respective maintenance jurisdiction shall
place and maintain such traffic control devices upon highways under their
maintenance jurisdiction as are required to indicate and carry out the
provisions of this title, and local traffic ordinances or to regulate, warn
or guide traffic. All such traffic control devices shall conform to the State
Manual and Specifications and shall be justified by traffic warrants stated
in the Manual.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-304)



§ 71.003  OBEDIENCE TO AND REQUIRED TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer,
subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-305(a))  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.004  AVOIDED TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.



   It is unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel across
private property to avoid an official traffic control device.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-305(b))  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.005  TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.



   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting
different colored lights successively one at a time, or with lighted green
arrows, only the following colors shall be used and such terms and lights and
lighted green arrows shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows.



   (A)   Circular green (alone).



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either
such turn. But vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent
crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk unless directed otherwise by
a pedestrian signal as provided under § 71.006.



   (B)   Steady yellow.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is
thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a
red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular
traffic may not enter the intersection.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, as provided in § 71.006,
are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and
no pedestrian shall start to cross.



   (C)   Steady red indication.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone must
stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of an intersection, or if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until an indication to
proceed is shown, except as provided in divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) below.



      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal at an
intersection may turn right after stopping as required by division (C)(1)
above, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an
adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection;
however, right turns are prohibited at the intersection in Ch. 77, Sch. VII.
Such ordinance or rule or regulation shall be effective when a sign is
erected at such intersection giving notice of the ordinance or rule or
regulation prohibiting the right turn.



      (3)   Vehicular traffic on a one-way highway facing a steady
red signal may, after stopping as required by division (C)(1) above,
cautiously enter the intersection and make a left turn onto an intersecting
one-way highway on which traffic travels to the left but shall yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to
other traffic lawfully using the intersection.



      (4)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway
unless a separate “Walk” indication is shown.



   (D)   Green straight-through arrow (alone).



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through, but shall not turn right or left. Such vehicular traffic shall yield
the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians legally within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within the appropriate marked or unmarked crosswalk unless directed
otherwise by a pedestrian signal as provided in § 71.006.



   (E)   Green turn arrow with circular green, with steady yellow, with
steady red, or with green straight-through arrow.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall comply with
the meaning of the circular green, steady yellow, steady red or green
straight-through arrow indication as if it were shown alone, except that such
vehicular traffic may cautiously enter the intersection to make the movement
indicated by the green turn arrow. Vehicular traffic shall yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic
lawfully using the intersection.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal shall comply with the
meaning of the circular green, steady yellow, steady red or straight-through
arrow indication as if it were shown alone, unless directed otherwise by a
pedestrian signal as provided in § 71.006.



   (F)   Application. In the event an official traffic control signal
is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the
provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to provisions which
by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be at a
traffic sign or a marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be
made or, in the absence of such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at
the signal.



   (G)   Authorization. The city is hereby authorized to erect, and
maintain traffic control signals and to enforce this section and §§ 71.008
and 71.009 at the intersection and locations in Ch. 77, Sch. VIII.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-306)



§ 71.006  PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.



   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words
“Walk” or “Don’t Walk” are in place such signals shall indicate as
follows.



   (A)   Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal, and shall be given the right-of-way
by the drivers of all vehicles.



   (B)   Don’t walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway
in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partly completed
his or her crossing on the “Walk” signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or
safety island while the “Don’t Walk” signal is illuminated, steady or
flashing.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-307)



§ 71.007  LANE-CONTROL SIGNAL.



   Whenever lane-control signals are used in conjunction with official
signs, they shall have the following meanings.



   (A)   Downward-pointing green arrow. A driver facing this indication
is permitted to drive in the lane over which the arrow signal is located.
Otherwise, he or she shall obey all other traffic controls present and follow
normal safe driving practices.



   (B)   Red X symbol. A driver facing this indication shall not drive
in the lane over which the signal is located, and this indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of all other traffic controls present.
Otherwise he or she shall obey all other traffic controls and follow normal
safe driving practices.



   (C)   Yellow X (steady). A driver facing this indication should
prepare to vacate the lane over which the signal is located in a safe manner
to avoid, if possible, occupying that lane when a steady red X is displayed.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-308)



§ 71.008  FLASHING SIGNALS.



   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in
conjunction with a traffic control device it shall require obedience by
vehicular traffic as follows.



   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection, or if none, then at a point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection and the right to
proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.



   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.



   (C)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings.
Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be
governed by § 73.01.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-309)



§ 71.009  DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGN, SIGNAL OR MARKING.



   (A)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports
to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device
or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic
or the effectiveness of an official traffic control device or any railroad
sign or signal.



   (B)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public
authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon
an commercial advertising.



   (C)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over
the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed
without notice.



   (D)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any traffic control
device to be used on any street or highway in this state which does not
conform to the requirements of this title.



   (E)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-310)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.010  INTERFERING WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.



   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device, or
any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon,
or any other part thereof.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-311)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.011  UNLAWFUL USE OR DAMAGE TO HIGHWAYS, APPURTENANCES AND STRUCTURES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure or damage any
public highway or street or any bridge, culvert, sign, signpost or structure
upon or used or constructed in connection with any public highway or street
for the protection thereof or for protection or regulation of traffic thereon
by any willfully unusual, improper or unreasonable use thereof, or by
willfully careless driving or use of any vehicle thereon, or by willfully
mutilation, defacing or destruction thereof.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-312)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.012  UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF HIGHWAY SIGN OR MARKER.



   The city authorities, with reference to traffic control signs, signals
or markers owned by the city is authorized to indicate the ownership of the
signs, signals or markers on the back of such devices in letters not less
than three-eighths inch or more than three-fourths inch in height, by use of
a metal stamp, etching or other permanent means and, except for employees of
the city, it is unlawful for any person to possess such sign, signal or
marker so identified.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-313)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.013  OBEDIENCE TO NO TURN.



   (A)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating no right or
no left turns, it shall be unlawful to disobey the direction of said sign.



   (B)   Such signs are authorized to be placed at the locations found
in Ch. 77, Sch. XI.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-314)  Penalty, see § 71.999




ACCIDENTS




§ 71.025  RESERVED.



§ 71.026  RESERVED.



§ 71.027  LEAVING SCENE; ACCIDENT; VEHICLE DAMAGE.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting
only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall
immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close
thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall
remain at the scene of such accident until he or she has fulfilled the
requirements of § 71.028.



   (B)   Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more
than is necessary.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-402)



§ 71.028  FAILURE TO GIVE AID OR INFORMATION.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or
attended by any person shall give his or her name, address and the
registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall upon
request and if available exhibit his or her driver’s license to the person
struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided
with and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable
assistance, including the carrying or the making of arrangements for the
carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or
surgical treatment, if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if
such carrying is requested by the injured person.



   (B)   If none of the persons entitled to information pursuant to
this section is in condition to receive and understand such information and
no police officer is present, such driver after rendering reasonable
assistance shall forthwith report such accident at the city police station,
disclosing the information required by this section.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-403)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.029  FAILURE TO GIVE INFORMATION AFTER STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE OR
OTHER PROPERTY.



   The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved in an
accident with any vehicle which is unattended, or other property, resulting
in any damage to such other vehicle or property shall immediately stop and
shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such
vehicle or other property of his or her name, address and the registration
number of the vehicle he or she is driving or shall attach securely in a
conspicuous place on or in the vehicle or other property struck a written
notice giving his or her name, address and the registration number of the
vehicle he or she is driving and shall without unnecessary delay notify the
City Police Department and shall make a report of such accident when and as
required by 625 ILCS 5/11-406. Every such stop shall be made without
obstructing traffic more than is necessary.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-404)



§ 71.030  FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT TO POLICE AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an
accident described in § 71.028 shall, if no police officer is present, give
notice of the accident by the fastest available means of communication to the
City Police Department.



   (B)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of
giving immediate notice of an accident as required in division (A) above, and
there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable
of doing so, that occupant must give notice as required in division (A) above.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-407)



§ 71.031  FALSE REPORTING.



   No person shall provide information in an oral or written report
required by this subchapter with knowledge or reason to believe that such
information is false.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-409)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.032  FURNISHING COPIES; FEES.



   The city may furnish copies of accident reports that have been
investigated by the city police and shall be paid a fee to be determined by
the Chief of Police.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-416)



DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED AND RECKLESS DRIVING



§ 71.045  RESERVED.



§ 71.046  RESERVED.



§ 71.047  RESERVED.



§ 71.048  ILLEGAL TRANSPORTATION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.



   No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor
within the passenger area of any motor vehicle except in the original package
and with the seal unbroken.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-502)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.049  RECKLESS DRIVING.



   Any person who drives any vehicle with a willful or wanton disregard
for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-503)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.050  STREET RACING.



   (A)   No person shall engage in street racing on any street or
highway of the city.



   (B)   No owner of any vehicle shall acquiesce in or permit his or
her vehicle to be used by another for the purpose of street racing.



   (C)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:



      ACQUIESCE or PERMIT. Actual knowledge that the motor vehicle was
to be used for the purpose of street racing.



      STREET RACING.



         (a)   The operation of two or more vehicles from a point
side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to outdistance
each other; or



         (b)   The operation of one or more vehicles over a
common selected course, each starting at the same point, for the purpose of
comparing the relative speeds or power of acceleration of such vehicle or
vehicles within a certain distance or time limit; or



         (c)   The use of one or more vehicles in attempt to
outgain or outdistance another vehicle; or



         (d)   The use of one or more vehicles to prevent another
vehicle from passing; or



         (e)   The use of one or more vehicles to arrive at a
given destination ahead of another vehicle or vehicles; or



         (f)   The use of one or more vehicles to test the
physical stamina or endurance of drivers over long-distance driving routes.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-504)  (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see
§ 71.999



§ 71.051  NEGLIGENT DRIVING AND SQUEALING TIRES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle
upon any street, public alley, public parking lot, beach area or any other
public place or public way, negligently or without due caution, in a manner
so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, NEGLIGENT as used herein
shall mean without due care and caution, or without due regard to the width,
grade, curves, corners, traffic, weather and other attendant conditions of
streets, highways, roads or other ways used for vehicular traffic within the
city limits.



   (C)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle in such a manner as
to cause or allow to be emitted squealing, screeching or other such noise
from the vehicle’s tires due to rapid acceleration or excessive speed
around corners or other such reason.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to the following conditions:



      (1)   An authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator; nor



      (2)   The emergency operation of a motor vehicle when avoiding
imminent danger; nor



      (3)   Any raceway, facing facility or other public event, not
part of a highway, sanctioned by the appropriate governmental authority.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-505) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.052  USE OF WIRELESS TELEPHONES AND ELECTRONIC DEVICES WHILE DRIVING.



   (A)   Use of wireless telephones and electronic devices while
driving prohibited.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (B) below, no person
shall drive a motor vehicle while using any wireless, mobile, cellular,
analog wireless or digital telephone, personal data assistant or other
electronic communications device.



      (2)   For purposes of this section, the term USING shall
include, without limitation: talking or listening to another person on the
telephone; text messaging; sending, reading or listening to an electronic
message; and browsing the internet.



   (B)   Exceptions. Division (A) above shall not apply to:



      (1)   Law enforcement officers and operators of emergency
vehicles, when on duty and acting in their official capacities;



      (2)   Persons using a telephone with a hands-free device that
allows the driver to talk to and listen to the other party on the telephone
without the use of the driver’s hands;



      (3)   Persons using a telephone, personal date assistant or
electronic communication device for purposes of contacting or communicating
with public safety or other emergency service providers while driving a motor
vehicle; or



      (4)   Persons using a telephone, personal data assistant or
electronic communication device in a motor vehicle that is in a parked
position.



(Ord. 2012-16, passed 5-21-2012)  Penalty, see § 71.999



SPEED RESTRICTIONS



§ 71.065  GENERAL SPEED RESTRICTIONS.



   No vehicle may be driven upon any highway in the city at a speed which
is greater than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic conditions
and the use of the highway, or endangers the safety of any person or
property. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable
maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease
speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and
going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazard exists with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
Speed must be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any
person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-601(a))



§ 71.066  SPEEDING; RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS AND ALLEYS.



   No person may drive a vehicle upon any highway in any residence
district (such highways are hereby delineated on the map attached hereto and
made a part hereof as Exhibit “A”) in the city at a speed greater than 25
mph or in an alley or parking lot at a speed greater than 15 mph, except as
provided in Ch. 77, Sch. II.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-601(b))  (Ord. 93-17, passed 3-18-1993; Ord. 2016-11,
passed 2-16-2016)



§ 71.067  SPEEDING; SCHOOL ZONE.



   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of
20 mph while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any public
thoroughfare on or across which children pass along to and from school during
school days when school children are present.



   (B)   This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs
are posted upon streets and highways where the school zone located. Such
signs shall give proper due warning that a school zone is being approached
and shall indicate the school zone and the maximum speed limit in effect
during school days when school children are present. Nothing in this title
shall prohibit the use of electronic speed-detecting devices within 500 feet
of signs within a special school speed zone indicating such zone, as defined
in this section, nor shall evidence obtained thereby be inadmissible in any
prosecution for speeding provided the use of such device shall apply only to
the enforcement of the speed limit in such special school  speed zone. The
school zones are set forth in Ch. 77, Sch. IX.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-605)



§ 71.068  MINIMUM SPEED REGULATION.



   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede
or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation of his or her vehicle or in compliance
with law.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-606)



§ 71.069  CHARGING VIOLATIONS AND RULE IN CIVIL ACTIONS.



   (A)   In every charge of violation of any speed regulation in this
subchapter the complaint, and also the summons or notice to appear, shall
specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven and the
maximum speed applicable within the district or at the location.



   (B)   The provision of this subchapter maximum speed limitations
shall not be construed to relieve the plaintiff in any action from the burden
of proving negligence on the part of the defendant as the proximate cause of
an accident.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-610)



§ 71.070  MAXIMUM ATTAINABLE OPERATING SPEED.



   No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle on any street or
highway in the city where the minimum allowable speed on that street or
highway, as posted, is greater than the maximum attainable operating speed of
the vehicle. Maximum attainable operating speed shall be determined by the
manufacturer of the vehicle and clearly published in the Manual of
Specifications and Operation, or it shall be determined by applicable rule
and regulation promulgated by the Secretary of State.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-611)  Penalty, see § 71.999



DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY, OVERTAKING AND PASSING AND THE LIKE



§ 71.085  DRIVING IN WRONG LANE.



   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows:



      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction under the rules governing such movements;



      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive
to the left of the center of the roadway; provided, any person so doing shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon
the unobstructed portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute
an immediate hazard;



      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for
traffic under the rules applicable thereon;



      (4)   Upon a roadway restricted to one way traffic; or



      (5)   Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side
of the public highway and two vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose
right is the wider shoulder shall give the right-of-way on such pavement to
the other vehicle.



   (B)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then
existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane available for traffic, or as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except
when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction
or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road
or driveway.



   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic
and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to
the left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic control devices designating, certain lanes to the left side of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such
lanes, or except as permitted under division (A)(2) above; however, this
division (C) shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the
centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or
driveway.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-701)



§ 71.086  IMPROPER PASSING; OPPOSITE DIRECTION.



   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each
other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line
of traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least
one-half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-702)



§ 71.087  IMPROPER OVERTAKING.



   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions
and special rules otherwise stated in this title. The driver of a vehicle
overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the
left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side
of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. In no event shall
such movement be made by driving off the pavement or the main traveled
portion of the roadway.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-703(a))



§ 71.088  FAILED TO YIELD TO AUDIBLE SIGNAL.



    Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
or her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-703(b))



§ 71.089  IMPROPER OVERTAKING; TWO- WHEELED VEHICLE.



   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not, in passing upon the left
of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction, pass upon the right of any
vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless there is an unobstructed lane
of traffic available to permit such passing maneuver safely.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-703(c))



§ 71.090  IMPROPER OVERTAKING (ON RIGHT).



   The driver of a vehicle with three or more wheels may overtake and pass
upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions:



   (A)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left
turn;



   (B)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not
occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of
moving vehicles in each direction; or



   (C)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-704(a))



§ 71.091  IMPROPER OVERTAKING (ON RIGHT) TWO-WHEELED VEHICLE.



   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not pass upon the right of any
other vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless the unobstructed
pavement to the right of the vehicle being passed is of a width of not less
than eight feet.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-704(b))



§ 71.092  IMPROPER OVERTAKING ON RIGHT; DROVE OFF ROADWAY.



   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled
portion of the roadway.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-704(c))



§ 71.093  IMPROPER OVERTAKING ON LEFT; SAME DIRECTION.



   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless authorized by the provisions of this title and unless such
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from
the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the
overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as
practicable and in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane
authorized for vehicles approaching from the opposite direction, before
coming within 200 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-705)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.094  FURTHER LIMITATIONS ON DRIVING TO THE LEFT OF CENTER OF ROADWAY.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:



      (1)   When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve
in the highway where the driver’s view is obstructed within such distance
as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the
opposite direction;



      (2)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing; or



      (3)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100
feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel.



   (B)   The limitations in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) and (A)(3) above
do not apply upon a one-way roadway nor upon a roadway with unobstructed
pavement or sufficient width for two or more lanes of moving traffic in each
direction nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley,
private road or driveway when such movements can be made with safety.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-706) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
71.999



§ 71.095  NO-PASSING ZONES.



   (A)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing
zone, no driver may at any time drive on the left side of the roadway within
the no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to
mark such no-passing zone throughout its length.



   (B)   This section does not apply under the conditions described in
§ 71.085(A)(2), nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an
alley, private road or driveway. The pavement striping designed to mark the
no-passing zone may be crossed from the left-hand lane for the purpose of
completing a pass that was begun prior to the beginning of the zone in the
driver’s direction of travel.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-707)



§ 71.096  ONE-WAY ROADWAYS.



   (A)   Upon a roadway so designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle
shall be driven only in the direction designated at all or such times as
shall be indicated by official traffic control devices.



   (B)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more
roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or a
clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular
traffic, every vehicle must be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless
directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic control
devices or police officers. No vehicle may be driven over, across or within
any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening in the
physical barrier, or dividing section, or space, or at a cross-over or
intersection.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-708)



§ 71.097  DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC; USE OF SHOULDER.



   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent
herewith shall apply.



   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely
within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver
has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.



   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides
for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the
same direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe
distance, or in preparation for making a left turn, or where such center lane
is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction
that the vehicle is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official
traffic control devices.



   (C)   Official traffic control devices may be erected directing
specific traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be
used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of
the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such
sign. On multilane controlled access highways with three or more lanes in one
direction, the city may designate lanes of traffic to be used by different
types of motor vehicles.



   (D)   Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting
the changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall
obey the directions of every such device.



   (E)   Vehicles shall be driven on a roadway, and shall only be
driven on the shoulder for the purpose of stopping or accelerating from a
stop while merging into traffic. It shall be a violation of this section if
while merging into traffic and while on the shoulder, the vehicle passes any
other vehicle on the roadway adjacent to it.



   (F)   This section shall not apply to any authorized emergency
vehicle, to any authorized transit bus, to any farm tractor or implement of
husbandry, to any service vehicle while engaged in maintenance of the highway
or related work, or to any authorized vehicle within a designated
construction zone.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-709) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)



§ 71.098  FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.



   (A)   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed
of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.



   (B)   The driver of any truck or motor vehicle drawing another
vehicle when traveling upon a roadway outside of a business or residence
district and which is following another truck or motor vehicle shall,
whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so that an overtaking
vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger, except that this
shall not prevent a truck or motor vehicle drawing, another vehicle from
overtaking and passing any vehicle or combination of vehicles.



   (C)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a
business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade whether or not
towing other vehicles shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space
between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any
other vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger. This provision
shall not apply to funeral processions.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-710)



§ 71.099  RESTRICTION ON USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY.



   No person may drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access
highway except at entrances and exits established by public authority.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-711)  Penalty, see § 71.999




TURNING AND STARTING AND SIGNALS ON STOPPING AND TURNING




§ 71.110  REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.



   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do
so as follows:



   (A)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be
made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway; and



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle, and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving
in such direction upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the
left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of
the center of the intersection.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-801)



§ 71.111  LIMITATIONS ON U-TURNS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to
proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety
and without interfering with other traffic and in no event at the locations
listed in Ch. 77, Sch. X. For the purpose of this section, a U-turn shall
include any maneuver which results in the automobile proceeding in a
direction roughly opposite from its original direction unless such maneuver
has taken it at least ten feet off any roadway.



   (B)   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite
direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a
grade, where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any vehicle
approaching from either direction within 500 feet.



   (C)   Limitations on turning around: the driver of any vehicle shall
not turn such vehicle to the left upon any street in the business district
for the purpose of proceeding in the opposite direction or for the purpose of
parking along a curb or to angle park when such movement must be made across
a solid yellow line when said line is in the driver’s lane of traffic and
shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be
made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-802)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.112  IMPROPER STARTING OF PARKED VEHICLE.



   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-803)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.113  FAILURE TO SIGNAL WHEN REQUIRED; IMPROPER SIGNAL.



   (A)   No person may turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the
vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in § 71.110 or
turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a
vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person may so turn
any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter
provided.



   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required must
be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning within a business or residence district, and such
signal must be given continuously during not less than the last 200 feet
traveled by the vehicle before turning outside a business or residence
district.



   (C)   No person may stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this
title to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is
opportunity to give such a signal.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-804)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.114  IMPROPER USE OF TURN SIGNAL.



   The electric turn signal device required in § 74.022 must be used to
indicate an intention to turn, change lanes or start from a parallel parked
position but must not be flashed on one side only on a parked or disabled
vehicle or flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal to operators of
other vehicles approaching from the rear; however, such signal devices may be
flashed simultaneously on both sides of a motor vehicle to indicate the
presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching,
overtaking and passing.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-804)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.115  SIGNAL BY HAND OR ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE.



   Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by
means of the hand and arm or by an electric turn signal device conforming to
the requirements provided in § 74.022.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-805)



§ 71.116  METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.



   All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from
the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:



   (A)   Left turn: hand and arm extended horizontally;



   (B)   Right turn: hand and arm extended upward; and



   (C)   Stop or decrease of speed: hand and arm extended downward.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-806)




RIGHT-OF-WAY




§ 71.130  VEHICLES APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION.



   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from
different roadways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left must yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.



   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) above is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this title.



   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a
highway from a highway which terminates at the intersection, or "T"
intersection, not otherwise regulated by this title or controlled by traffic
control signs or signals, shall stop, yield, and grant the privilege of
immediate use of the intersection to another vehicle which has entered the
intersection from the non-terminating highway or is approaching the
intersection on the non-terminating highway in such proximity as to
constitute a hazard and after stopping may proceed when the driver may safely
enter the intersection without interference or collision with the traffic
using the non-terminating



highway.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-901)  (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)



§ 71.131  VEHICLE TURNING LEFT.



   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is
so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so
yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-902)



§ 71.132  VEHICLES ENTERING STOP CROSSWALK.



   (A)   Where stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection or flashing red signals are in place at a plainly marked
crosswalk between intersections, drivers of vehicles shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk and pedestrians within or entering the
crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right-of-way over
vehicles so stopped. Drivers of vehicles having to yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians entering or within the nearest crosswalk at an intersection shall
also yield the right-of-way to pedestrians within any other crosswalk at the
intersection.



   (B)   Flashing red lights are authorized to be placed at all
locations in Ch. 78, Sch. VII and all other locations where traffic control
signals are authorized by this ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-903)



§ 71.133  VEHICLE ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION.



   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated
by stop or yield signs as authorized in § 71.001.



   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic
control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection
indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if
none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or
if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering
the intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another
roadway or which is approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when the driver is moving across or within
the intersection, but said driver having so yielded may proceed at such time
as a safe interval occurs.



   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in
obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another
roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such
driver is moving across or within the intersection.



   (D)   If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or
interfere with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield
right-of-way sign or a stop sign such collision or interference shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of the driver’s failure to yield right-of-way.



   (E)   Stop signs are authorized to be placed at all locations found
in Ch. 77, Sch. III.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-904)



§ 71.134  MERGING TRAFFIC.



   At an intersection where traffic lanes are provided for merging
traffic, the driver of each vehicle on the converging roadways is required to
adjust his or her vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a
collision with another vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-905)



§ 71.135  VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.



   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an
alley, building, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-906)



§ 71.136  OPERATION OF VEHICLES AND STREETCARS ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED
EMERGENCY VEHICLE.



   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of this
title or a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible or
visual signal, the driver of every other vehicle on the same roadway shall
yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to,
and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the highway clear
of any intersection and shall stop if possible and remain in such position
until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a police officer.



   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the highway.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-907) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)



§ 71.137  VEHICLES NOT TO BE DRIVEN ON SIDEWALKS OR SAFETY ZONES.



   No driver of a vehicle shall drive within any sidewalk area, except at
a permanent or temporary driveway, nor at any time into or upon a portion of
a roadway marked as a safety zone, except emergency vehicles or city vehicles
or municipal snow plows in performance of official duties.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-908)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 70.999.



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of § 71.052 shall be subject
to the penalty provisions of Chapter 11 of this city code, regarding
administrative hearings and fined no less than $100 for the first offense,
$200 for the second offense and $300 for the third offense.



(Ord. 2012-16, passed 5-21-2012)



CHAPTER 72:  PEDESTRIANS



Section



   72.01   Pedestrian obedience to traffic control devices and traffic
regulations



   72.02   Pedestrians’ right-of-way at crosswalks



   72.03   Crossing at other than crosswalks



   72.04   Drivers to avoid colliding with pedestrians



   72.05   Pedestrians with disabilities right-of-way



   72.06   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks



   72.07   Solicitation on the roadway



   72.08   Improper walking on highways



   72.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks



   72.10   Pedestrians yield to authorized emergency vehicles



   72.11   Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs



   72.12   Bridge and railroad signals



Cross-reference:



   Traffic regulations, see Chapter 71



§ 72.01  PEDESTRIAN OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS.



   (A)   A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic control device specifically applicable to him or her, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (B)   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian control
signals provided in §§ 71.005 and 71.006.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1001)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 72.02  PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in
operation the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down
or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway
within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.



   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of
safety and walk or turn into the path of a moving vehicle which is so close
as to constitute an immediate hazard.



   (C)   Division (A) above shall not apply under the condition stated
in § 72.03(B).



   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at
any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.



   (E)   Whenever stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection or at a plainly marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers
shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians as set forth in § 71.133.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1002)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 72.03  CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than
within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a
pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control
signals are in operation pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a
marked crosswalk.



   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally
unless authorized by official traffic control devices; and, whom authorized
to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in the official traffic
control devices in accordance with the official traffic control devices
pertaining to such crossing movements.



   (E)   Pedestrians with disabilities may cross a roadway at any point
other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk where
the intersection is physically inaccessible to them but they shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1003) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 72.04  DRIVERS TO AVOID COLLIDING WITH PEDESTRIANS.



   Notwithstanding other provisions of this title or the provisions of any
local ordinance, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid
colliding with any pedestrian, or any person operating a bicycle or other
device propelled by human power and shall give warning by sounding the horn
when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child
or any obviously confused, incapacitated or intoxicated person.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1003.1) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see
§ 70.999



§ 72.05  PEDESTRIANS WITH DISABILITIES RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
with clearly visible disabilities.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1004) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)



§ 72.06  PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.



   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1005)



§ 72.07  SOLICITATION ON THE ROADWAY.



   (A)   No person shall enter or remain in a highway in such a manner
that obstructs the flow of traffic or obstructs the lawful parking of any
vehicle.



   (B)   The prohibitions in division (A) shall not apply:



      (1)   In the event of an emergency where entry to or presence
in the highway is necessary to avoid injury or death;



      (2)   When otherwise permitted by traffic control device, city
code, or an authorized law enforcement official or city employee; or



      (3)   As otherwise provided in this section.



   (C)   City law enforcement personnel, or other persons employed by
or serving the city to protect the public safety, that desire to engage in
solicitation for a charitable organization may engage in solicitation for
charitable purposes in a highway provided that no later than ten days prior
to the requested dates of solicitation, the charitable organization submit an
application to the Chief of Police stating in full the following information:



      (1)   The name of the charitable organization for which the
solicitation will be conducted;



      (2)   The location or locations, including all public
highways, on which the solicitation will occur along with a list of three
alternate locations listed in order of preference;



      (3)   The manner and conditions under which the solicitation
is to occur;



      (4)   The dates and times for the proposed solicitation; and



      (5)   Proof of a valid liability insurance policy in the
amount of at least $1,000,000 insuring the charity or local agency against
bodily injury and property damage arising out of or in connection with the
solicitation.



   (D)   The Chief of Police shall issue a solicitation permit to any
city law enforcement personnel or other persons employed by or serving the
village to protect the public safety that desires to engage in solicitation
for a charitable organization in a highway no later than five business days
after receiving a full, accurate, complete, and qualifying application as
required by this section. The city may impose reasonable conditions in
writing that are consistent with the intent of this section and are based on
articulated public safety concerns. If the city determines that the
applicant’s location cannot be permitted due to significant safety
concerns, such as high traffic volumes, poor geometrics, construction,
maintenance operations, or past accident history, then the city may deny the
application for that location and shall approve one of the three alternate
locations following the order of preference submitted by the applicant on the
alternate location list, subject to such conditions as may be imposed
consistent with public safety concerns. Upon request of an applicant,
additional alternate locations may be proposed in order to obviate public
safety concerns or to proceed without conditions that otherwise would apply
to the initially identified alternate locations.



   (E)   Other persons desiring to engage in solicitation for a
charitable organization in a highway may do so in the manner prescribed in
divisions (C) and (D) above, provided that the city may require an
organization to submit a satisfactory statement setting forth:



      (1)   Public safety and/or law enforcement training for the
individuals who will be participating in the charitable solicitation; and



      (2)   The safety devices and safety procedures to be utilized,
including the procedures to ensure the safety of the individuals who will be
participating in the charitable solicitation and the public in and around the
highway where the proposed solicitation will occur.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1006) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 72.08  IMPROPER WALKING ON HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it
shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent
roadway.



   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking
alone, and upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as
practicable from the edge of the roadway.



   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any
pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable
to an outside edge of a roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk
only on the left side of the roadway.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this title, any pedestrian
upon a roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1007) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 72.09  RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.



   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1008)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 72.10  PEDESTRIANS YIELD TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of an audible signal and visual signals meeting the requirements of §
70.055, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible
signal only, every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the authorized
emergency vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1009)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 72.11  PEDESTRIANS UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.



   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a
degree which renders himself or herself a hazard shall not walk or be upon a
highway except on a sidewalk.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1010)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 72.12  BRIDGE AND RAILROAD SIGNALS.



   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or
approach thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge
operation signal indication has been given.



   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while such
gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.



   (C)   No pedestrian shall enter, remain upon or traverse over a
railroad grade crossing or pedestrian walkway crossing a railroad track when
an audible bell or clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device is
operational giving warning of the presence, approach, passage or departure of
a railroad train.



   (D)   A violation of any part of this section is a petty offense,
for which a $250 fine shall be imposed for a first violation, and a $500 fine
shall be imposed for a second or subsequent violation. The court may impose
25 hours of community service in place of the $250 fine for a first violation.



   (E)   Local authorities shall impose fines as established in
division (D) above for pedestrians who fail to obey signals indicating the
presence, approach, passage or departure of a train.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1011)  (Ord. 2010-34, passed 6-7-2010; Ord. 2010-37,
passed 6-21-2010)



CHAPTER 73:  STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Section




Special Stops Required




   73.01   Disobeyed railroad signal or flagger



   73.02   Failed to stop at railroad crossing - specific vehicles



   73.03   Moving heavy equipment at railroad grade crossing



   73.04   Disobeyed stop sign



   73.05   Disobeyed yield sign



   73.06   Failed to stop at sidewalk (or emerging from alley or
driveway)




Stopping, Standing, Parking




   73.20   Stopping, standing or parking outside of business or
residence district



   73.21   Persons with disabilities parking



   73.22   Impounding and removal of vehicles



   73.23   Authority of City Manager



   73.24   Duty of City Manager to maintain a public record of parking
prohibitions and restrictions



   73.25   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places



   73.26   Lessors of visitor vehicles; duty upon receiving notice of
violation of this subchapter or local parking regulation



   73.27   Public parking lot regulations



   73.28   Angle parking



   73.29   Parking prohibited at all times in designated places



   73.30   Parking prohibited at all times east of Sheridan Road



   73.31   Parking during certain hours in designated places



   73.32   Standing for passenger loading only



   73.33   Interference with parking enforcement



   73.34   No stopping, standing or parking



   73.35   Standing for loading only



   73.36   Bus to park only at designated stands



   73.37   Bus stands not for private use



   73.38   Standing or parking close to curb



   73.39   Unlawful parking



   73.40   Parking on parkway without permit



   73.41   Permits for parking on parkways



   73.42   Continuing violations of parking regulations



   73.43   Using vehicle for primary purpose of advertising prohibited



   73.44   Parking during snow removal operations



   73.45   Parking at Forest Park Beach



   73.46   Parking at boat launching ramp



   73.47   Prohibited truck parking



   73.48   City vehicles and city contractor exemption



   73.49   City facility parking



   73.50   Vehicle immobilization



   73.51   Conflict with other ordinances



 



   73.99   Penalty




SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED




§ 73.01  DISOBEYED RAILROAD SIGNAL OR FLAGGER.



   (A)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing such person must exercise due care and caution as the
existence of a railroad track across a highway is a warning of danger, and
under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver shall stop
within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the
railroad and shall not proceed until he or she can do so safely. The
foregoing requirements shall apply when:



      (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device
gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;



      (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagger gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;



      (3)   A railroad train approaching a highway crossing emits a
warning signal and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to
such crossing, is in immediate hazard;



      (4)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is
in hazardous proximity to such crossing; and



      (5)   A railroad train is approaching so closely that an
immediate hazard is created.



   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.



   (C)   The Department, and local authorities with the approval of the
Department, are hereby authorized to designate particularly dangerous highway
grade crossings of railroads and to erect stop signs thereat. When such stop
signs are erected the driver of any vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not
less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall proceed
only upon exercising due care.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1201)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.02  FAILED TO STOP AT RAILROAD CROSSING - SPECIFIC VEHICLES.



   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire,
or of any vehicle carrying liquid petroleum and liquid petroleum products,
explosives, flammable or oxidizing liquids and solids, flammable or poisonous
compressed gases, volatile liquids and solids which emit poisonous fumes,
corrosive liquids and radioactive materials as a cargo or part of a cargo,
before crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such
vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of
such railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions
along such track for any approaching train, and for signals indicating the
approach of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed
until he or she can do so safely. After stopping as required in this section,
the driver shall proceed only in a gear not requiring a change of gears
during the crossing, and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the
track or tracks.



   (B)   This section shall not apply at:



      (1)   Any railroad grade crossing at which traffic is
controlled by a police officer or human flagger;



      (2)   Any railroad grade crossing at which traffic is
regulated by a traffic control signal;



      (3)   Any railroad grade crossing protected by crossing gates
or an alternately flashing light signal intended to give warning of the
approach of a railroad train; or



      (4)   Any railroad grade crossing at which an official traffic
control device gives notice that the stopping requirement imposed by this
section does not apply.



   (C)   This section does not apply to streetcar grade crossings
within a business or residence district.



   (D)   All school buses shall stop at all railroad crossings when
carrying passengers, except at any railroad grade crossing located upon a
four-lane highway where the posted speed limit is in excess of 45 mph or any
railroad grade crossing at which traffic is controlled by a police officer or
human flagger.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1202)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.03  MOVING HEAVY EQUIPMENT AT RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING.



   (A)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor,
power shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal
operating speed of ten or less mph, or, for such equipment with 18 feet or
less distance between two adjacent axles, having a vertical body or load
clearance of less than nine inches above a level surface, or, for such
equipment with more than 18 feet between two adjacent axles, having a
vertical body or load clearance of less than one-half inch per foot of
distance between such adjacent axles above a level surface upon or across any
tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with this section.



   (B)   Notice of any such intended crossing shall be given to a
superintendent of such railroad and a reasonable time be given to such
railroad to provide proper protection at such crossing.



   (C)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or
moving any such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same not less than
15 feet nor more than 50 feet from the nearest rail of such railway and while
so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any
approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and
shall not proceed until the crossing can be made safely.



   (D)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by
automatic signal or crossing gates or a flagger or otherwise of the immediate
approach of a railroad train or car.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1203)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.04  DISOBEYED STOP SIGN.



   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control
signal every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection, indicated
by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection, or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the
intersection roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on
the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. Stop intersections
are found in Ch. 77, Sch. II and are authorized in § 71.133(E).



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1204(b))  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 73.05  DISOBEYED YIELD SIGN.



   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety
to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where
the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1204(c))  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 73.06  FAILED TO STOP AT SIDEWALK (OR EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY).



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from any alley, building, private road
or driveway within an urban area shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to
driving into the sidewalk area extending across such alley, building
entrance, road or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall
stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic thereon, and shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such
roadway.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1205)




STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING




§ 73.20  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING OUTSIDE OF BUSINESS OR RESIDENCE
DISTRICT.



   (A)   Roadway obstruction. Outside a business or residence district
no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, upon the roadway when it is practicable to stop, park or so leave
such vehicle off the roadway, but in any event an unobstructed width of the
highway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of
other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicle shall be available
from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon such highway.



   (B)   Signs. The city with respect to highways under its
jurisdiction or for the maintenance of which it is responsible may place
signs prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles on any highway where in its opinion such stopping, standing or
parking is dangerous to those using the highway or where the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement
of traffic thereon. Any such regulations adopted by the city regarding the
stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, upon any specific street, streets
or highways become effective at the time of the erection of appropriate signs
indicating such regulations.



   (C)   Disabled vehicle exemption. This section and § 73.25 shall
not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled in such manner and
to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily
leaving the vehicle in such position.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)



§ 73.21  PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.



   (A)   It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not
properly displaying registration plates or decals issued to a person with
disabilities, by the Illinois Vehicle Code or to a disabled veteran, as
defined by the Illinois Vehicle Code, as evidence that the vehicle is
operated by or for a person with disabilities or disabled veteran, in any
parking place, including any private or public offstreet parking facility,
specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign as designated, for
motor vehicles displaying such registration plates. It shall be prohibited to
park any motor vehicle in a designated access aisle adjacent to any parking
place specifically reserved for persons with disabilities, by the posting of
an official sign as designated under state law, for motor vehicles displaying
such registration plates. When using the parking privileges for persons with
disabilities, the parking decal or device must be displayed properly in the
vehicle where it is clearly visible to law enforcement personnel, either
hanging from the rearview mirror or placed on the dashboard of the vehicle in
clear view. Disability license plates and parking decals and devices are not
transferable from person to person. Proper usage of the disability license
plate or parking decal or device requires the authorized holder to be present
and enter or exit the vehicle at the time the parking privileges are being
used. It is a violation of this section to park in a space reserved for a
person with disabilities if the authorized holder of the disability license
plate or parking decal or device does not enter or exit the vehicle at the
time the parking privileges are being used. Any motor vehicle properly
displaying a disability license plate or a parking decal or device containing
the international symbol of access issued to persons with disabilities by any
local authority, state, district, territory or foreign country shall be
recognized by the city as a valid license plate or device and receive the
same parking privileges as residents of this city.



   (A-1)   An individual with a vehicle displaying disability license
plates or a parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with a
disability under 625 ILCS 5/3-616, 11-1301.1, or 11-1301.2 or to a disabled
veteran under § 3-609 of the Illinois Vehicle Code is in violation of this
section if (i) the person using the disability license plate or parking decal
or device is not the authorized holder of the disability license plate or
parking decal or device or is not transporting the authorized holder of the
disability license plate or parking decal or device to or from the parking
location and (ii) the person uses the disability license plate or parking
decal or device to exercise any privileges granted through the disability
license plate or parking decals or devices under this code.



   (A-2)   A driver of a vehicle displaying disability license plates
or a parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with a disability
under 625 ILCS 5/3-616, 11-1301.1, or 11-1301.2 or to a disabled veteran
under § 3-609 of the Illinois Vehicle Code is in violation of this section
if (i) the person to whom the disability license plate or parking decal or
device was issued is deceased and (ii) the driver uses the disability license
plate or parking decal or device to exercise any privileges granted through a
disability license plate or parking decal or device under this code.



   (B)   Any person or local authority owning or operating any public
or private off-street parking facility may, after notifying the police or
sheriffs department, remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or
other place of safety any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for
use by a person with disabilities which does not display person with
disabilities registration plates or a special decal or device as required
under this section.



   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of
division (A) shall be fined $250 in addition to any costs or charges
connected with the removal or storage of any motor vehicle authorized under
this section. It shall not be a defense to a charge under this section that
either the sign posted pursuant to this section or the intended accessible
parking place does not comply with the technical requirements of § 11-301 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code or local ordinance if a reasonable person would be
made aware by the sign or notice on or near the parking place that the place
is reserved for a person with disabilities.



   (C-1)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of
division (A-1) a first time shall be fined $600. Any person found guilty of
violating division (A-1) a second or subsequent time shall be fined $1,000.
Any person who violates division (A-2) shall be fined $2,500. The City Clerk
shall distribute 50% of the fine imposed on any person who is found guilty of
or pleads guilty to violating this section, including any person placed on
court supervision for violating this section, to the law enforcement agency
that issued the citation. If more than one law enforcement agency is
responsible for issuing the citation or making the arrest, the 50% of the
fine imposed shall be shared equally.



   (D)   As used in this section, AUTHORIZED HOLDER means an individual
issued a disability license plate under § 3-616 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, an individual issued a parking decal or device under § 11-1301.2 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, or an individual issued a disabled veteran's
license plate under § 3-609 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.



   (E)   Any police officer may seize the parking decal or device from
any person who commits a violation of this section. Any police officer may
seize the disability license plate upon authorization from the Secretary of
State. Any police officer may request that the Secretary of State revoke the
parking decal or device or the disability license plate of any person who
commits a violation of this section.



   (F)   A motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a person
with disabilities, as defined by § 1-159.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
pursuant to § 3-616 or to a veteran with a disability pursuant to subsection
(a) of § 3-609 or a special decal or device issued pursuant to § 3-616 or
pursuant to § 11-1301.2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or a motor vehicle
registered in another jurisdiction, state, district, territory or foreign
country upon which is displayed a registration plate, special decal or device
issued by the other jurisdiction designating the vehicle is operated by or
for a person with disabilities shall be exempt from any ordinance imposing
time limitations on parking, except limitations of one-half hour or less, on
any street or highway, a parking area subject to regulation under subsection
(a) of § 11-209 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or any parking lot or parking
place which are owned, leased or owned and leased by the city or a city
parking utility; and shall be recognized by the city as a valid license plate
or parking device and shall receive the same parking privileges as residents
of this state; but, such vehicle shall be subject to the laws which prohibit
parking in "no stopping" and "no standing" zones in front of or near fire
hydrants, driveways, public building entrances and exits, bus stops and
loading areas, and is prohibited from parking where the motor vehicle
constitutes a traffic hazard, whereby such motor vehicle shall be moved at
the instruction and request of a law enforcement officer to a location
designated by the officer.



   (G)   Any motor vehicle bearing registration plates or a special
decal or device specified in this section or in § 3-616 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code or such parking device as specifically authorized in §
11-1301.2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code as evidence that the vehicle is
operated by or for a person with disabilities or bearing registration plates
issued to a veteran with a disability under subsection (a) of § 3-609 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code may park, in addition to any other lawful place, in any
parking place specifically reserved for such vehicles by the posting of an
official sign as provided under § 11-301 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
Parking privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to the person
to whom the special registration plates, special decal or device were issued
and to qualified operators acting under his or her express direction while
the person with disabilities is present. A person to whom privileges were
granted shall, at the request of a police officer or any other person
invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic,
present an identification card with a picture as verification that the person
is the person to whom the special registration plates, special decal or
device was issued.



   (H)   Such parking privileges granted by this section are also
extended to motor vehicles of not-for-profit organizations used for the
transportation of persons with disabilities when such motor vehicles display
the decal or device issued pursuant to § 11-1301.2 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code.



   (I)   No person shall use any area for the parking of any motor
vehicle pursuant to § 11-1303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or where an
official sign controlling such area expressly prohibits parking at any time
or during certain hours.



   (J)   A vehicle displaying a decal or device issued under subsection
(c-5) of § 11-1301.2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be exempt from the
payment of fees generated by parking in a metered space or in a publicly
owned parking area.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016; Ord. 2016-29,
passed 5-2-2016)



§ 73.22  IMPOUNDING AND REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   General. Any motor vehicle parked upon a public street or
alley, or upon any street or way used by the public generally as a street,
within the city, at a place, in a manner, for a length of time or at a time
prohibited or declared to be unlawful by an ordinance of the city is, if
unoccupied, hereby declared to be an obstruction in such street or alley and
a public nuisance. Any police officer of the city is hereby authorized to
cause such vehicle to be removed and impounded in a depository designated by
the Police Department.



   (B)   Records and care. Whenever any such vehicle shall be ordered
removed and impounded, it shall become the duty of the Police Department to
take possession of and safely keep the same until any such vehicle shall have
been repossessed by the owner or other person legally entitled to possession
thereof or otherwise disposed of as hereinafter provided. The Police
Department shall keep an accurate record of the description of any such
vehicle, including the name of the officer ordering the removal and
impoundage, the person, firm, or corporation, if any, employed to tow or
deliver the same, and the charges, if any, therefore, the date, time and
place of the removal and impoundage, the make and color of car, style of
body, vehicle identification number, year built, state license number, city
vehicle license number, equipment and general description of condition. Such
record shall be a public record and shall be available for public inspection.



   (C)   Notification. Whenever a motor vehicle is removed and
impounded, the Police Department shall promptly notify the owner or other
person legally entitled to possession of such vehicle of the fact. If such
owner or other person cannot be ascertained from the records of the city, the
Police Department shall immediately instigate action to determine any
registered owner or lien holder. Notification shall be made to the proper
state authorities of the impoundment and intent of sale at public auction
should legal owners fail to make claim for the impounded vehicle. All
notifications and any sale at public auction of impounded vehicles shall
coincide and conform to 625 ILCS 5/4-201 through 4-215 and as amended from
time to time. No person may make claim or reimbursement for an auctioned
vehicle against the city if said owner or other person legally entitled to
possession of said vehicle fails to respond to proper notification.



   (D)   Costs. When a vehicle removed from either public or private
property is authorized by the Police Department, the owner of the vehicle
will be responsible for all towing and storage costs.



   (E)   Reclaiming vehicle. Before the owner or person entitled to
possession of any impounded vehicle shall be permitted to redeem the same
from the Police Department, he or she shall furnish sufficient evidence of
his or her identity and ownership of the vehicle; present a receipt for
towing storage, and other necessary charges and expenses; and shall sign a
receipt for the vehicle.



   (F)   State statute. Said vehicle shall be disposed of in accordance
with the provisions of Ill. Rev. Stat. Chapter 95-1/2 and as amended from
time to time.



   (G)   Causes for removal. Any police officer is hereby additionally
authorized to remove or cause to be removed any vehicle found upon a highway
when:



      (1)   Report has been made that such vehicle has been stolen
or taken without the consent of its owner;



      (2)   The person or persons in charge of such vehicle are
unable to provide for its custody or removal; or



      (3)   When the person driving or in control of such vehicle is
arrested for an alleged offense.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)



§ 73.23  AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   To prohibit parking on certain streets. The City Manager is
hereby authorized to prohibit the parking of vehicles at all times, or
between certain hours, on any street or portion of any street when in the
Manager’s discretion such parking may impede the free flow of traffic on
such streets, and shall cause appropriate signs to be erected and maintained
giving notice thereof.



   (B)   To restrict parking on certain streets. The City Manager is
hereby authorized to designate either side, or both sides, or any portion of
either side, of any street as a restricted parking area, and shall determine
the time of day any such parking restriction shall be effective, as well as
the duration of time allowed for continuous vehicular parking, the duration
of time allowed for continuous vehicular parking, as well as the form of
city-issued permit that may be required to allow persons to park in these
areas, any charge to be paid as a condition of such parking, and shall cause
appropriate signs to be erected and maintained in such areas designating the
effective time of day of such parking restriction, the duration of time that
continuous vehicular parking is allowed, and the form of city-issued permit
or fee that may be required. Such designation shall be evidenced by the
physical presence of such signs or legends or notices on or near the parking
lane of the streets or portions thereof where such restrictions are to be
effective.



   (C)   To restrict parking in city parking lots. The City Manager is
hereby authorized to designate publicly owned off-street parking lots, or any
portion of any publicly owned off-street parking lot, as a restricted parking
area, and shall determine the time of day any such parking restriction shall
be effective, the duration of time allowed for continuous vehicular parking,
as well as the form of city-issued permit that may be required to allow
persons to park in these lots, any charge to be paid as a condition of such
parking, and shall cause appropriate signs to be erected and maintained in
such areas designating the effective time of day of such parking
restrictions, the duration of time that continuous parking is allowed, and
the form of city-issued permit or fee that may be required. Such designation
shall be evidenced by the physical presence of any such signs or legends or
notices on or near the publicly owned off-street parking lot or portions
thereof where such restrictions are to be effective.



   (D)   Exceptions. The grant of authority to the City Manager set
forth in this section shall not extend to the areas listed below, and the
City Council shall retain the sole and exclusive power to establish and
modify all parking prohibitions and restrictions over these areas:



      (1)   East of Sheridan Road;



      (2)   The parking area adjoining the Forest Park Beach and the
parking lot on the bluff, commonly known as the Forest Park Beach lots; and



      (3)   The parking area adjoining the Forest Park Boat Ramp and
the driveway leading thereto, commonly known as the Boat Ramp Lot.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)



§ 73.24  DUTY OF CITY MANAGER TO MAINTAIN A PUBLIC RECORD OF PARKING
PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.



   The City Manager shall keep and maintain a record of all parking
prohibitions and restrictions affecting public streets and city parking lots.
This record shall be kept current by the City Manager and made freely
accessible to the public.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)



§ 73.25  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.



   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic
control device, no person shall:



   (A)   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:



      (1)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street;



      (2)   On a sidewalk;



      (3)   Within an intersection;



      (4)   On a crosswalk;



      (5)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30
feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;



      (6)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



      (7)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a
highway or within a highway tunnel;



      (8)   On any railroad tracks;



      (9)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;



      (10)   On any controlled-access highway; or



      (11)   In the area between roadways of a divided highway,
including crossovers.



   (B)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:



      (1)   In front of a public or private driveway, or upon the
opposite side of the street from such driveway where such parking interferes
with the normal ingress or egress of such driveway;



      (2)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



      (3)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



      (4)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal,
stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway;



      (5)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within 75 feet of such entrance (when properly sign-posted); or



      (6)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.



   (C)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily
for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
property or passengers:



      (1)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing; or



      (2)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.26  LESSORS OF VISITOR VEHICLES; DUTY UPON RECEIVING NOTICE OF
VIOLATION OF THIS SUBCHAPTER OR LOCAL PARKING REGULATION.



   Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and
who leases such vehicle to others, after receiving written notice of a
violation of this title involving such vehicle, shall upon request provide
such police officers as have authority of the offense, and the court having
jurisdiction thereof, with a written statement of the name and address of the
lessee at the time of such offense and the identifying number upon
registration plates and registration sticker of such vehicle.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.27  PUBLIC PARKING LOT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   General. Whenever the city shall have acquired or shall
thereafter acquire title to or dominion over, by purchase, license, lease or
otherwise, areas, lots, tracts or parcels of land and shall authorize the use
of the same for the purpose of public parking, such areas, lots, tracts or
parcels may be used for and employed for such purpose upon the following
conditions, and the following rules and regulations shall apply in the use
thereof.



      (1)   Use. Unless and until a charge for parking in such
areas, lots, tracts or parcels of land has been fixed as provided in this
subchapter the same may be used without charge for the parking of private
motor vehicles of the public at large. Parking in such areas, lots, tracts or
parcels of land shall not be permitted for the purposes of the servicing,
sale, repair or storage of any vehicle. Storage shall be defined as parking
or leaving a vehicle in one space for more than 72 consecutive hours.



      (2)   Overnight parking. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to park, permit, cause or procure to be parked or to
suffer any motor vehicles to remain within any city parking lot at any time
between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., except as may be permitted by
direction of the City Manager as provided in this subchapter. Any such motor
vehicle so parked or which shall not be permitted to remain in any such area
during the hours aforesaid may be removed by the city and shall, be stored at
the expense of the owner thereof. The cost of removal and storage of any such
motor vehicle so removed shall constitute a lien upon the motor vehicle,
which shall be repaid to the city before delivery thereof to the owner or
operator thereof.



      (3)   Striping and signage; spaces. When the city shall cause
lines or marks to be placed in any parking area designating individual
parking spaces, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
park or to allow to be parked or place any such motor vehicle in such parking
area except within the lines so designated or so as to encroach upon an
adjacent designated space. It shall further be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to park or place any motor vehicle in any part of such parking
area marked and indicated by lettering “No Parking” or otherwise
prohibited parking.



      (4)   Striping and signage; direction. When signs are erected
giving notice thereof, or when lines or markings have been placed upon the
pavement indicating the direction of travel to be followed, it shall be
unlawful for any person (except when emerging from a marked parking space) to
operate a motor vehicle in any direction other than that indicated by such
lines, markings or signs, or to disregard the instructions of any such signs
with respect to ingress or egress to such areas, lots, tracts or parcels of
land.



      (5)   Locking vehicle. It shall be and is hereby declared to
be the duty of any person, firm or corporation who shall park or permit the
parking of any motor vehicle in any such municipally maintained parking area
to lock and secure the said motor vehicle for the prevention of theft of the
vehicle or its contents, and the city shall not be liable in the maintenance
of such parking area to any person, firm or corporation for loss or damage to
any motor vehicle or contents of any motor vehicle placed in said parking
area, nor for the injury to person or property arising from the use and
maintenance of any such parking area.



      (6)   Permit required. When signs are erected giving notice
thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in any
city parking lot, except during the periods and/or under the conditions (such
as the displaying of a required permit) as set forth on the applicable
signage.



   (B)   Meters, daily fee and gated spaces; prohibition. A motor
vehicle that is displaying a parking permit shall not park in a city parking
lot or parking spaces utilizing parking gates, ticket dispensers, drop boxes,
parking meters or similar devices except upon payment of the fee specified
for such lots or spaces.



   (C)   Permit purchase and issuance. Upon application and payment of
the fee, as described in division (C)(8) below, the Finance Director or
designee shall issue the requested parking permit which shall be valid for
the fiscal year or time period shown thereon in the city parking lots as
described in division (C)(8) below. The sale and issuance of parking permits
shall be guided by the following.



      (1)   Unlimited permit. Unlimited parking permits shall be due
and payable on or before May 1 of each year, provided that, on and after
November 1 of each year, the fee shall be one-half of the annual fee.
Unlimited permits allow for parking in any parking space in any city-owned
off-street parking lot at any time, (except between the hours of 3:00 a.m.
and 5:00 a.m., unless in a designated overnight space), but do not allow for
parking at Forest Park Beach.



      (2)   Annual CBD permit. Annual parking permits shall be due
and payable on or before May 1 of each year. Subsequently, the annual fee is
prorated based upon the time remaining in the fiscal year. Unless otherwise
determined by the City Manager pursuant to this subchapter and properly
signed, annual CBD permits allow for parking in the permit required CBD and
other designated lots at any time, (except between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., unless in a designated overnight space), but do not allow for
parking at Forest Park Beach.



      (3)   Monthly permit. Monthly parking permits shall be due and
payable on or before the first of each month; provided that, discounted
permits may be offered for sale at the discretion of the Finance Director.
Unless otherwise determined by the City Manager pursuant to this subchapter
and properly signed, monthly permits allow for daily parking in the permit
required CBD and other designated lots at any time, (except between the hours
of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless in a designated overnight space), but do
not allow for parking at Forest Park Beach.



      (4)   Employer purchased permits. Any individual, firm or
corporation doing business in the city may purchase monthly or annual parking
permits for their individual employees and receive a discount as described in
division (C)(8) below. Purchase of said employer purchased permit must be
made by corporate of business check or account.



      (5)   Special permits. The City Manager may designate spaces,
lots or locations requiring special permits at his or her discretion.
Appropriate signs shall be erected and maintained designating the requirement
of a special permit for these spaces.



      (6)   Daily parking. The City Manager shall provide daily
parking spaces at his or her discretion for a per day fee set by the City
Council as provided for in division (C)(8) below. Appropriate signs shall be
erected and maintained designating these spaces as daily parking spaces.



      (7)   Fees and permitted lots. The permit, daily and other
parking fees shall be set by the City Council of the city. Fees shall be
reviewed at least annually by the City Council and may be revised in
accordance with the findings of such review. The fees set forth in the fee
schedule shall be the minimum amounts that may be charged for permits or
daily parking. All fees listed may be superseded by any fee ordinance or
resolution as passed by the City Council.



   (D)   Paid Parking Fund. All revenue derived from the sale of
daytime parking stickers or decals or from daily fees shall be kept in the
Paid Parking Fund and used for the purpose of acquiring, improving, paving,
repairing and maintaining city parking lots and related expenses.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.28  ANGLE PARKING.



   (A)   Angle parking is permitted on those streets where official
signs or striping allowing for angle parking have been erected or otherwise
provided.



   (B)   No person shall back in to any angle parking space.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.29  PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES IN DESIGNATED PLACES.



   No person shall park a vehicle during the time prohibited at places so
indicated by official signs.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.30  PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES EAST OF SHERIDAN ROAD.



   (A)   Prohibition. When signs are properly erected in any area
described in Ch. 78, Sch. V, hereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any
time.



   (B)   Exemption. When signs are properly erected in any area
described in Ch. 78, Sch. I, hereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any
time in such area except when displaying a city motor vehicle license, a
city-issued Forest Park Beach nonresident parking permit, a city-issued
Forest Park resident parking permit or such other permit specifically
authorized by the city.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.31  PARKING DURING CERTAIN HOURS IN DESIGNATED PLACES.



   (A)   General. No person shall park a vehicle for any period of time
in excess of the time posted on the official sign or legend or notice
effective for the parking space for which it is erected during the effective
time thereof.



   (B)   12:00 midnight - 5:00 a.m. Forest Park Beach parking
prohibition. When signs are erected in any block or area, as described in Ch.
78, Sch. I, hereof, giving notice that no person shall park a vehicle at any
time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. on any day.



   (C)   Vehicle “jockeying” prohibition. A vehicle shall be deemed
to be in violation of parking time limitations established by appropriate
official signs installed pursuant to this subchapter, (except that the
provisions shall extend northward on Western Avenue only to Woodland Road),
if it is moved with the purpose of evading such parking time limitation to
another parking space located within 500 feet from the closest point of the
parking space at which such vehicle shall have been first parked, commonly
referred to as “jockeying.” The movement of a vehicle less than 30
minutes before or after the expiration of said parking time limitation from
one parking space to such other parking space shall be presumed to have been
moved with the purpose of evading the parking limitation.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.32  STANDING FOR PASSENGER LOADING ONLY.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length
of time at a railroad station other than for the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers in any place marked as a station loading zone during
the hours when the regulations applicable to such station loading zone are
effective and then only for periods not to exceed five minutes. Places may
hereafter be designated as station loading zones and shall be appropriately
marked as such.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.33  INTERFERENCE WITH PARKING ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any
police officer or other officer or employee of the city in their enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or
other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or
officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking
regulations of this chapter shall, if done for the purpose of evading the
provisions of this chapter, constitute such interference or obstruction.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.34  NO STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING.



   When signs are erected on public streets giving notice thereof, no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time
within the area or upon any of those streets.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.35  STANDING FOR LOADING ONLY.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length
of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and
loading of materials in any place marked as a loading zone as described in
Ch. 78, Sch. II, hereof, during the hours when the provisions applicable to
such loading zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and
unloading of materials exceed 15 minutes.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.36  BUS TO PARK ONLY AT DESIGNATED STANDS.



   The driver of a bus shall not stand or park upon any street in any
business district at any place other than at a bus stop, established and as
described in Ch. 78, Schs. III and IV, hereof, except that this provision
shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in
accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 2016-29, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see
§ 73.99



§ 73.37  BUS STANDS NOT FOR PRIVATE USE.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus at a bus
stop when any such stop has been officially designated and as described in
Ch. 78, Schs. III and IV, hereof, and appropriately marked by sign or signs,
except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein
for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus waiting to
enter or about to enter such zone.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 2016-29, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see
§ 73.99



§ 73.38  STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of traffic. The
curb-side wheels of the vehicle shall be within 12 inches of the edge of the
roadway. On those streets that have been marked or signed for angle or
parallel parking vehicles shall park front wheel to curb at the angle, and
within, such marks or signs.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.39  UNLAWFUL PARKING.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway or parkway for
the principal purpose of displaying it for sale, or for washing, greasing or
repairing such vehicle, except for repairs necessitated by an emergency.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.40  PARKING ON PARKWAY WITHOUT PERMIT.



   No person, firm or corporation shall park any vehicle, or permit the
same to be parked, on any parkway, except on that portion of a parkway cut
back and improved by written permit in accordance with the ordinances of the
city, or, in cases of an emergency or when authorized by a police officer.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.41  PERMITS FOR PARKING ON PARKWAYS.



   Permits to cut back the parkway and to park thereon, as aforesaid, may
be issued by the City Manager, provided that the portion of the parkway to be
used for parking shall be cut back and improved, at the expense of the
applicant, in accordance with the standards and regulations approved by the
City Council.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.42  CONTINUING VIOLATIONS OF PARKING REGULATIONS.



   Each period of posted time limit that a vehicle is illegally parked
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be prosecuted accordingly.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.43  USING VEHICLE FOR PRIMARY PURPOSE OF ADVERTISING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall operate or park on any street any vehicle for the
primary purpose of advertising.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.44  PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL OPERATIONS.



   (A)   On street prohibition. No person shall park any vehicle on any
street or thoroughfare within the city at any time after snow begins to fall
and said snow exceeds two inches in depth until snow removal operations are
completed, except in Central Business District which is defined as follows:
the area from Vine Avenue on the south, Oakwood Avenue on the west, Woodland
Avenue on the north, McKinley Avenue on the east, and Western Avenue
extending north to Alden Lane. Parking is prohibited in said Central Business
District after 12:00 a.m. after a snow fall exceeds two inches until snow
removal operations are completed. The Chief of the Police Department, and all
members assigned to the traffic duty, are hereby authorized to remove and tow
away or have removed or towed away by a commercial towing service, any car or
other vehicle illegally parked in violation of this subchapter. Cars so towed
away shall be stored on any city property or in a public garage or parking
lot and shall be restored to the owner or operator thereof after payment of
the expense incurred by the city in removing and storing such vehicles.



   (B)   Parking lot prohibition. It shall be unlawful when appropriate
signs are posted for any person to park any motor vehicle in any public
parking lot, at anytime between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. when
snow has accumulated in excess of two inches, unless specifically exempted
from such prohibition by the city. The Chief of Police or designee shall
attempt to notify the owner of any motor vehicle so parked which hinders snow
removal or plowing operations in any public parking lot and request the
removal of such vehicle, however, if such owner cannot be located then the
vehicle so parked shall be removed to a place of storage and all expenses of
such removal and storage shall be charged to the owner of said vehicle prior
to release of said vehicle.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.45  PARKING AT FOREST PARK BEACH.



   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall drive or
park a motor vehicle on or in the parking area adjoining the Forest Park
Beach and the parking lot on the bluff, commonly known as the “Forest Park
Beach Lots,” except when bearing a city motor vehicle license, a
city-issued non-resident parking permit, or such other permit specifically
authorized by the city.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.46  PARKING AT BOAT LAUNCHING RAMP.



   When signs are properly erected giving notice thereof, no person shall
drive or park a motor vehicle on or in the parking area adjoining the Forest
Park Boat Ramp and the driveway leading thereto, commonly known as the
“Boat Ramp Lot,” except when a valid boat launching or fishing permit is
permanently displayed and affixed on the rear window.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see
§ 73.99



§ 73.47  PROHIBITED TRUCK PARKING.



   No person shall park a truck at any time upon any street or area where
official signs are erected giving notice that truck parking is prohibited.
For the purpose of this section, a TRUCK is defined as any commercial motor
vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation and
delivery of property or poultry or other farm animals.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see
§ 73.99



§ 73.48  CITY VEHICLES AND CITY CONTRACTOR EXEMPTION.



   Provisions of the traffic code regulating the parking or standing of
motor vehicles shall not apply to vehicles or equipment belonging to the city
while being used for city business and to vehicles or equipment owned by
persons or companies under contract with the city while said vehicles or
equipment are being used in pursuance of said contract.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)



§ 73.49  CITY FACILITY PARKING.



   (A)   City facilities. When signs are erected giving notice thereof,
no person shall park in the following city facility parking lots except city
employees and persons conducting city business or using said facilities:



      (1)   Municipal Services Building;



      (2)   Public Safety Building;



      (3)   Lake Forest Recreation Center;



      (4)   Telegraph Road Fire Station;



      (5)   Water Plant;



      (6)   Cemetery;



      (7)   Deerpath Golf Course;



      (8)   Gorton Community Center; and



      (9)   Grove Cultural Campus.



   (B)   Elawa Farm. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no
person shall park in the Elawa Farm/Middlefork Savanna parking lot except
city and Lake County Forest Preserve District employees and persons
conducting city or county business or using Elawa Farm, Elawa Farm Park or
Middlefork Savanna facilities.



   (C)   Library. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no
person shall park in the Lake Forest Library parking lot except when using
library facilities, and in no event longer than three hours at any time.
(Library employees may park in spaces designated for them during work hours.)



   (D)   Elementary schools. When signs are erected giving notice
thereof, no person shall park in the parking lots of Sheridan Elementary
School, Everett Elementary School, Cherokee Elementary School, Deerpath
Elementary School or Deerpath Junior High School, except when conducting
school business at the respective school in which such person is parked.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 73.50  VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION.



   (A)   Authorization. The Police Department of the city is hereby
authorized to direct and supervise a program of vehicle immobilization for
the purpose of enforcing the parking regulations of this subchapter. Any
Police Department employee authorized by the Chief of Police is hereby
authorized to cause the immobilization, by placement of a restraint in such a
manner as to prevent its operation, of any vehicle parked upon any public
street or way or upon any other city-owned property, that is eligible for
immobilization and that has been included on the vehicle immobilization list
pursuant to this section.



   (B)   Eligibility for immobilization. A vehicle shall be considered
eligible for immobilization when the registered owner of the vehicle has
accumulated five or more citations, at least five of which are more than 90
days old, and for which the fines and penalties have not been paid in full,
issued against the vehicle’s registration charging that such vehicle was
parked or stopped in violation of the city’s parking regulations. Every
such vehicle shall hereafter be referred to as an eligible vehicle.



   (C)   Notice of pending immobilization. The Police Department shall
cause a notice of pending immobilization to be sent to the registered owner
of any eligible vehicle. The notice shall be sent certified mail or
registered mail-return receipt requested, to the address of the registered
owner of the eligible vehicle recorded with the Illinois Secretary of State,
or if the eligible vehicle bears a registration number of a state other than
the state, then at the address of the registered owner recorded in that
state’s registry of motor vehicles. The notice of pending immobilization
shall provide the following information:



      (1)   A description of the vehicle, including the make, model,
year and color of the eligible vehicle;



      (2)   The eligible vehicle’s vehicle registration number and
the number and state of the license plate displayed on the eligible vehicle;



      (3)   The name and address of the registered owner of the
eligible vehicle;



      (4)   The number and issue dates of the outstanding parking
citations; and



      (5)   A statement that the registered owner’s vehicle is
subject to immobilization pursuant to this section, unless the registered
owner, within ten days of receipt of the pending immobilization notice:



         (a)   Submits to either the city’s Finance Department
or Police Department the full fine or penalty amount due for each outstanding
parking citation; or



         (b)   Requests a pre-immobilization hearing to contest
the notice of pending immobilization.



   (D)   Pre-immobilization hearing procedures.



      (1)   Request for hearing. The registered owner of an eligible
vehicle may contest the validity of a notice of pending immobilization by
delivering to the Chief of Police within ten days after receipt of the notice
of pending immobilization a written request for a pre-immobilization hearing.
If the registered owner of an eligible vehicle does not request a
pre-immobilization hearing pursuant to this section within said ten-day
period, then the right to a pre-immobilization hearing shall be deemed waived.



      (2)   Scheduling of hearing. The Chief of Police or his or her
designee shall schedule a pre-immobilization hearing within ten days after
receipt of the written request, and shall promptly notify the registered
owner of the eligible vehicle of the scheduled hearing date and time.



      (3)   Conduct of hearing. The pre-immobilization hearing may
be conducted either by the Chief of Police or by his or her designee. The
registered owner of the eligible vehicle must appear in person or by his or
her attorney at the hearing and, to invalidate the notice of pending
immobilization, submit evidence that clearly demonstrates that the registered
owner’s vehicle is not an eligible vehicle. Such evidence may include
demonstration of any of the following:



         (a)   The registered owner is not the owner or lessee of
the subject vehicle on the date or dates that the parking citations were
issued;



         (b)   The fines or penalties for the parking citations
identified in the notice of pending immobilization have been paid in full; or



         (c)   The registered owner has not accumulated five or
more outstanding parking citations.



      (4)   Decision. Based on the evidence presented by the
registered owner, the Chief of Police or his or her designee shall issue a
written decision either: affirming the validity of the notice of pending
immobilization and confirming that the subject vehicle is an eligible vehicle
subject to immobilization pursuant to this section; or revoking the notice of
pending immobilization. A copy of the written decision shall be delivered to
the registered owner within 48 hours after the conclusion of the
pre-immobilization hearing. The decision of the Chief of Police or his or her
designee to affirm or revoke the notice of pending immobilization shall be
final.



      (5)   Action if affirmation. If the decision affirms the
validity of the pending immobilization notice, the decision shall be
accompanied by a notice that the registered owner has three days to pay, or
cause to be paid, all outstanding parking citation fines and penalties, and
that failure to do so will subject the registered owner’s vehicle to
immediate immobilization.



      (6)   No determination of violations. A pre-immobilization
hearing shall not be determinative of and shall not be used or construed to
adjudicate, any of the individual parking violation citations on which the
notice of pending immobilization was based, or any other violation of any
city ordinance relating to the eligible vehicle.



   (E)   Vehicle immobilization list.



      (1)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall create,
keep and maintain a vehicle immobilization list. The Chief of Police or his
or her designee shall place on the vehicle immobilization list the vehicle
registration number of all eligible vehicles for which the registered owner
has:



         (a)   Failed to respond to a notice of pending
immobilization within ten days after receipt of such notice; or



         (b)   Failed to pay all outstanding parking citation
fines and penalties within three days after receipt of the decision following
a pre-immobilization hearing to affirm the validity of a notice of pending
immobilization.



      (2)   Any police officer may, in a manner consistent with this
section, immediately immobilize any vehicle included on the vehicle
immobilization list without further notice.



   (F)   Immobilizing restraint. When immobilizing an eligible vehicle
pursuant to the provisions of this section, the Police Department shall use
the “Denver boot” or other similar wheel locking restraint in such a
manner as to prevent operation of the vehicle. Every such vehicle so
restrained shall hereafter be referred to as an immobilized vehicle.



   (G)   Unauthorized activities. It shall be unlawful for any person
to relocate or to tow any immobilized vehicle except in accordance with the
provisions of this section. It shall also be unlawful for any person to
damage an immobilizing restraint, or to remove or attempt to remove an
immobilizing restraint without authorization. Any person who violates any
provision of this division (G) shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $500 for each such violation. Violation notices shall be
issued, served and resolved in accordance with the administrative hearing
system established pursuant to Chapter 11 of this city code.



   (H)   Notice of immobilization. A notice of immobilization shall be
immediately affixed to any eligible vehicle immobilized pursuant to this
section. The notice of immobilization shall:



      (1)   State that the eligible vehicle is immobilized, and that
any attempt to move the immobilized vehicle may result in damage to the
vehicle;



      (2)   State that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the
immobilizing restraint is prohibited, and punishable by a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $500 for each such violation;



      (3)   Provide information on how the registered owner may
secure release of the immobilizing restraint;



      (4)   Provide information on how the registered owner may
obtain a post-immobilization hearing pursuant to this section; and



      (5)   State that if the registered owner fails to secure
release of the immobilizing restraint or to request a post-immobilization
hearing within 24 hours, the immobilizing restraint may be released by the
city and the eligible vehicle may be towed and impounded pursuant to § 73.22.



   (I)   Release of immobilizing restraint. The registered owner of an
immobilized vehicle, or other person entitled to possession of such vehicle
may secure the release of an immobilizing restraint by paying or causing to
be paid to the city the following fees and penalties:



      (1)   An immobilization fee as set out in the fee schedule; and



      (2)   All parking citation fines and penalties issued against
the immobilized vehicle that remain outstanding, including specifically, but
without limitation, the parking citations identified in the notice of pending
immobilization.



   (J)   Towing and impoundment of immobilized vehicle. If the
registered owner of the immobilized vehicle or other authorized person does
not secure the release of the immobilizing restraint or request a
post-immobilization hearing within 24 hours of the immobilization, the Police
Department shall be authorized to cause such vehicle to be towed and
impounded. If a request for a post-immobilization hearing is received within
this time, the towing and impounding of the immobilized vehicle shall be
deferred pending the outcome of the post-immobilization hearing. The
provisions set forth in § 73.22 regarding impounded vehicles parked
illegally shall apply fully to all immobilized vehicles impounded pursuant to
this section: provided, however, that



      (1)   In addition to the towing and storage charges imposed
pursuant to § 73.22(D), the fees and penalties specified in division (I)
above shall be paid before the owner or person entitled to possession of the
impounded vehicle shall be permitted to repossess or secure the release of
such vehicle; and



      (2)   Notification to be provided to the owner of the
impounded vehicle under § 73.22(C) shall include a statement that such
vehicle was impounded pursuant to the provisions of this section, and that
the registered owner has a right to appeal the immobilization, towing and
impoundment of such vehicle by requesting a post-immobilization hearing.



   (K)   Post-immobilization hearing procedures.



      (1)   Request for hearing. The registered owner of an
immobilized or impounded vehicle other than the registered owner of an
immobilized or impounded vehicle that received a decision in a
pre-immobilization hearing under division (D)(4) above shall have the right
to contest the validity of the immobilization and any subsequent
immobilization, towing or storage fees, by delivering a written request for a
post-immobilization hearing to the Chief of Police within five days after the
immobilization of the vehicle. If the registered owner of an immobilized or
impounded vehicle does not request a post-immobilization hearing pursuant to
this division (K) within said five-day period, then the right to a
post-immobilization hearing shall be deemed waived.



      (2)   Scheduling of hearing. The Chief of Police or his or her
designee shall schedule a post-immobilization hearing within three days after
receipt of the written request, and shall promptly notify the registered
owner of the eligible vehicle of the scheduled hearing date and time.



      (3)   Conduct of hearing. The hearing may be conducted either
by the Chief of Police or by his or her designee. At the hearing, the
registered owner must appear in person or by his or her attorney and present
evidence clearly establishing that the immobilization, towing or impoundment
of the registered owner’s vehicle was not authorized.



      (4)   Decision. Based on the hearing record, the Chief of
Police or his or her designee shall issue a written decision: affirming, in
whole or in part, the validity of the immobilization, towing or impoundment
of the registered owner’s vehicle; or invalidating, in whole or in part,
the immobilization, towing or impoundment of the registered owner’s
vehicle. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the registered owner of
the subject vehicle within 48 hours after the close of the
post-immobilization hearing. The decision of the Chief of Police or his or
her designee shall be final.



      (5)   Action if invalidation. If the decision is to invalidate
the immobilization, towing or impoundment, the Chief of Police or his or her
designee shall immediately release the immobilizing restraint if the vehicle
has not yet been towed, or release the vehicle if impounded, and remove its
state registration number from the vehicle immobilization list.



      (6)   Action if affirmation. If the decision is to affirm the
immobilization, towing or impoundment, the registered owner shall be so
informed. If the immobilized vehicle has not yet been towed, the registered
owner shall also be informed that the immobilization fee and all outstanding
parking citation fines and penalties must be paid in full within 24 hours
after receipt of the decision, and that failure to make such payment may
result in the immediate towing and impoundment of the registered owner’s
vehicle.



      (7)   No determination of violations. A post-immobilization
hearing shall not be determinative of and shall not be used or construed to
adjudicate, any of the individual parking citations on which the
immobilization, towing or impoundment was based, or any other violation of
any city ordinance relating to the eligible vehicle.



   (L)   Removal from vehicle immobilization list. After payment in
full of the all applicable fees, fines and penalties specified in this
section, the state registration number of the eligible vehicle shall be
removed immediately from the vehicle immobilization list.



(Ord. 2010-36, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)



§ 73.51  CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.



   To the extent, if any, that this subchapter is in conflict with any
existing ordinances of the city, this subchapter shall supersede such
existing ordinances, and such superseded ordinances shall be void and of no
effect.



(Ord. 2010-36, passed 6-21-2010)



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Unless otherwise set forth in the schedule of fees adopted
from time-to-time by the City Council, the penalties and fines set forth in
this section shall apply. Any person violating this title for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Fines; first three violations. Whomever violates or
fails to comply with any of the provisions of §§ 73.20 through 73.49
dealing with parking (other than §§ 73.21 and 73.46) shall be punished for
the first three such violations in any 12-month period by a fine of not less
than $15, nor more than $500 for each and every offense; provided, however,
that the first three parking violations received in any 12-month period may
be satisfied by the following payments if paid within the listed time limits.



 

 

Original Notice

 

Second Notice

 

Final Notice



Violation
 

(0—5 days)

 

(6—20 days)

 

(21—30 days)



Illegal parking in decal/meter lot
 

$15

 

$25

 

$35



Improper parking
 

$15

 

$25

 

$35



Overtime parking
 

$15

 

$25

 

$35



Parking east of Sheridan Road
 

$125

 

$150

 

$175



Parking in a prohibited area
 

$15

 

$25

 

$35




 



      (2)   Fines; more than three violations. Whomever violates or
fails to comply with any of the provisions of §§ 73.20 through 73.49
dealing with parking (other than §§ 73.21 and 73.46) more than three times
but less than ten times in any 12-month period shall be punished by a fine or
not less than $15, nor more than $500 for each and every offense; provided
however, that violations may be satisfied by the following payments if paid
within the listed time limits.



 

 

Original Notice

 

Second Notice

 

Final Notice



Violation
 

(0—5 days)

 

(6—20 days)

 

(21—30 days)



Illegal parking in decal/meter lot
 

$50

 

$75

 

$100



Improper parking
 

$50

 

$75

 

$100



Overtime parking
 

$50

 

$75

 

$100



Parking east of Sheridan Road
 

$50

 

$75

 

$100



Parking in a prohibited area
 

$50

 

$75

 

$100




 



      (3)   Fines; more than ten violations. Whomever violates or
fails to comply with the provisions of §§ 73.20 through 73.49 dealing with
parking (other than §§ 73.21 and 73.46) more than ten times in any 12-month
period shall be punished by a fine of not less than $15, nor more than $500
for each and every offense; provided however, that violations may be
satisfied by the following payments if paid within the listed time limits.



 

 

Original Notice

 

Second Notice

 

Final Notice



Violation
 

(0—5 days)

 

(6—20 days)

 

(21—30 days)



Illegal parking in decal/meter lot
 

$100

 

$150

 

$200



Improper parking
 

$100

 

$150

 

$200



Overtime parking
 

$100

 

$150

 

$200



Parking east of Sheridan Road
 

$50

 

$75

 

$100



Parking in a prohibited area
 

$100

 

$150

 

$200




 



      (4)   Fines; boat ramp lot. Whomever violates or fails to
comply with the provisions of §§ 73.20 through 73.49 dealing with parking
(other than § 73.21) by parking in the parking area adjoining the Forest
Park Boat Ramp and the driveway leading thereto, commonly known as the
“Boat Ramp Lot,” without a valid boat launching permit shall be punished
by a fine by the following payments if paid within the listed time limits:



 

 

Original Notice

 

Second Notice

 

Final Notice



Violation
 

(0—5 days)

 

(6—20 days)

 

(21—30 days)



Parking at boat ramp without permit
 

$100

 

$150

 

$200




 



      (5)   Handicapped spaces. Whoever violates or fails to comply
with the provisions of § 73.21 dealing with designated handicapped parking
areas shall be punished by a fine of $250 for each and every offense that
shall be paid within ten days from the date of the violation (effective May
1, 2006).



      (6)   Maximum fine. Notwithstanding any other provision in
division (B) to the contrary, the maximum fine for any parking violation
under §§ 73.20 through 73.49 shall not exceed $750, unless a greater fine
is authorized by statute. In addition, any cost of collection of fines or
other amounts due to the city under this division (B) may be assessed in
accordance with § 10.99.



      (7)   Payment address. All payments pursuant to this division
(B) shall be made at the Public Safety Building, 255 W. Deerpath, Lake
Forest, Illinois.



(Ord. 07-08, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 2009-11, passed 5-4-2009; Ord. 2016-11,
passed 2-16-2016)



CHAPTER 74:  VEHICLE EQUIPMENT



Section




General Provisions




   74.001   Scope and effect of equipment requirements




Lights and Lamps




   74.015   When lighted lamps are required



   74.016   Clearance, identification and side marker lamps



   74.017   Lamps on parked vehicles



   74.018   Lamp or flag on projecting load



   74.019   Lamps on other vehicles and equipment



   74.020   Implements of husbandry or slow-moving vehicles; display of
amber signal lamp



   74.021   Spot lamps and auxiliary driving lamps



   74.022   Signal lamps and signal devices



   74.023   Additional lighting equipment



   74.024   Use of headlamps



   74.025   Number of driving lamps required or permitted



   74.026   Special restrictions on lamps



   74.027   Special lighting equipment on rural mail delivery vehicles



   74.028   Oscillating, rotating or flashing lights on motor vehicles



   74.029   Operation of oscillating, rotating or flashing lights




Brakes




   74.040   Brakes



   74.041   Brake fluid




Tires




   74.055   Restriction as to tire equipment



   74.056   Sale or offer of sale of First Division motor vehicle tires
with other than original grooves



   74.057   Sale or offer of sale of Second Division motor vehicle
tires with other than original grooves



   74.058   Sale or offer of sale of any regrooved motor vehicle tires
without marking



   74.059   Operating condition of passenger car tires




Glass, Windshields and Mirrors




   74.070   Definition



   74.071   Safety glaring material in motor vehicles



   74.072   Mirrors



   74.073   Obstruction to driver’s view




Miscellaneous Requirements




   74.085   Definitions



   74.086   Horns and warning devices



   74.087   Mufflers; prevention of noise



   74.088   Gas and smoke



   74.089   Seat safety belts



   74.090   Television receivers



   74.091   Tow trucks; identification; equipment; insurance



   74.092   Suspension system



   74.093   Bumpers



   74.094   Headset receivers




Special Requirements for Vehicles of the Second Division




   74.105   Certain vehicles to carry flares or other warning devices



   74.106   Road oil vehicles



   74.107   Vehicles transporting explosives



   74.108   Vehicles transporting radioactive material



   74.109   Vehicles transporting flammable liquids when lights
required; marking with reflectorized paint; placarding



   74.110   Fire apparatus; safety belts



   74.111   Prohibition; liability insurance; penalty



   74.112   Slow moving vehicle emblem



   74.113   Rear fender splash guards




Special Requirements for School Buses




   74.125   Definitions



   74.126   Color



   74.127   Identification



   74.128   Stop signal arm



   74.129   Other vehicles; color, stop signal arm and identification



   74.130   Identification, stop signal arms and special lighting when
not used as a school bus



   74.131   Seat belt for driver; seat height



   74.132   Fire extinguisher



   74.133   First aid kit



   74.134   Restraining device for handicapped passengers



   74.135   Amber 3 bar clearance light



   74.136   School bus safety glass



   74.137   Crossing control arms



   74.138   Rules and regulations



   74.139   School bus driver communication devices



   74.140   Strobe lamp on school bus



   74.141   Emergency exits identification



   74.142   Noise suppression switch



   74.143   Pre- and post-trip inspection policy for school buses



   74.144   Nursery school buses



   74.145   Display of telephone number; complaint calls




Special Requirements for Religious Organization Buses




   74.160   Color and markings



   74.161   Special lighting equipment




City Vehicle Licenses




   74.175   Motor vehicle defined



   74.176   Vehicles requiring city license



   74.177   Application for license



   74.178   Exempt vehicles



   74.179   Annual license fee



   74.180   Time of payment; license year



   74.181   License



   74.182   Display of license



   74.183   Reserved



   74.184   License may be transferred



   74.185   Duplicate licenses



   74.186   Use of fund



   74.187   Illegal use



   74.188   Delegation of responsibility




Traffic Engineer and Emergency Regulations




   74.200   Office of the City Traffic Engineer



   74.201   City Traffic Engineer; general duties



   74.202   Traffic Engineer to place traffic control devices



   74.203   Traffic Engineer to mark crosswalks, safety zones and
traffic lanes



   74.204   Erection of signs regulating or restricting turns



   74.205   Traffic Engineer to mark loading zones



   74.206   Marking of taxicab and bus stands



   74.207   Erection of signs indicating parking limitations



   74.208   Traffic Engineer to erect stop signs and signs regulating
speed



   74.209   Traffic Engineer to erect yield right-of-way sign



   74.210   Traffic Engineer to erect additional signs



   74.211   Cooperation from other departments for personnel and
supplies



   74.212   Authorization for emergency and experimental regulations



   74.213   Parking administration



 



   74.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Bicycles, see Chapter 75



   General traffic provisions, see Chapter 70



   Pedestrians, see Chapter 72



   Traffic regulations, see Chapter 71




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 74.001  SCOPE AND EFFECT OF EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the
owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any
vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to
endanger any person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is
not at all times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper
condition and adjustment as required in this chapter, or which is equipped in
any manner in violation of this chapter, or for any person to do any act
forbidden or fail to perform any act required under this chapter.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter with respect to equipment on
vehicles shall not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road
rollers or farm tractors or to farm-wagon type trailers having a fertilizer
spreader attachment permanently mounted thereon, having a gross weight of not
to exceed 10,000 pounds and used only for the transportation of bulk
fertilizer or to farm-wagon type tank trailers of not to exceed 1,200 gallons
capacity, used during the liquid fertilizer season as field-storage “nurse
tanks” supplying the fertilizer to a field applicator and moved on highways
only for bringing the fertilizer from a local source of supply to farm or
field or from one farm or field to another.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-101)  Penalty, see § 74.999




LIGHTS AND LAMPS




§ 74.015  WHEN LIGHTED LAMPS ARE REQUIRED.



   (A)   When upon any highway in this state, every motorcycle shall at
all times exhibit at least one lighted lamp, showing a white light, commonly
known as a driving lamp, visible for at least 500 feet in the direction the
motorcycle is proceeding. All other motor vehicles shall, during the period
from sunset to sunrise, or at any other time when visibility is so limited as
to require the use of lights for safety, exhibit two such lighted driving
lamps showing white lights, or lights of a yellow or amber tint, visible for
at least 500 feet in the direction the motor vehicle is proceeding. Parking
lamps may be used in addition to but not in lieu of any such driving lamps.
Every motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer shall also exhibit at least two
lighted lamps, commonly known as tail lamps, which shall be mounted on the
left rear and right rear of the vehicle so as to throw a red light visible
for at least 500 feet in the reverse direction, except that a motorcycle or a
truck tractor or road tractor manufactured before January 1, 1968, need be
equipped with only one such lamp.



   (B)   Either a tail lamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed
and placed as to illuminate with a white light a rear registration plate when
required and render it clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet to the
rear. Any tail lamp or tail lamps, together with any separate lamp or lamps
for illuminating a rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be
lighted whenever the driving lamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-201)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.016  CLEARANCE, IDENTIFICATION AND SIDE MARKER LAMPS.



   (A)   Every motor vehicle of the Second Division, the length of
which together with any trailer or trailers in tow thereof, is more than 25
feet or the width of which is more than 30 inches exclusive of mirrors,
bumpers and other required safety devices, while being operated on the
highways of this state during the period from sunset to sunrise, shall
display on the front of the vehicle two yellow or amber lights, one on each
upper front corner of the vehicle, which shall be plainly visible at a
distance of at least 500 feet; also on the rear thereof in a horizontal line,
three red lights plainly visible at a distance of not less than 500 feet;
also on the front of the body of that vehicle near the lower left-hand corner
one yellow or amber tinted reflector, and near the lower right-hand corner
one yellow or amber tinted reflector; also red reflectors on the rear of the
body of that vehicle, not more than 12 inches from the lower left and
right-hand corners. All motor vehicles of the Second Division more than 20
feet long, and all trailers and semi-trailers, except trailers and
semi-trailers having a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or less including the
weight of the trailer and maximum load, while being operated on the highways
of this state during the period from sunset to sunrise, shall display on each
side of the vehicle at approximately the one-third points of the length of
the same, at a height not exceeding five feet above the surface of the road,
and reflecting on a line approximately at right angles to the centerline of
the vehicle, two amber tinted reflectors. After January 1974, all new motor
vehicles of the Second Division more than 20 feet long, and all trailers and
semi-trailers except trailers and semi-trailers having a gross weight of
3,000 pounds or less including the weight of the trailer and maximum load
sold as new in this state, while being operated on the highways of this state
during period from sunset to sunrise, shall display on each side of the
vehicle, not more than 12 inches from the front, one amber tinted reflector,
and not more than 12 inches from the rear one red reflector at a height not
exceeding five feet above the surface of the road, and reflecting on a line
approximately at right angles to the centerline of the vehicle, approved by
the Department of Transportation.



   (B)   Every trailer and semi-trailer having a gross weight of 3,000
pounds or less including the weight of the trailer and maximum load, towed
either by a motor vehicle of the First Division or a motor vehicle of the
Second Division shall be equipped with two red reflectors, which will be
visible when hit by headlight beams 300 feet away at night, on the rear of
the body of such trailer, not more than 12 inches from the lower left-hand
and lower right-hand corners.



   (C)   Every vehicle designated in divisions (A) or (B) above that is
manufactured after December 31, 1973, shall, at the places and times
specified in divisions (A) or (B) above, display reflectors and clearance,
identification and side marker lamps in conformance with the specifications
prescribed by the Department.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-202)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.017  LAMPS ON PARKED VEHICLES.



   (A)   During the period from sunset to sunrise every motorcycle or
motor vehicle which is standing on any highway shall display a parking light
on the front and at the rear of the same; however, any city, village or
incorporated town may by ordinance, under rules and regulations it may
prescribe, designate any part or parts of any street, or other highway under
their jurisdiction, as parking places in which motorcycles and motor vehicles
may be parked without having their lamps lighted, as otherwise required by
this section.



   (B)   Any lighted driving lamps upon a parked vehicle shall be
depressed or dimmed.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-203)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.018  LAMP OR FLAG ON PROJECTING LOAD.



   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet, or
more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in § 74.015, a red
light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
sides and rear. The red light or lantern required under this section shall be
in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other
time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag
or cloth not less than 12 inches square.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-204)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.019  LAMPS ON OTHER VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Every vehicle, including animal-drawn vehicles, referred to in
§ 74.001(B), not specifically required by the provisions of this subchapter
to be equipped with lamps or other lighting devices, shall at all times
specified in § 74.015 be equipped with at least two lamps displaying a white
light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of
such vehicle and shall also be equipped with two lamps displaying a red light
visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear of such
vehicle.



   (B)   Division (A) above does not apply to antique vehicles. An
antique vehicle shall be equipped with lamps of the same type originally
installed by the manufacturer as original equipment and in working order.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-205)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.020  IMPLEMENTS OF HUSBANDRY OR SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES; DISPLAY OF AMBER
SIGNAL LAMP.



   Every animal drawn vehicle, farm tractor, implement of husbandry and
special mobile equipment, except when used for road construction or
maintenance within the limits of a construction or maintenance project where
traffic control devices are used in compliance with the applicable provisions
of the Manual and Specifications adopted under 625 ILCS 5/11-301, when
operated on a highway during a time when lighted lamps are required by §
74.015, shall display to the rear at least one flashing amber signal lamp
mounted as high as practicable and of sufficient intensity to be visible for
a distance of at least 500 feet in normal sunlight; provided, that only the
rearmost vehicle of a combination of vehicles coupled together need display
such lamp.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-205.1)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.021  SPOT LAMPS AND AUXILIARY DRIVING LAMPS.



   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed one spot
lamp and every lighted spot lamp shall be so aimed and used upon approaching
another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the beam will
be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the
vehicle nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.



   (B)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed three
auxiliary driving lamps mounted on the front at a height not less than 12
inches nor more than 42 inches above the level surface upon which the vehicle
stands.



   (C)   The restrictions of divisions (A) and (B) above shall not
apply to authorized emergency vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-207)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.022  SIGNAL LAMPS AND SIGNAL DEVICES.



   (A)   Every vehicle other than an antique vehicle displaying an
antique plate operated in this state shall be equipped with a stop lamp or
lamps on the rear of the vehicle which shall display a red or amber light
visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear in normal
sunlight and which shall be actuated upon application of the service (foot)
brake, and which may not need not be incorporated with other rear lamps.
During times when lighted lamps are not required an antique vehicle may be
equipped with a stop lamp or lamps on the rear of such vehicle of the same
type originally installed by the manufacturer as original equipment and in
working order; however, at all other times, such antique vehicle must be
equipped with stop lamps meeting the requirements of this section.



   (B)   Every motor vehicle other than an antique vehicle displaying
an antique plate shall be equipped with an electric turn signal device which
shall indicate the intention of the driver to turn to the right or to the
left in the form of flashing lights located at and showing to the front and
rear of the vehicle on the side of the vehicle toward which the turn is to be
made. The lamps showing to the front shall be mounted on the same level and
as widely spaced laterally as practicable and, when signaling, shall emit a
white or amber light, or any shade of light between white and amber. The
lamps showing to the rear shall be mounted on the same level and as widely
spaced laterally as practicable and, when signaling, shall emit a red or
amber light. An antique vehicle shall be equipped with a turn signal device
of the same type originally installed by the manufacturer as original
equipment and in working order.



   (C)   Every trailer and semi-trailer shall be equipped with an
electric turn signal device which indicates the intention of the driver in
the power unit to turn to the right or to the left in the form of flashing
red or amber lights located at the rear of the vehicle on the side toward
which the turn is to be made and mounted on the same level and as widely
spaced laterally as practicable.



   (D)   Turn signal lamps must be visible from a distance of not less
than 300 feet in normal sunlight.



   (E)   Motorcycles and motor-driven cycles need not be equipped with
electric turn signals. Antique vehicles need not be equipped with turn
signals unless such were installed by the manufacturer as original equipment.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-208)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.023  ADDITIONAL LIGHTING EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two side
cowl or fender lamps which shall emit an amber or white light without glare.



   (B)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
running board courtesy lamp on each side thereof which shall emit a white or
amber light without glare.



   (C)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with one or more back-up
lamps either separately or in combination with other lamps; but any such
back-up lamp or lamps shall not be lighted when the motor vehicle is in
forward motion.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-209)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.024  USE OF HEAD LAMPS.



   (A)   Whenever the driver of any vehicle equipped with an electric
driving head lamp or head lamps is within 500 feet of another vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction, the driver shall dim or drop such
head lamp or head lamps.



   (B)   The driver of any vehicle equipped with an electric driving
head lamp or head lamps shall dim or drop such head lamp or head lamps when
there is another vehicle traveling in the same direction less than 300 feet
to the front of him or her.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-210)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.025  NUMBER OF DRIVING LAMPS REQUIRED OR PERMITTED.



   (A)   At all times specified in § 74.015, at least two lighted
driving lamps shall be displayed, one on each side of the front of every
motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, except when such vehicle is parked
subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.



   (B)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with driving lamps, as
herein required is also equipped with any auxiliary driving lamps or a spot
lamp or any other lamp on the front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity
greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a total of four of any such lamps
on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one time when upon a
highway.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-211)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.026  SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS ON LAMPS.



   Except as provided in §§ 74.028 and 74.029:



   (A)   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon
any highway with any lamp or device thereon displaying a red light visible
from directly in front thereof; and



   (B)   Subject to the restrictions in § 71.113, flashing lights are
prohibited on motor vehicles except as a means of indicating a right or left
turn or the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in
approaching, overtaking or passing.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-212)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.027  SPECIAL LIGHTING EQUIPMENT ON RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLES.



   If a rural mail delivery vehicle is equipped with special signal lamps,
there shall be displayed to the front two such alternately flashing amber
lamps located at the same level and mounted as high and as widely spaced
laterally as practicable and to the rear two alternately flashing amber lamps
located at the same level and mounted as high and as widely spaced laterally
as practicable. Such lamps shall be of sufficient intensity to be visible at
500 feet in normal sunlight and shall be controlled so that they will only be
used to indicate to other traffic that a stop is being made for the purpose
of picking up or delivering United States mail.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-214)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.028  OSCILLATING, ROTATING OR FLASHING LIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter:



   (A)   Red oscillating, rotating or flashing lights, whether lighted
or unlined are prohibited except on:



      (1)   Law enforcement vehicles of the state or federal
government;



      (2)   Law enforcement vehicles owned by local authorities;



      (3)   A vehicle operated by a police officer or county coroner
and designated or authorized by local authorities, in writing, as a law
enforcement vehicle; however, such designation or authorization shall be
carried in the vehicle;



      (4)   Vehicles of local fire departments and firefighting
vehicles of the state or federal government;



      (5)   Vehicles which are designed as ambulances; furthermore,
such lights shall not be lighted except while responding to an emergency call
for the purpose of conveying sick or injured persons; and



      (6)   Rescue squad vehicles operated by fire departments or
rescue squads.



   (B)   Amber oscillating, rotating or flashing lights, whether
lighted or unlighted, are prohibited except on:



      (1)   Second Division vehicles designed for towing or hoisting
disabled vehicles; furthermore, such lights shall not be lighted, except when
such vehicles are actually being used for such purposes;



      (2)   Motor vehicles or equipment of the state, local
authorities and contractors; furthermore, such lights shall not be lighted,
except while such vehicles are engaged in maintenance or construction
operations within the limits of construction projects;



      (3)   Vehicles or equipment used by engineering or survey
crews; furthermore, such lights shall not be lighted except while such
vehicles are actually engaged in work on a highway;



      (4)   Vehicles of public utilities and municipal departments;
furthermore, such lights shall not be lighted except while such vehicles are
engaged in maintenance or construction operations within the limits of
construction projects;



      (5)   Oversized vehicle or load moving under permit issued by
the Department of Transportation under 625 ILCS 5/15-1301.



      (6)   The front and rear of motorized equipment owned and
operated by the state or the city, which is designed and used for removal of
snow and ice from highways; and



      (7)   Fleet safety vehicles registered in another state,
furthermore, such lights shall not be lighted except as provided for in §
74.026.



   (C)   Blue oscillating, rotating or flashing lights whether lighted
or unlighted, are prohibited except on:



      (1)   The front, or any part from the back of the front seat
forward to the windshield, and said light may be permanently or temporarily
mounted and covered or uncovered, of any motor vehicle owned or fully
operated by a volunteer firefighter, paid firefighter, part-paid firefighter
or on call firefighter, such lights to be used only while responding to a
fire call or other Fire Department emergency, or the vehicle of any
volunteer, paid or unpaid or an call, member of a rescue squad responding to
a rescue squad emergency or, if the Fire Department or a civil defense
emergency medical services unit operates a rescue squad, its members on the
way to an emergency call;



      (2)   Vehicles of rescue squads when on the way to an
emergency call; and



      (3)   Law enforcement vehicles of state or local authorities
when used in combination with red oscillating, rotating, or flashing lights.



   (D)   All oscillating, rotating or flashing lights referred to in
this section shall be of sufficient intensity, when illuminated, to be
visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight.



   (E)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a manufacturer of
oscillating, rotating or flashing lights or his or her representative from
temporarily mounting such lights on a vehicle for demonstration purposes only.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-215) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
74.999



§ 74.029  OPERATION OF OSCILLATING, ROTATING OR FLASHING LIGHTS.



   Oscillating, rotating or flashing lights located on top of police
vehicles in this state shall be lighted whenever a police officer is in
pursuit of a violator of a traffic law or regulation.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-216)  Penalty, see § 74.999




BRAKES




§ 74.040  BRAKES.



   (A)   Brake equipment required.



      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motor-driven cycle, an
antique vehicle displaying an antique plate, and an expanded-use antique
vehicle displaying expanded-use antique vehicle plates, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold such vehicle, including two separate means of applying the
brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least one wheel on a motorcycle and at least two wheels on all other First
Division and Second Division vehicles. If these two separate means of
applying the brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed
that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the
motor vehicle without brakes.



      (2)   Every motor-driven cycle when operated upon a highway
shall be equipped with at least one brake which may be operated by hand or
foot.



      (3)   Every antique vehicle shall be equipped with the brakes
of the same type originally installed by the manufacturer as original
equipment and in working order.



      (4)   (a)   Except as provided in division (A)(4)(b) below,
every trailer or semitrailer of a gross weight of over 3,000 pounds, when
operated upon a highway must be equipped with brakes adequate to control the
movement of, to stop and to hold such vehicle, and designed so as to be
operable by the driver of the towing vehicle from its cab. Such brakes must
be so designed and connected that in case of an accidental breakaway of a
towed vehicle over 5,000 pounds, the brakes are automatically applied.



         (b)   Every boat trailer of a gross weight of over 3,000
pounds, when operated upon a highway, must be equipped with brakes adequate
to control the movement of, to stop and to hold that boat trailer. The brakes
must be designed to ensure that, in case of an accidental breakaway of a
towed boat trailer over 5,000 pounds, the brakes are automatically applied.



      (5)   Every motor vehicle, expanded-use antique vehicle,
trailer, pole trailer or semitrailer, sold in this state or operated upon the
highways shall be equipped with service brakes upon all wheels of every such
vehicle, except any motor-driven cycle, and except that any trailer, pole
trailer or semitrailer 3,000 pounds gross weight or less need not be equipped
with brakes, and except that any trailer or semitrailer with gross weight
over 3,000 pounds but under 5,001 pounds need be equipped with brakes on only
one wheel on each side of the vehicle. Any motor vehicle and truck tractor
having three or more axles and manufactured prior to July 25, 1980 need not
have brakes on the front wheels, except when such vehicles are equipped with
at least two steerable axles, the wheels of one such axle need not be
equipped with brakes. However, a vehicle that is more than 30 years of age
and which is driven on the highways only in going to and returning from an
antique auto show or for servicing or for a demonstration need be equipped
with two wheel brakes only.



   (B)   Performance ability of brakes.



      (1)   The service brakes upon any motor vehicle or combination
of vehicles operating on a level surface shall be adequate to stop such
vehicle or vehicles when traveling 20 mph within a distance of 30 feet when
upon dry asphalt or concrete pavement surface free from loose material.



      (2)   Under the above conditions the hand brake shall be
adequate to stop such vehicle or vehicles, except any motorcycle, within a
distance of 55 feet and the hand brake shall be adequate to hold such vehicle
or vehicles stationary on any grade upon which operated.



      (3)   Under the above conditions the service brakes upon an
antique vehicle or expanded-use antique vehicle shall be adequate to stop the
vehicle within a distance of 40 feet and the hand brake adequate to stop the
vehicle within a distance of 55 feet.



      (4)   All braking distances specified in this section apply to
all vehicles mentioned, whether such vehicles are unloaded or are loaded to
the maximum capacity permitted under this title.



      (5)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and
shall be so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to
the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle.



      (6)   Brake assembly requirements for mobile homes shall be
the standards required by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development adopted under Title VI of the Housing and Community Development
Act of 1974, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-301)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.041  BRAKE FLUID.



   No person shall sell, offer for sale or distribute brake fluid for use
on motor vehicles for repair purposes unless such fluid conforms to
specifications prescribed by the Department of Transportation.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-302)  Penalty, see § 74.999




TIRES




§ 74.055  RESTRICTION AS TO TIRE EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   No metal tired vehicle, including tractors, motor vehicles of
the Second Division, traction engines and other similar vehicles, shall be
operated over any improved highway of this state, if such vehicle has on the
periphery of any of the road wheels any block, stud, flange, cleat, ridge,
lug or any projection of metal or wood which projects radially beyond the
tread or traffic surface of the tire. This prohibition does not apply to
pneumatic tires with metal studs used on vehicles operated by rural letter
carriers who are employed or enjoy a contract with the United States Postal
Service for the purpose of delivering mail if such vehicle is actually used
for such purpose during operations between November 15 of any year and April
1 of the following year, or to motor vehicles displaying a disability or
disabled veteran license plate whose owner resides in an unincorporated area
located upon a county or township highway or road and possesses a valid
driver’s license and operates the vehicle with such tires only during the
period heretofore described, or to tracked type motor vehicles when that part
of the vehicle coming in contact with the road surface does not contain any
projections of any kind likely to injure the surface of the road; however,
tractors, traction engines and similar vehicles may be operated which have
upon their road wheels V-shaped, diagonal or other cleats arranged in such a
manner as to be continuously in contact with the road surface, provided that
the gross weight upon such wheels per inch of width of such cleats in contact
with the road surface, when measured in the direction of the axle of the
vehicle, does not exceed 800 pounds.



   (B)   All motor vehicles and all other vehicles in tow thereof, or
thereunto attached, operating upon any roadway, shall have tires of rubber or
some material of equal resiliency. Solid tires shall be considered defective
and shall not be permitted to be used if the rubber or other material has
been worn or otherwise reduced to a thickness of less than three-fourths of
an undue vibration when the vehicle is in motion or to cause undue
concentration of the wheel load on the surface of the road. The requirements
of this section do not apply to agricultural tractors or traction engines or
to agricultural machinery, including wagons being used for agricultural
purposes in tow thereof, or to road rollers or road building machinery
operated at a speed not in excess of ten mph. All motor vehicles of the
Second Division, operating upon any roadway shall have pneumatic tires,
unless exempted herein.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of
tire chains of reasonable proportion upon any vehicle when required for
safety because of snow, ice or other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to
skid.



(625 ILCS 5/12-401)  (Prior Code, § 40-2-401)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.056  SALE OR OFFER OF SALE OF FIRST DIVISION MOTOR VEHICLE TIRES WITH
OTHER THAN ORIGINAL GROOVES.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any tire for
use on any motor vehicle of the First Division into which any groove, other
than the original grooves made by the manufacturer thereof, is deliberately
made by cutting, burning or other means to within 4/32 of an inch of the cord.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-402)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.057  SALE OR OFFER OF SALE OF SECOND DIVISION MOTOR VEHICLE TIRES WITH
OTHER THAN ORIGINAL GROOVES.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any tire for
use on any motor vehicle of the Second Division into which any groove, other
than the original grooves made by the manufacturer thereof, is deliberately
made by cutting, burning or other means to within 7/32 of an inch of the cord.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-403)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.058  SALE OR OFFER OF SALE OF ANY REGROOVED MOTOR VEHICLE TIRES
WITHOUT MARKING.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any tire, for
the use of any motor vehicle, into which any groove, other than the original
grooves made by the manufacturer thereof, is made by cutting, burning, or
other means, unless the words “regrooved tire” are branded thereon in
letters not letters than one inch in height.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-404)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.059  OPERATING CONDITION OF PASSENGER CAR TIRES.



   (A)   Sale or lease of siped or regrooved pneumatic tire.



      (1)   No person or organization shall sell or lease or offer
for sale or lease, for use on a highway, any pneumatic tire, either original
tread or retread, on which the tread is siped or regrooved to a depth equal
to or deeper than the molded groove depth, unless the tire was constructed or
retreaded with sufficient tread material and type of labels to permit such
siping or regrooving. Such labels and siping or regrooving shall be in
compliance with 49 C.F.R. part 569, and after siping or regrooving the tire
shall conform to that part.



      (2)   For the purpose of this division (A), SIPED shall mean
cut without removing material, and regrooved shall mean the tread groove
pattern is renewed, or a new pattern generated, or both, without additional
tread material being added.



(625 ILCS 5/12-402)



   (B)   Sale or lease of retreaded or “recapped” pneumatic tire.
No person or organization shall sell or lease or offer for sale or lease, for
use on a highway, any pneumatic tire produced or rebuilt by a process in
which tread material is attached to a used tire, unless the tire, tread
material, labeling and certification, before and after processing, conform to
49 C.F.R. part 571.117.



(625 ILCS 5/12-403)



   (C)   Sale or lease of pneumatic tire without marking. No person or
organization shall sell or lease or offer for sale or lease, for use on a
highway, any pneumatic tire that does not bear the special marking required
by this division (C).



      (1)   Regrooved or siped tire. In addition to the
identification, labeling and certification required under division (A) above,
either the word “regrooved” or the word “siped” shall be branded on
each side of a pneumatic tire on which the tread is either regrooved or
siped, as the case may be. In the case of a tire that is both regrooved and
siped, the word “regrooved” alone on each side shall suffice, although
both words may appear on each side. Each branding shall be conspicuous but
shall be sized, located and applied so as not to weaken or damage the tire or
otherwise degrade the performance of the tire or shorten its useful life.



      (2)   Retreaded tire. In addition to the labeling,
identification, certification and other marking required under division (B)
above, the word “retreaded” shall be branded or molded into or onto each
side of a pneumatic tire that has been retreaded or “recapped.” Each
molding or branding shall be conspicuous but shall be sized, located and
applied so as not to weaken or damage the tire or otherwise degrade the
performance of the tire or shorten its useful life.



      (3)   New tire. The labeling, identification, certification
and other marking required by 49 C.F.R. part 571.109 shall appear on each new
pneumatic tire intended for use on a passenger car other than a multipurpose
passenger vehicle. The labeling, identification, certification and other
marking required by 49 C.F.R. part 571.109 shall appear on each new pneumatic
tire intended for use on either a multipurpose passenger vehicle or other
type of vehicle that is not a passenger car.



(625 ILCS 5/12-404)



   (D)   Operating condition of pneumatic tires.



      (1)   Definition. The term SPARE TIRE as used in this division
(D) means any new, used or specially constructed tire that is either carried
or installed for short term emergency use.



      (2)   Promulgated rules. The Department shall promulgate rules
concerning unsafe operating conditions of pneumatic tires. The rules shall be
enforced by police officers by visual inspection of tires, including visual
comparison with simple measuring scales or gauges. The rules shall include
precepts and standards for determining unsafe conditions, including the
determination of an effective depth of tread groove, and shall be based upon,
to the extent that it is reasonable and practical, all provisions set forth
in division (D)(4) below.



      (3)   Use of unsafe tire.



         (a)   No person or organization shall place, drive or
move, or cause or allow to be placed, driven or moved, on a highway of this
state, any vehicle equipped with one or more pneumatic tires deemed to be
unsafe under a provision of division (D)(4) below or a rule promulgated under
division (B)(2) above.



         (b)   Exemptions: Any restriction stated in this
division (D)(3) shall not apply:



            1.   To a tire on a damaged, disabled, abandoned
or other unsafe or unwanted vehicle being legally towed, pushed or otherwise
transferred to a repair, relocation, storage, salvage, junking or other
collection site;



            2.   To a tire on a racing or other competitive
vehicle being legally moved or transported, not under its own power, to a
lawful competition site or to a bona fide testing site; or



            3.   To a spare tire either carried or in short
term emergency use for only such distance or time as is reasonably necessary
to accomplish the repair or replacement of the damaged or unsafe tire for
which the spare was substituted.



      (4)   Criteria for unsafe pneumatic tires. A pneumatic tire
shall be deemed to be unsafe if it has:



         (a)   Any part of a ply or cord exposed;



         (b)   A tread or sidewall crack, cut, snag or other
surface interruption deep enough to expose a ply or cord;



         (c)   Any bulge, knot or separation;



         (d)   Tread wear indicators flush with the tread outer
surface in any two or more adjacent tread grooves at three locations
approximately equally spaced around the circumference of the tire;



         (e)   A depth of tread groove less than two
thirty-seconds of an inch or less than one thirty-second of an inch if on a
motorcycle or truckster, measured in any two or more adjacent tread grooves
at three locations approximately equally spaced around the circumference of
the tire, at least one of which, in the judgment of the inspecting officer,
is a location at which the tread is thinnest, provided that any measurement
over a tie bar, tread wear indicator, hump or fillet is excluded;



         (f)   A depth of tread groove less than four
thirty-seconds of an inch at any one location and the tire is mounted on the
front wheel of a motor vehicle subject to the provisions of Chapter 18B of
this Code, provided that any measurement over a tie bar, tread wear
indicator, hump or fillet is excluded;



         (g)   A marking which indicates that the tire is not
intended for use on a public highway;



         (h)   Been regrooved or recut below the bottom of an
original tread groove, except in the case of a special “regroovable” tire
that was manufactured or retreaded with thick undertread, identified and
regrooved in compliance with the applicable federal standard in 49 C.F.R.,
and in compliance with each applicable section of this code; or



         (i)   Other condition, marking or lack of marking that
may be reasonably demonstrated to identify the tire as unsuitable for highway
use, including inflation, load, speed or installation condition seriously
incompatible with the tire size, construction or other pertinent marking or
feature.



      (5)   Sale, lease or installation of pneumatic tires.



         (a)   No person or organization shall sell, lease or
offer for sale or lease, or mount, install or cause or allow to be mounted or
installed, for use on a highway, any pneumatic tire deemed to be unsafe under
division (D)(4) above or under a rule promulgated under division (D)(2)
above. Except as provided in division (D)(3) above, any person or
organization offering a vehicle for sale or lease shall, prior to its being
placed, driven or moved on a highway, correct any unsafe tire condition.



         (b)   No person or organization shall sell, lease or
offer for sale or lease, for highway use, any pneumatic tire, or any vehicle
equipped with a pneumatic tire, which has a depth of tread groove less than
three thirty-seconds of an inch; except a pneumatic tire on a motorcycle or
truckster may have a depth of tire groove of not less than two thirty-seconds
of an inch. Groove depth shall not be measured where a tie bar, tread wear
indicator, hump or fillet is located.



      (6)   Compliance and enforcement. Any police officer, upon
reasonable cause to believe that a person or organization has acted or is
acting in violation of any provision of this section, shall require the
driver, owner or other appropriate custodian to submit the tire or tires to
an inspection. When so required, the owner or other appropriate custodian
shall allow the tire inspection and the driver of a vehicle or combination of
vehicles shall stop at a designated location and allow the tire or tires to
be inspected or shall move the vehicle or combination to a location that is
reasonably convenient and is suitable for such inspection.



(625 ILCS 5/12-405)



   (E)   Rules and regulations. The Department may promulgate rules and
regulations to clarify or specify the requirements of this section.



(625 ILCS 5/12-407)



(Prior Code, § 40-2-405)  Penalty, see § 74.999




GLASS, WINDSHIELDS AND MIRRORS




§ 74.070  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SAFETY GLAZING MATERIALS.  Any glazing materials so constructed,
treated or combined with other materials, as to reduce substantially, in
comparison with ordinary street glass or plate glass, the likelihood of
injury to persons by objects from exterior sources or by these safety glazing
materials when they may be cracked or broken.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-500)



§ 74.071  SAFETY GLARING MATERIAL IN MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly sell any 1936 or later model motor
vehicle unless such vehicle is equipped with safety glazing material
conforming to specifications prescribed by the Department wherever glazing
material is used in doors, windows and windshields. These provisions apply to
all motor vehicles of the First and Second Division but with respect to
trucks, including truck tractors, the requirements as to safety glazing
material apply to all glazing material used in doors, windows and windshields
in the drivers’ compartments of such vehicles.



   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner or any other person knowingly to
install or cause to be installed in any motor vehicle any glazing material
other than safety glazing material conforming to the specifications
prescribed by the Department of Transportation.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-501)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.072  MIRRORS.



   Every motor vehicle, operated singly or when towing another vehicle,
shall be equipped with a mirror having at least three square inches of
reflecting surface and so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the
highway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such motor vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-502)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.073  OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER’S VIEW.



   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster
or other non-transparent material upon the front windshield, sidewings or
side or rear windows of such vehicle which materially obstructs, obscures or
impairs the driver’s clear view of the highway or any intersecting highway.



   (B)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any objects
placed or suspended between the driver and the front windshield or between
the driver and the rear window which obstructs the driver’s clear view of
the highway.



   (C)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a
device for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield, which
device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver
of the vehicle.



   (D)   No object, stationary or mobile, shall be placed on or
suspended from the rearview mirror, front windshield, rear window or any
other part of the inside of a motor vehicle except: religious or lodge
statues or statuettes not exceeding six inches in height; and wearing apparel
which is suspended behind the driver and in a manner so as not to obstruct
the driver’s clear view of the highway.



   (E)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle when the windshield or
rear window is in such defective condition or repair as to directly impair
the driver’s vision to the front or rear.



   (F)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle when snow or ice on
the windshield or rear view mirror materially obstructs, obscures or impairs
the driver’s clear view of the highway.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-503)  Penalty, see § 74.999




MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS




§ 74.085  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUMPER. Every device or system of devices protruding from and attached
to the front and rear of a motor vehicle which has been designed to be used
to absorb the impact of a collision.



   MUFFLER. Every device consisting of a series of chambers or baffle
plates or other mechanical design for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas
from an internal combustion engine or turbine wheels for the purpose of
receiving exhaust gas from a diesel engine, both of which are effective in
reducing noise.



   SUSPENSION SYSTEM. The system of devices consisting of, but not limited
to, springs, spring shackles, shock absorbers, torsion bars, frame or any
other supporting members used to attach the body of a motor vehicle to its
axles.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-600)



§ 74.086  HORNS AND WARNING DEVICES.



   (A)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound
audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet,
but no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonable loud or harsh
sound or a whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall when reasonably
necessary to ensure safe operation give audible warning with his or her horn
but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon a highway.



   (B)   No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise permitted in
this division (B). Any authorized emergency vehicle, as defined in § 70.002,
may be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound
audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet,
but such siren, whistle or bell, shall not be used, except when such vehicle
is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of
an actual or suspected violator of the law in either of which events the
driver of such vehicle shall sound such siren, whistle or bell, when
necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-601)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.087  MUFFLERS; PREVENTION OF NOISE.



   (A)   Every motor vehicle driven or operated upon the highways of
the city shall at all times be equipped with an adequate muffler or exhaust
system in constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive
or unusual noise. No such muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with a
cutout, bypass or similar device.



   (B)   No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle
in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise of such vehicle above
that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle, and such
original muffler shall comply with all the requirements of this section.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-602)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.088  GAS AND SMOKE.



   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense clouds of
gas or smoke or such an amount of smoke or fumes as to be annoying or
dangerous to the health of persons or as to endanger the drivers of other
vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-602.1)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.089  SEAT SAFETY BELTS.



   (A)   No person shall sell any 1965 or later model motor vehicle of
the First Division unless the front seat of such motor vehicle is equipped
with two sets of seat safety belts. Motorcycles are exempted from the
provisions of this section.



   (B)   No person shall operate any 1961 or later model motor vehicle
of the First Division that is titled or licensed by the Secretary of State
unless the front seat of such motor vehicle is equipped with two sets of seat
safety belts.



   (C)   As used in this section, SEAT SAFETY BELTS means a set of
belts or a harness meeting the specifications established by the Department
of Transportation and installed in such manner as to prevent or materially
reduce the movement of the person using the same in the event of collision or
upset of the vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-603)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.090  TELEVISION RECEIVERS.



   (A)   No motor vehicle operated on the highways in the city shall be
equipped with television-type receiving equipment so located that the viewer
or screen is visible from the driver’s seat.



   (B)   This section does not prohibit the use of television-type
receiving equipment used exclusively for safety of traffic engineering
studies.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-604)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.091  TOW TRUCKS; IDENTIFICATION; EQUIPMENT; INSURANCE.



   (A)   Every tow truck, except those owned by governmental agencies,
shall have displayed on each side thereof, a sign with letters not less than
two inches in height, contrasting in color to that of the background, stating
the name, address and telephone number of the owner or operator thereof.



   (B)   Every tow truck shall be equipped with:



      (1)   One or more brooms and shovels;



      (2)   One or more trash cans at least 18 inches in height; and



      (3)   One fire extinguisher of the dry chemical or carbon
dioxide type with an aggregate rating of at least 4-B, C units, and bearing
the approval of a laboratory qualified by the Division of Fire Prevention for
this purpose.



   (C)   Every owner or operator and driver of a tow truck shall comply
with § 70.048, and shall remove or cause to be removed all glass and debris
deposited upon any street or highway by the disabled vehicle being serviced,
and shall in addition, spread dirt or sand upon that portion of any street or
highway where oil or grease has been deposited by the disabled vehicle being
serviced.



   (D)   Every tow truck operator shall in addition provide an
indemnity bond or insurance policy which shall indemnify or insure the tow
truck operator for his or her liability for loss or damage to any disabled or
damaged vehicle towed or stored by the tow truck operator in an amount as set
out in the fee schedule for any one accident or claim. Any such bond or
policy shall be issued only by a bonding or insuring firm properly qualified
to do business as such in the state, and a certificate of such bond or policy
shall be carried in the cab of each tow truck.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-606)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.092  SUSPENSION SYSTEM.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle on any highway
of this state when the suspension system has been modified from the original
manufactured design by lifting the body from the chassis in excess of three
inches or to cause the horizontal line from the front of the rear bumper to
vary over three inches in height when measured from a level surface of the
highway to the lower edge of the bumper.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the installation of
manufactured heavy duty equipment to include shock absorbers and overlord
springs, nor shall anything contained in this section prevent a person to
operate a motor vehicle on any highway of this state with normal wear of the
suspension system if normal wear does not affect the control or safe
operation of the vehicle. This section shall not apply to motor vehicles
designed or modified primarily for off-highway racing purposes while such
vehicles are in tow or to motorcycles or motor driven cycles.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-607)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.093  BUMPERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle of the First
Division or any vehicle registered as a recreational vehicle on any highway
in the city, unless such vehicle is equipped with both a front and rear
bumper. The bumper height shall not be modified to vary more than three
inches from the original manufactured bumper height for that vehicle when
measured from a level surface of the highway to the lower edge of the bumper.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the installation of manufactured bumper
guards.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to motor vehicles designed or
modified primarily for off-highway racing purposes while such vehicle is in
tow or to motorcycles or motor driven cycles, nor to an antique vehicle, when
registered as such, when the original design did not include bumpers.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-608)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.094  HEADSET RECEIVERS.



   (A)   No driver of a motor vehicle on the highways of this state
shall wear headset receivers while driving.



   (B)   This section does not prohibit the use of a headset type
receiving equipment used exclusively for safety or traffic engineering
studies, by law enforcement personnel on duty, or emergency medical services
and fire service personnel.



   (C)   This section does not prohibit the use of any single sided
headset type receiving and transmitting equipment designed to be used in or
on one ear which is use exclusively for providing two- way radio vocal
communications by an individual in possession of a current and valid novice
class or higher amateur radio license issued by the Federal Communications
Commission and an amateur radio operator special registration plate issued
under 625 ILCS 5/3-607.



   (D)   This section does not prohibit the use of a single-sided
headset or earpiece with a cellular or other mobile telephone.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-610) (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
74.999




SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLES OF THE SECOND DIVISION




§ 74.105  CERTAIN VEHICLES TO CARRY FLARES OR OTHER WARNING DEVICES.



   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle of the Second
Division weighing more than 8,000 pounds or any vehicle of the Second
Division weighing 8,000 pounds or less towing a trailer or any motor vehicle
towing a house trailer upon any highway outside an urban district at any time
unless there is carried in such vehicle the following equipment, except as
provided in division (B) below:



      (1)   At least three liquid-burning flares, or three red
electric lanterns or three portable red emergency reflectors, each of which
is capable of being seen and distinguished at a distance of not less than 500
feet when lighted lamps are required, provided that emergency reflectors
meeting the requirements of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 125
shall be deemed acceptable as regards visibility and color;



      (2)   At least three red-burning 15-minute fusees unless red
electric lanterns or portable red emergency reflectors are carried; and



      (3)   At least two red-cloth flags, not less than 12 inches
square, with standards to support flags or in lieu thereof, two portable
emergency reflectors meeting the requirements of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standard No. 125.



   (B)   No person shall operate at the time and under the conditions
stated in division (A) above any motor vehicle used for the transportation of
explosives, any cargo tank truck used for the transportation of flammable
liquids or compressed gases or any motor vehicle using compressed gas as a
fuel unless there is carried in such vehicle three red electric lanterns or
three portable red emergency reflectors meeting the requirements of division
(A) above, and such vehicle shall not carry any flares, fusees or signals
produced by flame.



   (C)   Whenever any motor vehicle of the Second Division weighing
more than 8,000 pounds or any vehicle of the Second Division weighing 8,000
pounds or less towing a trailer or any motor vehicle towing a house trailer
is disabled upon the roadway of any highway or the shoulder thereof outside
an urban district or on any controlled access highway within an urban
district at any time when lighted lamps are required, the driver of such
vehicle shall display the following warning devices upon the highway during
the time the vehicle is so disabled, except as provided in division (D) below:



      (1)   A lighted fusee, a lighted red electric lantern or a
portable red emergency reflector shall be immediately placed at the traffic
side of the vehicle in the direction of the nearest approaching traffic.
However, the driver of such vehicle upon learning of the disability may
simultaneously flash the two front and two rear turn signals as a vehicular
traffic warning and continue such flashing until the portable signals have
been placed as required by this section and during the time such portable
emergency signals are being picked up for storage prior to the movement of
the vehicle.



      (2)   As soon thereafter as possible, but in any event within
the burning period of the fusee (15 minutes), the driver shall place three
liquid-burning flares, or three lighted red electric lanterns or three
portable red emergency reflectors on the roadway or shoulder of the highway
in the following order:



         (a)   One approximately 100 feet from the disabled
vehicle in the center of the lane or shoulder occupied by such vehicle and
toward traffic approaching in that lane; and



         (b)   One approximately 100 feet in the opposite
direction from the disabled vehicle and in the center of the traffic lane or
shoulder occupied by such vehicle; and



         (c)   One at the traffic side of the disabled vehicle
not less than ten feet to the rear or forward thereof in the direction of the
nearest approaching traffic. If a lighted red electric lantern or a portable
red emergency reflector has been placed at the traffic side of the vehicle in
accordance with division (C)(1) above, it may be used for this purpose.



   (D)   Whenever any vehicle referred to in this section is disabled
within 500 feet of a curve, hill crest or other obstruction to view, the
warning signal in that direction shall be so placed as to afford ample
warning to other users of the highway, but in no case less than 100 feet nor
more than 500 feet from the disabled vehicle.



   (E)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is
disabled upon any roadway or shoulder of a divided highway during the time
that lighted lamps are required, the appropriate warning devices prescribed
in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above shall be placed as follows:



      (1)   One at a distance of approximately 200 feet from the
vehicle in the center of the lane or shoulder occupied by the stopped vehicle
and in the direction of traffic approaching in that lane;



      (2)   One at a distance of approximately 100 feet from the
vehicle in the center of the lane or shoulder occupied by the vehicle and in
the direction



of traffic approaching in that lane; and



      (3)   One at the traffic side of the vehicle and approximately
ten feet from the vehicle in the direction of the nearest approaching traffic.



   (F)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is
disabled upon the roadway of any highway or the shoulder thereof outside an
urban district or on any controlled access highway within an urban district
at any time when the display of fusees, flares, red electric lanterns or
portable red emergency reflectors are not required, the driver of the vehicle
shall display two red-cloth flags or two portable emergency reflectors
meeting the requirements of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 125
upon the roadway or shoulder in the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled
vehicle in the following order:



      (1)   One at a distance of approximately 100 feet in advance
of the vehicle; and



      (2)   One at a distance of approximately 100 feet in the rear
of the vehicle.



   (G)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is
disabled upon any roadway or shoulder of a divided highway during the time
that lighted lamps are not required, the driver of such vehicle shall display
two red-cloth flags or two portable emergency reflectors meeting the
requirements of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 125 upon the
roadway or shoulder in the center of the lane of traffic occupied by the
disabled vehicle in the following order:



      (1)   One at a distance of approximately 200 feet to the rear
of the vehicle; and



      (2)   One at a distance of approximately 100 feet to the rear
of the vehicle.



   (H)   Whenever any motor vehicle used for the transportation of
explosives, or any cargo tank truck used for the transportation of any
flammable liquid or compressed flammable gas or any motor vehicle using
compressed gas as a fuel is disabled upon a highway of this state at any time
or place mentioned in division (C) above, the driver of such vehicle shall
immediately display three red electric lanterns or portable red emergency
reflectors placed in the following order:



      (1)   One at the traffic side of the vehicle and approximately
ten feet from the vehicle in the direction of the nearest approaching traffic;



      (2)   One at a distance of approximately 100 feet to the front
of the disabled vehicle in the center of the lane of traffic or shoulder
occupied by such vehicle; and



      (3)   One at a distance of approximately 100 feet to the rear
of the disabled vehicle in the center of the lane of traffic or shoulder
occupied by such vehicle. Flares, fusees or signals produced by flame shall
not be used as warning devices for disabled vehicles of the type mentioned in
this division (H).



   (I)   The flares, fusees, red electric lanterns, portable red
emergency reflectors and flags to be displayed as required in this section
shall conform with the requirements of divisions (A) and (B) above applicable
thereto.



(625 ILCS 5/12-702)  (Prior Code, § 40-2-702)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.106  ROAD OIL VEHICLES.



   No person shall operate, on a durable all-weather highway of a type
other than gravel or crushed stone, any vehicle used for the purpose of
applying road oil, liquid asphalt or similar material to road surfaces unless
such vehicle is so equipped as to absolutely prevent such material from
dripping on such highway, nor shall such material be allowed to drip on any
such highway.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-703)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.107  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.



   Any person operating any vehicle transporting any explosive as a cargo
or part of a cargo upon a highway shall at all times comply with the
provisions of this section.



   (A)   Such vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and the
rear with the word “Explosives” in letters not less than four inches
high, or there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not
less than 24 inches square marked with the word “Danger” in white letters
six inches high, except that any vehicle which is required to be placarded
pursuant to “An Act to require labeling of equipment and facilities for the
use, transportation, storage and manufacture of hazardous materials and to
provide for a uniform response system to hazardous materials emergencies,”
enacted by the 79th General Assembly, shall be placarded in accordance with
the provisions of that Act.



   (B)   Every such vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two
fire extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at a
convenient point on the vehicle used.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-704)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.108  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL.



   Highway vehicle used for transport of packages bearing Radioactive
Yellow-III labels as defined in the 49 C.F.R. Chapter 1, Paragraph 173.399
(a) must be placarded by the carrier, or by the shipper for sole use vehicles
containing full loads of low specific activity materials. Placards printed
“Radioactive” with black letters four inches high and five-eighths inch
width of stroke on a yellow background must be applied on the front, rear and
on each side of the vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-704.1)



§ 74.109  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS WHEN LIGHTS REQUIRED;
MARKING WITH REFLECTORIZED PAINT; PLACARDING.



   No person shall operate upon the highways in the city any Second
Division motor vehicle customarily used in cargo transportation of flammable
liquids or explosives during the hours when lighted lamps are required under
§ 74.015, unless such vehicle is marked or placarded in reflectorized paint
on each side and rear with the words “Flammable,” four inches high,
except that any vehicle which is required to be placarded pursuant to “An
Act to require labeling of equipment and facilities for the use,
transportation, storage and manufacture of hazardous materials and to provide
for a uniform response system to hazardous materials emergencies,” enacted
by the 79th General Assembly, shall be placarded in accordance with the
provisions of that Act.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-705)



§ 74.110  FIRE APPARATUS; SAFETY BELTS.



   No fire apparatus equipped to carry firefighters on the outside of such
vehicle on the sides, or rear, or both, shall be operated without first
installing on the fire apparatus on the sides and rear thereof a sufficient
number of safety belts and safety belt connections to protect the maximum
number of firefighters who can occupy the sides and rear of such apparatus
while responding to alarms of fire. The city shall cause inspection of such
safety equipment at least semi-annually.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-706)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.111  PROHIBITION; LIABILITY INSURANCE; PENALTY.



   (A)   No school bus, commuter van or motor vehicle owned by or used
for hire by and in connection with the operation of private or public
schools, day camps, summer camps or nursery schools or in charter operations
shall be operated if it is occupied by more passengers than recommended by
the manufacturer thereof if the vehicle is manufactured as a passenger
vehicle; if the vehicle is manufactured for use other than passenger, then it
shall not accommodate more passengers than provided for by the manufacturer
in passenger vehicles of like style or rating.



   (B)   No school bus, commuter van or motor vehicle owned by or used
for hire by and in connection with the operation of private or public
schools, day camps, summer camps or nursery schools shall be operated for
such purposes unless the owner thereof shall carry a minimum of personal
injury liability insurance in the amount as set out in the fee schedule for
any one person in any one accident and subject to the limit for one person,
and for two or more persons injured by reason of the operation of the vehicle
in any one accident in the amount as set out in the fee schedule.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-707)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.112  SLOW MOVING VEHICLE EMBLEM.



   (A)   Every animal drawn vehicle, farm tractor, implement of
husbandry and special mobile equipment when operated on a highway must
display a slow-moving vehicle emblem mounted on the rear except as provided
in division (B) below. Special mobile equipment is exempt when operated
within the limits of a construction or maintenance project where traffic
control devices are used in compliance with the applicable provisions of the
Manual and Specifications adopted under § 1-301 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.



   (B)   Every vehicle or unit described in division (A) above, when
operated in combination on a highway, must display a slow-moving vehicle
emblem as follows.



      (1)   Where the towed unit or any load thereon partially or
totally obscures the slow-moving vehicle emblem on the towing unit, the towed
unit shall be equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem. In such cases the
towing unit need not display the emblem.



      (2)   Where the slow-moving vehicle emblem on the towing unit
is not obscured by the towed unit or its load, then either or both may be
equipped with the required emblem but it shall be sufficient if either
displays it.



      (3)   A registered truck towed behind a farm tractor in
conformity with the provisions of § 1-1418 of the Illinois Vehicle Code must
display a slow-moving vehicle emblem in the manner provided in division (C)
below, while being towed on a highway if the emblem on the towing vehicle is
partially or totally obscured.



   (C)   The slow-moving vehicle emblem required by divisions (A) and
(B) above must meet the specifications and mounting requirements established
by the Department of Transportation. Such specifications and mounting
requirements shall be based on the specifications adopted by the American
Society of Agricultural Engineers and published by that body as ASAE S 276.2
dated March, 1968. No advertising or other marking shall appear upon the
emblem.



   (D)   A slow-moving vehicle emblem is intended as a safety
identification device and shall not be displayed on any vehicle nor displayed
in any manner other than as described in divisions (A), (B) and (C) above.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-709)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.113  REAR FENDER SPLASH GUARDS.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle of the
Second Division, except a truck tractor, to which this section is applicable
upon any highway in the city outside an urban area unless such vehicle is
equipped with rear fender splash guards of either the contour type or the
flap type which comply with the specifications provided in this section for
the type of splash guards used on the vehicle, and which are so attached as
to prevent the splashing of mud or water upon the windshield of other motor
vehicles.



   (A)   Specifications for contour type splash guards. When contour
type rear fender splash guards are used, they shall contour the wheel in such
a manner that the relationship of the inside surface of any such splash guard
to the tread surface of the tire or wheel shall be relatively parallel, both
laterally and across the wheel, at least throughout the top 90 degrees of the
rear 180 degrees of the wheel surface; provided however, on vehicles which
have a clearance of less than five inches between the top of the tire or
wheel and that part of the body of the vehicle directly above the tire or
wheel when the vehicle is loaded to maximum legal capacity, the curved
portion of the splash guard need only extend from a point directly behind the
center of the rear axle and to the rear of the wheel surface upwards to
within at least two inches of the bottom line of the body when the vehicle is
loaded to maximum legal capacity. There shall be a downward extension of the
curved surface which shall end not more than 12 inches from the ground when
the vehicle is loaded to maximum legal capacity. This downward extension
shall be part of the curved surface or attached directly to such curved
surface, but it need not contour the wheel. Such contour type splash guards
shall be wide enough to cover the full tread width of the tire or tires being
protected and shall be installed not more than six inches from the tread
surface of the tire or wheel when the vehicle is loaded to maximum legal
capacity. The splash guard shall have a lip or flange on its outside edge to
minimize side throw and splash. The lip or flange shall extend toward the
center of the wheel, and shall be perpendicular to and extend not less than
two inches below the inside or bottom surface line or plane of the guard.
Such contour type splash guards may be constructed of either a rigid or
flexible material, but: shall be attached in such a manner that, regardless
of movement either by the splash guards or the vehicle, the splash guards
will retain their general parallel relationship to the tread surface of the
tire or wheel under all ordinary operating conditions.



   (B)   Specifications for flap type splash guards. When flap type
splash guards are used, they shall be wide enough to cover the full tread
width of the tire or tires being protected; shall be so installed that they
extend from the underside of the vehicle in a vertical plane behind the rear
wheels to within 12 inches of the ground, when the vehicle is loaded to
maximum legal capacity; shall be so constructed and attached so that when the
vehicle is in forward motion such splash guard will not deviate or move
backward from the vertical plane by an angle of more than 30 degrees measured
from the vertical plane and so that when the forward motion of the vehicle
causes such splash guard to deviate from the vertical plane, the bottom of
such flap type splash guard will not be more than 15 inches from the ground,
when the vehicle is loaded to maximum legal capacity. Such flap type splash
guard may be constructed of either a rigid or flexible material.



   (C)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to vehicles the
construction or design of which does not require such splash guards, nor to
vehicles in-transit and capable only of using temporary splash guards
prescribed by the Department of Transportation nor to pole trailers.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-710)  Penalty, see § 74.999




SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SCHOOL BUSES




§ 74.125  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Transportation of the State of Illinois.



   TYPE I SCHOOL BUS. A school bus with provision for 13 inches of seating
space for each of 17 or more passengers exclusive of the driver.



   TYPE II SCHOOL BUS. A school bus with provision for 13 inches of
seating space for each of 16 or fewer passengers exclusive of the driver.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-800)



§ 74.126  COLOR.



   The exterior of each school bus shall be national school bus glossy
yellow except as follows:



   (A)   The rooftop may be white.



   (B)   The fenders of school buses manufactured before January 1,
1976, may be black.



   (C)   Body trim, rub rails, lettering other than on a stop signal
arm and bumpers on a Type I school bus shall be glossy black.



   (D)   Lettering on a stop signal arm shall be white on a red
background.



   (E)   Bumpers on a Type II school bus may be glossy black or a
bright, light or colorless finish.



   (F)   The hood and upper cowl may be lusterless black or lusterless
school bus yellow.



   (G)   Grilles on the front, lamp trim and hubcaps may be a bright
finish.



   (H)   The name or emblem of a manufacturer may be colorless or any
color.



   (I)   The exterior paint of any school bus shall match the central
value, hue and chroma set forth in rules promulgated by the Department.



(625 ILCS 5/12-801)  (Prior Code, § 40-2-801)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.127  IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   Each school bus shall have the sign “SCHOOL BUS” painted
on both the front and rear of the bus as high as practicable in letters at
least eight inches high.



   (B)   Each school bus and multifunction school-activity bus (MFSAB)
shall have the vehicle weight and the vehicle maximum passenger capacity
recommended by the manufacturer of the bus, which shall be based upon
provision for 13 inches of seating space for each passenger exclusive of the
driver, painted on the body to the left of the service door in letters at
least two inches high. The name of the owner or the entity or both for which
the school bus or MFSAB is operated shall be painted in a contrasting color
on both sides, centered as high as practicable below the window line, in
letters at least four inches high. An identification number shall be painted
as high as practicable on both the front and rear of the school bus or MFSAB
in letters at least four inches high.



   (C)   Decals may be used instead of painting under this section.



(625 ILCS 5/12-802)  (Prior Code, § 40-2-802)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.128  STOP SIGNAL ARM.



   (A)   Each school bus shall be equipped with a stop signal arm on
the driver’s side of the school bus that may be operated either manually or
mechanically. For each school bus manufactured on and after September 1,
1992, the stop signal arm shall be an octagon shaped semaphore that conforms
to 49 C.F.R. part 571.131, “School Bus Pedestrian Safety Devices,” §§
5.1 through 5.5.



   (B)   Each school bus manufactured prior to September 1, 1992 shall
be equipped with a stop signal arm that conforms to standards promulgated by
the Department.



(625 ILCS 5/12-803)  (Prior Code, § 40-2-803)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.129  OTHER VEHICLES; COLOR, STOP SIGNAL ARM AND IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   No vehicle other than a school bus shall be identified with
the sign “SCHOOL BUS,” shall be equipped with a stop signal arm, shall be
equipped with a strobe lamp or shall be equipped with a warning lamp system
as described in § 74.135. No commuter van or bus other than a school bus
shall be painted national school bus glossy yellow or a color that closely
resembles national school bus glossy yellow.



(625 ILCS 5/12-804)



   (B)   Each school bus purchased as a new vehicle after December 31,
1975 shall be equipped with an eight-lamp flashing signal system. Until
December 31, 1978, all other school buses shall be equipped with either a
four-lamp or an eight-lamp flashing signal system. After December 31, 1978,
all school buses shall be equipped with an eight-lamp flashing signal system.



   (C)   A four-lamp flashing signal system shall have two alternately
flashing red lamps mounted as high and as widely spaced laterally on the same
level as practicable at the front of the school bus and two such lamps
mounted in the same manner at the rear. An eight-lamp flashing signal system
shall have, in addition to a lamp-lamp system, lamp alternately flashing
amber lamps. Each amber lamp shall be mounted next to a red lamp and at the
same level but closer to the centerline of the school bus.



   (D)   Each signal lamp shall be a sealed beam at least five and
one-half inches in diameter and shall have sufficient intensity to be visible
at 500 feet in normal sunlight. Both the four-lamp and eight-lamp system
shall be actuated only by means of a manual switch. There shall be a device
for indicating to the driver that the system is operating properly or is
inoperative. A school bus may also be equipped with alternately flashing head
lamps, which may be operated in conjunction with the eight-lamp flashing
signal system.



(625 ILCS 5/12-805)



(Prior Code, § 40-2-804)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.130  IDENTIFICATION, STOP SIGNAL ARMS AND SPECIAL LIGHTING WHEN NOT
USED AS A SCHOOL BUS.



   (A)   Identification, stop signal arms and special lighting when not
used as a school bus. Except as provided in division (B) below, whenever a
school bus is operated for the purpose of transporting passengers other than
persons in connection with an activity of the school or religious
organization which owns the school bus or for which the school bus is
operated, the “SCHOOL BUS” signs shall be covered or concealed and the
stop signal arm and flashing signal system shall not be operable through
normal controls.



(625 ILCS 5/12-806)



   (B)   Identification, stop signal arms and special lighting on
school buses used in connection with a youth camp, child care facility or
community based rehabilitation facility.



      (1)   Subject to the conditions in division (B)(3) below, a
bus which meets any of the special requirements for school buses in §§
74.126, 74.127, 74.128 and 74.129 may be used for the purpose of transporting
persons 18 years of age or less in connection with any of the following
facilities:



         (a)   Any youth camp licensed under the Youth Camp Act;
and



         (b)   Any child care facility licensed under the Child
Care Act of 1969.



      (2)   Subject to the conditions in division (B)(3) below, a
bus which meets any of the special requirements for school buses in §§
74.126, 74.127, 74.128 and 74.129 may be used for the purpose of transporting
persons recognized as clients of a community based rehabilitation facility
which is accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation
Facilities of Tucson, Arizona, and which is under a contractual agreement vii
th the Department of Human Services.



      (3)   (a)   A bus used for transportation as provided in
division (B)(1) or (B)(2) shall either:



            1.   Meet all of the special requirements for
school buses in §§ 74.126, 74.127, 74.128 and 74.129; or



            2.   Shall have the “SCHOOL BUS” signs covered
or concealed and the stop signal arm and flashing signal system rendered
inoperable through normal means.



         (b)   A bus which meets all of the special requirements
for school buses in §§ 74.126, 74.127, 74.128 and 74.129 shall be operated
by a person who has a valid and properly classified driver’s license issued
by the Secretary of State and who possesses a valid school bus driver permit
or is accompanied and supervised, for the specific purpose of training prior
to routine operation of a school bus, by a person who has held a valid school
bus driver permit for at least one year. A bus which has had the “SCHOOL
BUS” signs covered or concealed and the stop signal arm and flashing signal
system rendered inoperable through normal means may be operated by a person
who has a valid and properly classified driver’s license issued by the
Secretary of State.



(625 ILCS 5/12-806a)



(Prior Code, § 40-2-806)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.131  SEAT BELT FOR DRIVER; SEAT HEIGHT.



   (A)   Seat belt for driver. Each school bus shall be equipped with a
retractable lap belt assembly for the driver’s seat. No school bus shall be
operated unless the driver has properly restrained himself or herself with
the lap belt assembly.



(625 ILCS 5/12-807)



   (B)   Seat back height. No Type I school bus manufactured after June
30, 1987 shall be sold for use as, or purchased for use as, or used as a
school bus within this state unless such bus is equipped with passenger seat
backs having a seat back height of 28 inches installed by the original bus
body manufacturer.



(625 ILCS 5/12-807.1)



(Prior Code, § 40-2-807)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.132  FIRE EXTINGUISHER.



   Each school bus shall be equipped with at least one dry chemical gauge
type fire extinguisher mounted in the extinguisher manufacturer’s
automobile type bracket in a position readily accessible to the driver.



(625 ILCS 5/12-808)  (Prior Code, § 40-2-808)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.133  FIRST AID KIT.



   Each school bus shall be equipped with a first aid kit mounted in full
view of and readily accessible to the driver.



(625 ILCS 5/12-809)  (Prior Code, § 40-2-809)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.134  RESTRAINING DEVICES FOR HANDICAPPED PASSENGERS.



   Each school bus which is operated for transporting passengers who are
persons with disabilities shall be equipped with an appropriate restraining
or safety device for each such passenger.



(625 ILCS 5/12-810)  (Prior Code, § 40-2-810)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.135  AMBER 3 BAR CLEARANCE LIGHT.



   Each Type I school bus shall be equipped with an Amber 3 bar clearance
light on the front of the bus. The light shall be illuminated at all times
when the bus is being operated between sunset and sunrise and in conditions
of reduced visibility.



(625 ILCS 5/12-811)  (Prior Code, § 40-2-811)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.136  SCHOOL BUS SAFETY GLASS.



   No vehicle manufactured after July 31, 1976 may be operated as a Type I
school bus in the city unless laminated safety glass is used in its
construction wherever glazing materials are used in doors, windows and
windshields. The laminated safety glass shall comply with specifications and
standards set forth in regulations promulgated by the Department of
Transportation and filed with the Secretary of State.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-814)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.137  CROSSING CONTROL ARMS.



   (A)   No Type I or Type II school bus may be operated or used as a
school bus within this state after December 31, 1999 unless that bus is
equipped with a crossing control arm on the front of the bus that conforms to
equipment and installation standards that the Department of Transportation
shall promulgate for purposes of this division (A).



   (B)   If a Type I or Type II school bus is manufactured after
December 31, 1997, that bus shall not be sold for use as, or purchased for
the use as, or used as a school bus within this state unless that bus is
equipped with a crossing control arm that is installed on the front of the
bus by the original bus body manufacturer and that conforms to equipment and
installation standards that the Department shall promulgate for purposes of
this division (B).



   (C)   A crossing control arm meeting standards promulgated by the
Department under this section shall be designed to swing out from the front
of a school bus when the bus stops and opens its doors while school children
enter or exit the bus, as prescribed in rules promulgated by the State Board
of Education.



   (D)   This section does not apply to the temporary operation in this
state of a school bus that is legally registered in another state and is
displaying valid registration plates of that state if:



      (1)   The bus is not operated in Illinois on a regular basis;
and



      (2)   The bus is being operated in Illinois in connection with
a cultural, tourist, athletic or similar activity that is sponsored by one or
more schools located outside of Illinois for the benefit of their enrolled
students who are being transported to or from that activity.



(625 ILCS 5/12-807.2)



§ 74.138  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The Department may promulgate rules and regulations
to more completely specify the equipment requirements of this subchapter.



      (2)   All rules, regulations and standards promulgated from
time to time by the State Board of Education and the Department for the
safety and construction of school buses shall be applicable to every motor
vehicle in this state defined as a school bus under § § 70.002.



(625 ILCS 5/12-812)



   (B)   (1)   The Department shall adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations governing the use of liquefied petroleum gases, compressed
natural gases and liquefied natural gases as a propellant fuel in school
buses. Such rules and regulations shall include the installation, maintenance
and operation of such equipment installed on school buses and shall be based
on the generally accepted standards of safety as recommended by the National
Fire Protection Association.



      (2)   All school buses using liquefied petroleum gases,
compressed natural gases or liquefied natural gases as a propellant fuel must
conform to and obey any rule or regulation lawfully adopted by the Department.



(625 ILCS 5/12-812.1)



§ 74.139  SCHOOL BUS DRIVER COMMUNICATION DEVICES.



   (A)   In this section:



      CELLULAR RADIO TELECOMMUNICATION DEVICE. A device capable of
sending or receiving telephone communications without an access line for
service and which requires the operator to dial numbers manually. It does
not, however, include citizens band radios or citizens band radio hybrids.



      POSSESSION OF A SCHOOL BUS. The period of time from which a bus
driver takes possession until the school bus driver returns possession of the
school bus, whether or not the school bus driver is operating the school bus.



      SCHOOL BUS DRIVER. A person operating a school bus who has a
valid school bus driver permit as required under 625 ILCS 5/6-104 and 625
ILCS 5/6-106.1.



      TO OPERATE. To have the vehicle in motion while it contains one
or more passengers.



      USING A CELLULAR RADIO TELECOMMUNICATION DEVICE. Talking or
listening to or dialing a cellular radio telecommunication device.



   (B)   A school bus driver may not operate a school bus while using a
cellular radio telecommunication device.



   (C)   Division (B) above does not apply:



      (1)   To the use of a cellular radio telecommunication device
for the purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an
emergency situation:



         (a)   An emergency response operator;



         (b)   A hospital;



         (c)   A physician’s office or health clinic;



         (d)   An ambulance service;



         (e)   A fire department, fire district or fire company;
or



         (f)   A police department.



      (2)   To the use of a cellular radio telecommunication device
to call for assistance in the event that there is a mechanical breakdown or
other mechanical problem that impairs the safe operation of the bus or to
communicate with school authorities or their designees about any other issue
relating to the operation of the school bus or the welfare and safety of any
passenger thereon. In no case may a cellular radio telecommunication device
be used for anything not provided for in this section, including, but not
limited to, personal use; or



      (3)   When the school bus is parked.



   (D)   A school bus driver who violates division (B) of this section
is guilty of a petty offense punishable by a fine of not less than $100 and
not more than $250.



   (E)   A school bus must contain either an operating cellular radio
telecommunication device or two-way radio while the school bus driver is in
possession of a school bus. The cellular radio telecommunication device or
two-way radio in this division (E) must be turned on and adjusted in a manner
that would alert the school bus driver of an incoming communication request.



(625 ILCS 5/12-813.1)



§ 74.140  STROBE LAMP ON SCHOOL BUS.



   (A)   A school bus manufactured prior to January 1, 2000 may be
equipped with one strobe lamp that will emit 60 to 120 flashes per minute of
white or bluish-white light visible to a motorist approaching the bus from
any direction. A school bus manufactured on or after January 1, 2000 shall be
equipped with one strobe lamp that will emit 60 to 120 flashes per minute of
white or bluish-white light visible to a motorist approaching the bus from
any direction. The lamp shall be of sufficient brightness to be visible in
normal sunlight when viewed directly from a distance of at least one mile.



   (B)   The strobe lamp shall be mounted on the rooftop of the bus
with the light generating element in the lamp located equidistant from each
side and either at or behind the center of the rooftop. The maximum height of
the element above the rooftop shall not exceed one-thirtieth of its distance
from the rear of the rooftop. If the structure of the strobe lamp obscures
the light generating element, the element shall be deemed to be in the center
of the lamp with a maximum height one-fourth inch less than the maximum
height of the strobe lamp unless otherwise indicated in rules and regulations
promulgated by the Department. The Department may promulgate rules and
regulations to govern measurements, glare, effectiveness and protection of
strobe lamps on school buses, including higher strobe lamps than authorized
in this division (B).



   (C)   The strobe lamp may be lighted only when the school bus is
actually being used as a school bus and:



      (1)   Is stopping or stopped for loading or discharging pupils
on a highway outside an urban area; or



      (2)   Is bearing one or more pupils.



(625 ILCS 5/12-815)



§ 74.141  EMERGENCY EXITS IDENTIFICATION.



   On and after August 1, 2000, all emergency exits of a school bus shall
be outlined around the perimeter of the exit with a minimum one inch wide
yellow reflective tape or decal. This yellow reflective tape or decal shall
be placed on the exterior surface of the school bus.



(625 ILCS 5/12-815.1)



§ 74.142  NOISE SUPPRESSION SWITCH.



   Any school bus manufactured on or after January 1, 2006 must be
equipped with a noise suppression switch capable of turning off noise
producing accessories, including: heater blowers; defroster fans; auxiliary
fans; and radios.



(625 ILCS 5/12-815.2)



§ 74.143  PRE- AND POST-TRIP INSPECTION POLICY FOR SCHOOL BUSES.



   (A)   In order to provide for the welfare and safety of children who
are transported on school buses throughout the state, each school district
shall have in place, by January 1, 2008, a policy to ensure that the school
bus driver is the last person leaving the bus and that no passenger is left
behind or remains on the vehicle at the end of a route, a work shift or the
work day. This policy and procedure shall, at a minimum, require the school
bus driver:



      (1)   To test the cellular radio telecommunication device or
two-way radio and ensure that it is functioning properly before the bus is
operated; and



      (2)   Before leaving the bus at the end of each route, work
shift or work day, to walk to the rear of the bus and check the bus for
children or other passengers in the bus.



   (B)   If a school district has a contract with a private sector
school bus company for the transportation of the district’s students, the
school district shall require in the contract with the private sector company
that the company have a post-trip inspection policy in place. This policy and
procedure shall, at a minimum, require the school bus driver:



      (1)   To test the cellular radio telecommunication device or
two-way radio and ensure that it is functioning properly before the bus is
operated; and



      (2)   Before leaving the bus at the end of each route, work
shift or work day, to walk to the rear of the bus and check the bus for
children or other passengers in the bus.



   (C)   Before this inspection, the school bus driver shall activate
the interior lights of the bus to assist the driver in seeing in and under
the seats during a visual sweep of the bus.



   (D)   This policy may include, at the discretion of the school
district, the installation of a mechanical or electronic post-trip inspection
reminder system which requires the school bus driver to walk to the rear of
the bus to deactivate the system before the driver leaves the bus. The system
shall require that when the driver turns off the vehicle’s ignition system,
the vehicle’s interior lights must illuminate to assist the driver in
seeing in and under the seats during a visual sweep of the bus.



(625 ILCS 5/12-816)



§ 74.144  NURSERY SCHOOL BUSES.



   The Department of Transportation, after conducting a public hearing,
may, by regulation, modify and supplement the requirements pertaining to seat
dimensions, spacing and height from the floor and to other safety features in
the interior of a school bus used to transport preschool children, when such
modification or supplementing will enhance the safety of the bus when
transporting such children.



(625 ILCS 5/12-820)



§ 74.145  DISPLAY OF TELEPHONE NUMBER; COMPLAINT CALLS.



   (A)   (1)   Each school bus and multifunction school-activity bus
shall display at the rear of the bus a sign, with letters and numerals
readily visible and readable, indicating the area code and telephone number
of the owner of the bus, regardless of whether the owner is a school district
or another person or entity. The sign shall be in the following form:



“TO COMMENT ON MY DRIVING, CALL (area code and telephone number of bus
owner).”



      (2)   A school bus owner who placed a sign conforming to the
requirements of Public Act 95-176 on a school bus before January 1, 2010 (the
effective date of Public Act 96-655) may continue to use that sign on that
school bus rather than a sign that conforms to the requirements of Public Act
96-655; however, if the school bus owner replaces that sign, the replacement
sign shall conform to the requirements of Public Act 96-655.



   (B)   The owner of each school bus or multifunction school activity
bus shall establish procedures for accepting the calls provided for under
division (A) above and for taking complaints.



   (C)   The procedures established under division (B) above shall
include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   An internal investigation of the events that led to each
complaint; and



      (2)   A report to the complaining party on the results of the
investigation and the action taken, if any.



(625 ILCS 5/12-821)




SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION BUSES




§ 74.160  COLOR AND MARKINGS.



   Each religious organization bus may be of any color and have any
markings designating its purpose other than those required for school buses
under §§ 74.125 through 74.145.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-900)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.161  SPECIAL LIGHTING EQUIPMENT.



   Any religious organization bus may be equipped with a four-lamp
flashing signal system having unison flashing amber lamps, two at the front
and two at the rear of the bus, mounted as high and as widely spaced
laterally on the same level as is practicable. If such equipment is
installed: each lamp must be a sealed beam at least five inches in diameter
and have sufficient intensity to be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight;
the system shall be actuated only by means of a manual switch; and there
shall be a device for indicating to the receiver that the system is operating
properly or is inoperative.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-901)  Penalty, see § 74.999




CITY VEHICLE LICENSES




§ 74.175  MOTOR VEHICLE DEFINED.



   The term MOTOR VEHICLE, as used in this subchapter, is hereby defined
as and shall be construed to mean and include all automobiles, trucks, vans,
motor bicycles, traction vehicles and all other vehicles propelled otherwise
than by muscular power, and vehicles or trailers pulled by motor vehicles;
but the term MOTOR VEHICLE shall not be construed to include the cars of
railways or other vehicles operated solely on fixed tracks or rails.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1001)



§ 74.176  VEHICLES REQUIRING CITY LICENSE.



   Any person residing within the city or any person who owns or leases a
motor vehicle registered to that person’s business or residential address
within the city shall be entitled to, and required to, obtain a license for
such motor vehicle from the city as hereinafter provided. Any such person who
fails to obtain such a license from the city and uses or causes to be used
such unlicensed motor vehicle upon the streets, avenues or alleys of the city
shall be in violation of this section.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1002)  (Ord. 03-43, passed 9-8-2003; Ord. 2016-11,
passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.177  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Every person required pursuant to § 74.176 to obtain a motor vehicle
license from the city, and only such persons, shall, except as hereinafter
provided, file an application with the Finance Clerk, upon a form to be
provided by him or her, setting forth the name and address of the applicant
and a description of the vehicle for which the license is desired. Such
application shall be filed within 30 days after the person becomes an owner
or operator of a motor vehicle for which such license is required. Upon
payment by the applicant of the license fee as hereinafter provided, the
Finance Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued a license authorizing the use
of such motor vehicle within the city until the expiration of the license.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1003)  (Ord. 03-43, passed 9-8-2003)  Penalty, see §
74.999



§ 74.178  EXEMPT VEHICLES.



   No vehicle owned by the city, no members of the military service
present in the state by reason of military orders, no vehicles which have
prisoner of war (POW) state-issued plates, and no vehicles 25 years and older
which are properly displaying state-issued antique plates shall be subject to
the provisions hereof.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1004)  (Ord. 1698, passed 4-18-1987; Ord. 03-43, passed
9-8-2003)



§ 74.179  ANNUAL LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   The license fee shall be set by the City Council by motion,
resolution or ordinance, and may be changed from time to time, by motion,
resolution or ordinance as the Council deems necessary.



   (B)   The annual license fee to be paid for vehicle licenses shall
be paid for each vehicle. In the event that the City Council fails to
establish or otherwise repeals the annual license fee amounts in place from
time to time, or of such fee amounts are finally determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unenforceable, the minimum annual license fee
amounts shall be as set forth as set out in the fee schedule.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1005)  (Ord. 1580, passed 4-7-1986; Ord. 95-56, passed
1-8-1996; Ord. 98-1, passed 1-5-1998; Ord. 03-43, passed 9-8-2003; Ord.
2006-11, passed 4-3-2006; Ord. 09-37, passed 12-7-2009)



§ 74.180  TIME OF PAYMENT; LICENSE YEAR.



   Such license fees or taxes shall be due and payable annually in advance
of May 1 of each year, and the license shall be for one year; provided that
the owners of such vehicle coming into possession of the same after the
expiration of six months of the license year shall pay one-half of the lesser
annual fee, set out herein, if paid within 30 days of the date of coming into
possession of each vehicle, or one-half of the larger fee, set out herein, if
paid more than 30 days after coming into possession. For licenses issued
between April 1 of one year and before the 12-month period beginning May 1
the following year, such licenses shall be deemed to expire on April 30,
notwithstanding any other provision of the city code or other license
provision to the contrary.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1006)  (Ord. 1259, passed 10-17-1981; Ord. 03-43,
passed 9-8-2003; Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)



§ 74.181  LICENSE.



   Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle, except auto dealers, who
procures such license shall receive a city license, label, sticker or tag
without extra charge therefor; such label, sticker or tag shall be numbered
serially and bear the number and year for which issued.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1007)  (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)



§ 74.182  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   It shall be the duty of the applicant to permanently affix such label
or sticker in accordance with the instructions received therewith in a
conspicuous place on the windshield of such vehicle where it can be readily
seen.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1008)



§ 74.183  RESERVED.



§ 74.184  LICENSE MAY BE TRANSFERRED.



   (A)   When an owner or operator who has paid the license fee for
which provision is made in this subchapter, shall sell or dispose of his or
her motor vehicle prior to the date at which such license shall expire or
purchase or acquire a replacement motor vehicle, it shall be the duty of said
owner or operator to make proper application for such transfer and, upon
payment of a fee as set out in the fee schedule, the Finance Clerk shall
transfer such license to the owner or operator.



   (B)   In the event that the new motor vehicle so purchased or
acquired shall be of a class upon which the payment of a greater fee is
required by this subchapter, before such transfer shall become effective,
such owner or operator shall pay the difference between the amount previously
paid and the amount due upon the vehicle so purchased; provided, that if the
transfer is made after the expiration of six months of the license year,
one-half of the difference between said amounts shall be paid.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1010)  (Ord. 1259, passed 10-17-1981)



§ 74.185  DUPLICATE LICENSES.



   Duplicate licenses to replace those lost, destroyed or transferred
during the license year may be issued for any vehicle upon payment of a fee
as set out in the fee schedule. The license fee shall be set by the City
Council by motion, and may be changed from time to time, by motion, as the
Council deems necessary.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1011)  (Ord. 1580, passed 4-7-1986; Ord. 95-56, passed
1-8-1996)



§ 74.186  USE OF FUND.



   All revenues derived from such license fees shall be deposited in the
General Fund and used for the purpose of improving, paving, repairing or
maintaining the streets and other public roadways within the city.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1012)  (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-16-2016)



§ 74.187  ILLEGAL USE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to use or display or give,
sell or otherwise furnish to another a city motor vehicle license not
lawfully issued to him or her for use upon a vehicle for which it was not
issued.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly falsify any
application to obtain a city motor vehicle license.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1013)  Penalty, see § 74.999



§ 74.188  DELEGATION OF RESPONSIBILITY.



   Wherever in this subchapter a responsibility or authority is assigned
to the City Clerk, the City Manager may, in the Manager’s sole discretion,
delegate such responsibility or authority to another person and shall provide
appropriate notice of such delegation to the public as the Manager deems
necessary to ensure the convenient administration of this subchapter.



(Ord. 03-43, passed 9-8-2003)




TRAFFIC ENGINEER AND EMERGENCY REGULATIONS




§ 74.200  OFFICE OF THE CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER.



   The City Traffic Engineer shall be appointed by the City Manager, and
he or she shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1101)



§ 74.201  CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER; GENERAL DUTIES.



   (A)   In addition to duties assigned by the City Manager, it shall
be the general duty of the City Traffic Engineer to determine the
installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, to
conduct engineering analysis of accidents and to devise remedial measures, to
conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate
with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve
traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional power and duties as are
hereinafter described.



   (B)   In addition to the above, the City Traffic Engineer shall
recommend:



      (1)   The installation of official traffic control devices to
regulate, guide or warn traffic;



      (2)   The designation of pedestrian crosswalks by appropriate
devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, the establishment of
safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as may be deemed
necessary for the protection of pedestrians and the marking of lanes to
regulate the movement of vehicles;



      (3)   The regulation or restriction of turns and the placement
of appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway to
indicate the course to be traveled in making such turns;



      (4)   The establishment of loading zones and public carrier
stands and the placement of official signs or markings to indicate the same;



      (5)   The limitation or restrictions of parking at specific
locations or within certain zones, the manner of parking and the erection of
official signs in regard to such limitations or restrictions;



      (6)   The designation of through streets, and the placement of
stop signs on all cross streets intersecting such through streets;



      (7)   The designation of any intersection as a stop
intersection and the placement of stop signs on approaches to such
intersections;



      (8)   The establishment of speed zones consistent with all
provisions of 625 ILCS 5/11-601, and as may be amended from time to time, and
the erection of official signs to designate such speeds; and



      (9)   The placing in effect of other measures for the
elimination of traffic hazards and other dangers to the public.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1102)



§ 74.202  TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO PLACE TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   The Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain traffic control devices
as required by this subchapter to make effective the provision of this
subchapter, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control
devices to regulate, guide or warn traffic as are required to effectuate the
provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1103)



§ 74.203  TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO MARK CROSSWALKS, SAFETY ZONES AND TRAFFIC
LANES.



   The Traffic Engineer, as directed by the City Manager, is hereby
authorized:



   (A)   To place appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface
of the roadway to designate crosswalks at intersections or other places when
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway;



   (B)   To make or construct safety zones at such places as he or she
might deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians and of a kind and
character that shall conform to the standards of the State Department of
Public Works and Buildings, Division of Highways; and



   (C)   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places
as directed and consistent with this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1104)



§ 74.204  ERECTION OF SIGNS REGULATING OR RESTRICTING TURNS.



   (A)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to place proper
official signs as directed by the City Manager at such intersections or other
places at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn.



   (B)   The Traffic Engineer is authorized to place official markers,
buttons, or signs as directed by the City Manager within or adjacent to
intersections, indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at
such intersection, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform
to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1105)



§ 74.205  TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO MARK LOADING ZONES.



   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to place and maintain
appropriate official signs as directed by the City Manager indicating the
location of passenger and freight loading zones and stating the hours during
which the provisions of this section are applicable.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1106)



§ 74.206  MARKING OF TAXICAB AND BUS STANDS.



   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to place and maintain
appropriate official signs as directed by the City Manager at all bus stops
and taxicab stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such
public streets and at such places as may be designated by the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1107)



§ 74.207  ERECTION OF SIGNS INDICATING PARKING LIMITATIONS.



   The Traffic Engineer as directed by the City Manager and pursuant to
applicable ordinances is hereby authorized:



   (A)   To erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any
street adjacent to any school property or church where such parking would
interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation;



   (B)   To appropriately mark or sign such streets upon which angle
parking shall be permitted;



   (C)   To erect signs indicating no parking upon any street; and



   (D)   To designate by proper signs places where the stopping or
parking of vehicles would create any especially hazardous condition or would
cause unusual delay to traffic.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1108)



§ 74.208  TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO ERECT STOP SIGNS AND SIGNS REGULATING SPEED.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes a
through street, it shall be the duty of the Traffic Engineer to place and
maintain an official stop sign on each and every street intersecting such
through street, or that portion thereof described and designated as such by
any ordinance by the city.



   (B)   Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes
any intersection as a stop intersection, it shall be the duty of the Traffic
Engineer to place and maintain an official stop sign on each approach to the
intersection as designated and described in such ordinance of the city.



   (C)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to place and
maintain official signs as directed by the City Manager regulating speed on
streets and highways consistent with all provisions of 625 ILCS 5/11-601, as
may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1109)



§ 74.209  TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO ERECT YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGN.



   Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes any
intersection as a yield right-of-way intersection, it shall be the duty of
the Traffic Engineer to place and maintain an official yield right-of-way
sign on each approach to the intersection as designated and described in such
ordinance of the city.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1110)



§ 74.210  TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO ERECT ADDITIONAL SIGNS.



   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to erect additional official
signs as directed by the City Manager indicating the direction of traffic
movement on one-way streets, the duration of parking time and the hours and
days during which such regulations shall be in effect.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1111)



§ 74.211  COOPERATION FROM OTHER DEPARTMENTS FOR PERSONNEL AND SUPPLIES.



   The Traffic Engineer shall have the right and power to call upon any
department or department’s personnel, equipment and supplies for the
purpose of carrying out any and all of the duties herein given to the Traffic
Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1112)



§ 74.212  AUTHORIZATION FOR EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Chief of Police or his or her supervisory personnel are
hereby empowered to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover
emergencies or special conditions. Such temporary regulations shall remain in
effect only during the period of emergency or special condition.



   (B)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to make temporary
rules to regulate traffic or test traffic control devices under actual
conditions of traffic. No such experimental regulation of traffic shall
remain in effect for more than 90 days.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1113)



§ 74.213  PARKING ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The Chief of Police is hereby appointed the Parking
Administrator for the city.



   (B)   The Parking Administrator for the city shall send notice of
impending driver’s license suspension to any person who has failed to
satisfy any fine or penalty imposed by final judgment for ten or more
violations of local standing and parking regulations of the city after such
person has exhausted all procedures for judicial review.



   (C)   The aforesaid notice under division (B) above shall specify
that the person liable for any fine or penalty shall pay the outstanding
fines or penalties within 45 days of the notice date and that failure to pay
the fine or penalty within 45 days will result in the city notifying the
Illinois Secretary of State that the person’s driver’s license is
eligible for suspension pursuant to 625 ILCS 51/6-306.5 (formerly known as
Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 95-1/2, § 6-306.5).



   (D)   All notices under this subchapter shall be sent by first day
United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the
Secretary of State.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1114)  (Ord. 93-11, passed 3-1-1993)



§ 74.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Unless otherwise set forth in the schedule of fees adopted
from time-to-time by the City Council, the penalties and fines set forth in
this section shall apply. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 70.999.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §§ 74.175
through 74.188 shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $750 for each
and every offense, and each day any motor vehicle is used upon the streets,
avenues, alleys or public facilities of this city without having complied
with the provisions of §§ 74.175 through 74.188 shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense; provided, however, that violations of §
74.175 may be satisfied by the purchase of a valid city vehicle license and
by the following payments if paid within the listed time periods.



 

Original Notice
 
Second Notice
 
Final Notice


(0—10 days)
 
(11—20 days)
 
(21—30 days)


$15
 
$25
 
$35



 



      (2)   All such payments shall be made at the Public Safety
Building, 255 W. Deerpath, Lake Forest, Illinois.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1014)



   (C)   For any fine, penalty or charge not timely paid in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, any cost of collection incurred by the
city pursuant to this chapter may be assessed as an addition tax or penalty,
or both, consistent with § 10.99 of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 40-2-1015)



(Ord. 1415, passed 2-18-1984; Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003; Ord. 2016-11,
passed 2-16-2016)



CHAPTER 75:  BICYCLES



Section



   75.01   Definition



   75.02   Effect of regulations



   75.03   Bicycle rental agencies



   75.04   Safety equipment of bicycle



   75.05   Operation of bicycles



   75.06   Parking bicycles



   75.07   Parental responsibility



   75.08   Inspection



   75.09   Removal of manufacturer’s serial number



   75.10   Effect of removal of serial number



   75.11   Use of bicycle without consent of owner



   75.12   Sale of abandoned bicycles



   75.13   Enforcement



 



   75.99   Penalty



§ 75.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two or more tandem wheels.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1501)



§ 75.02  EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.



   If is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1502)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.03  BICYCLE RENTAL AGENCIES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
rent, or offer to rent, any bicycle without first complying with the
provisions of this chapter relating to registration, licensing and equipping
of bicycles.



   (B)   (1)   Bicycles offered for rent by a rental agency shall be
equipped with the lights and other equipment required by this chapter shall
be kept in good and safe condition.



      (2)   Rental agencies shall comply with all provisions of this
chapter and shall be responsible for the condition of the bicycles they rent.



   (C)   The Chief of Police or someone designated by him or her shall
make periodic inspections of bicycle rental agencies to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1506)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.04  SAFETY EQUIPMENT OF BICYCLE.



   Every bicycle operated upon any street, alley or public way or place
shall be in such condition and equipped as follows.



   (A)   Mechanical condition. No person shall operate a bicycle which
is not in such mechanical condition so that it can be safely operated.



   (B)   Brakes. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake adequate
to control the movement of and to stop such bicycle whenever necessary.



   (C)   Lights and reflector. No bicycle shall be operated within the
period from sunset to sunrise without having properly lighted headlight
attached to the front of the bicycle, visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from the front thereof, for a distance of not less than 500 feet,
nor without having a red light or reflector attached to the rear of the
bicycle which is clearly visible in the headlight beam of a motor vehicle for
a distance of not less than 300 feet to the rear of the bicycle.



   (D)   Audible signal. Each bicycle shall be equipped with a horn,
bell or other signaling device in good working order and audible at a minimum
distance of 100 feet; except that no bicycle shall be equipped with nor shall
any person use on a bicycle any siren, gong or whistle.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1507)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.05  OPERATION OF BICYCLES.



   Bicycles are hereby classed as vehicles, and every person operating a
bicycle in any public place and on any public way in the city shall be
subject to the provisions of all state vehicle laws and all traffic
ordinances, except such provisions in conflict with this chapter or which by
their nature can have no application.



   (A)   Obedience to traffic directions. It shall be unlawful for any
person operating a bicycle to fail or refuse to comply with any order, signal
or direction of a police officer, or to disobey the instructions of any
official traffic sign, signal or other traffic control device.



   (B)   Riding on bicycles.



      (1)   A person operating a bicycle shall not ride other than
upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor carry
any other person upon such bicycle other than firmly attached regular seat
thereon, nor shall any person ride upon a bicycle other than as above
authorized.



      (2)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one
time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.



   (C)   Speed. No bicycle shall be operated at anytime faster than is
reasonable, proper and prudent under the conditions then existing, and every
bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the rider
and of other persons, property and vehicles.



   (D)   Riding on sidewalks.



      (1)   Only a duly licensed motor vehicle operator with a valid
motor vehicle operators license in their possession may operate a bicycle
upon the streets in the central business district between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m., such district to include all streets and public ways within the area
bounded by, and including, the streets of Illinois Road on the south,
Wisconsin Avenue on the north, Oakwood Avenue on the west, Western Avenue on
the east, and the length of Western Avenue extending from Westminster Avenue
north to Woodland Road. In such business district area and during normal
business hours, such business hours to be 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., bicycles
operating on the sidewalk shall be walked only, in a dismounted manner by
those operators of bicycles. Bicycles may be ridden on the sidewalks in the
business district during those times not specified above by those operators
who are not duly licensed motor vehicle operators.



      (2)   Bicycles may be operated on sidewalks in public parks.



      (3)   Due and proper care shall at all times be exercised by
the bicycle operator for the pedestrian(s). Under all circumstances, bicycle
operators riding or walking their bicycles, shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians using a sidewalk or path.



   (E)   Riding on right. Every person operating a bicycle shall keep
to the right and shall operate as practical at the right-hand edge of the
street, roadway, path or sidewalk.



   (F)   Riding in group. Persons riding bicycles or motorized pedal
cycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast, except on paths
or parts of roadways set aside for their exclusive use. Persons riding two
abreast shall not impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic and,
on a laned roadway, shall ride within a single lane.



   (G)   Stopping or turning. The operator of a bicycle on the roadway,
when making a right turn shall follow the right-hand edge of the roadway, and
the operator of the bicycle when making a left turn shall approach the point
of turning in the traffic lane nearest the center of the roadway. No operator
of a bicycle shall start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn without first
indicating such movement as provided by state laws for the operation of motor
vehicles.



   (H)   Coming out of alleys, driveways, sidewalks, paths or
buildings. The operator of a bicycle coming out of an alley, driveway,
sidewalk, path or building shall stop before riding on or across a sidewalk
or into a street or roadway if the view is obscured. Such operator shall in
all cases yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
street or roadway.



   (I)   Clinging to vehicles. No person riding upon any bicycle,
coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself
or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.



   (J)   Carrying articles. No person operating a bicycle shall carry
any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping both
hands upon the bicycle handlebars.



   (K)   Trick riding. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a
bicycle on the public streets, sidewalks, roadways or bike paths, or on any
public way to engage in any kind of trick or unsafe riding.



   (L)   Prohibited areas for bicycle. Bicycles are prohibited to be
operated in any area where appropriate signs are posted.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1508)  (Ord. 91-55, passed 8-5-1991; Ord. 2016-11,
passed 2-16-2016)  Penalty, see § 75.99



Cross-reference:



   Bicycle operation not on certain streets, but on sidewalks, see Ch. 77,
Sch. I



§ 75.06  PARKING BICYCLES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park any bicycle along buildings in
such a manner as to interfere with pedestrians, or along roadways where they
may interfere with traffic, or with persons getting into or out of motor
vehicles. No person other than the owner or operator shall move, or in any
manner interfere with, any bicycle properly parked, nor shall any person
interfere or in any manner hinder any person from properly parking a bicycle,
except that members of the Police Department and Fire Department may move, or
in property cases, prevent the parking of the bicycle when in the judgment of
the police officer or firefighter, his or her action is necessary in order to
properly safeguard persons or property.



   (B)   The Chief of Police through the City Engineer will cause
bicycle parking racks to be installed at places to be determined by him or
her within the central business district herein before described. No bicycle
shall be parked within 100 feet of such bicycle parking racks except in said
racks. No person shall sit, lean or climb upon any bicycle parked in any
parking rack.



   (C)   Bicycles may be secured by the operator in such a manner by
lock, chain, cable or other means to prevent theft of the bicycle when parked
or left unattended.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1509)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.07  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   The parent of any child or the guardian of any ward shall not authorize
or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter, and any parent or guardian authorizing or knowingly permitting
such violation shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished by imposition of penalties provided for by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1510)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.08  INSPECTION.



   Any member of the Police Department is authorized to inspect any
bicycle, at any reasonable time, for the purpose of verifying the presence
and validity of the serial number, and for the purpose of determining the
mechanical condition of the bicycle, or the ownership of said bicycle.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1511)  (Ord. 2007-44, passed 11-19-2007)  Penalty, see
§ 75.99



§ 75.09  REMOVAL OF MANUFACTURER’S SERIAL NUMBER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, willfully or maliciously, to
remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the manufacturer’s serial number of any
bicycle.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1512)  (Ord. 2007-44, passed 11-19-2007)  Penalty, see
§ 75.99



§ 75.10  EFFECT OF REMOVAL OF SERIAL NUMBER.



   No person shall buy, sell, receive, dispose of or cancel any bicycle or
bicycle equipment from which the manufacturer’s name plate, serial number
or other distinguishing mark has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or
destroyed.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1513)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.11  USE OF BICYCLE WITHOUT CONSENT OF OWNER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any bicycle
within the city without the consent of the owner.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1514)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.12  SALE OF ABANDONED BICYCLES.



   All abandoned bicycles and unidentified bicycles coming into the
possession of the Police Department shall be held of a reasonable time and
then sold at public auction, under the direction of the Chief of Police, in
accordance with state law.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1515)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.13  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and
shall have the authority to enforce the bicycle safety regulations of this
chapter as set forth in said code or hereafter amended by the issuance of
written warning notices.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1516)  (Ord. 2016-11, passed 2-11-2016)  Penalty, see
§ 75.99



§ 75.99  PENALTY.



   Unless otherwise specified herein, any and all persons convicted of a
violation of any provision of this chapter may be punished by a fine of not
less than $20, nor more than $750, for each such offense. The Police
Department may notify the parents or legal guardian of any minor who receives
a warning or charge of a violation of any provision of this chapter. In
addition, any cost of collection of fines or other amounts due to the city
under this section may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1517)



(Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003; Ord. 2016-54, passed 10-3-2016)



CHAPTER 76:  MOTOR VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY FEE



Section



   76.01   Definitions



   76.02   Use of motor vehicles for unlawful purposes



   76.03   Impoundment



   76.04   Notification and administrative hearing



   76.05   Lienholder requirements



   76.06   Disposition of unclaimed vehicles



§ 76.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING. an administrative hearing conducted by the city
pursuant to the procedures provided in Chapter 11 of this code, as modified
by this Chapter 76.



   BUSINESS DAY. Any day in which the Office of the City Manager is open
to the public for a minimum of seven hours.



   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled,
including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and
motor scooters.



   OWNER OF RECORD. The record titleholder(s) or lessee of the vehicle.



   TOWING AGENT. The towing company designated and authorized by the Chief
of Police to tow and store motor vehicles on behalf of the Police Department.



(Ord. 2014-17, passed 5-19-2014)



§ 76.02  USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSES.



   (A)   Conduct prohibited. A motor vehicle used in committing any of
the offenses described in division (B) below may be subject to impoundment by
the city, and the owner of record of said vehicle, or agents of that owner,
shall be liable to the city for an administrative penalty fee as prescribed
herein, plus any applicable towing and storage fees which shall be paid to
the towing agent, prior to the vehicle being released to the owner.



   (B)   Impound offenses and administrative penalty fee. Whenever a
police officer has reason to believe that a motor vehicle has been used in
the commission of any of the below listed offenses, the vehicle may be
subject to impoundment and an administrative penalty fee in the amount of
$500, plus payment to the towing agent of any applicable towing and storage
fees:



      (1)   Driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drug
or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, as
provided in 625 ILCS 5/11-501(a); or



      (2)   Driving while driver’s license, permit or privilege to
operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked as provided in 625 ILCS
5/6-303, as a result of a conviction for 625 ILCS 5/11-501(a) or DUI
statutory summary suspension pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-501.1.



   (C)   Waiver of administrative penalty fee. The administrative
penalty fee shall be waived by the city upon verifiable proof that the
vehicle was stolen at the time of the impound, and the theft was reported to
appropriate police authorities as evidenced by a police report, within 24
hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been
discovered.



(Ord. 2014-17, passed 5-19-2014)



§ 76.03  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   Tow. Whenever a police officer has reason to believe that a
vehicle is subject to impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle by the towing agent to a
storage facility as approved by the Chief of Police.



   (B)   Notice of impoundment. At the time the vehicle is impounded,
the police officer shall provide the written notice of impoundment as
provided in § 76.04(A) to any person who is found in control of the vehicle
at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person. In addition,
written notice shall be provided to the owner of record of the vehicle in
accordance with § 76.04(A).



   (C)   Payment or bonding of fees. Any motor vehicle impounded
pursuant to this chapter shall remain impounded until:



      (1)   An administrative penalty fee of $500 and all applicable
towing and storage fees are paid to the towing agent; or



      (2)   An administrative penalty fee of $500, or a bond (in a
form prepared by or acceptable to the Chief of Police) in the amount of the
administrative penalty fee, is posted with the city pending completion of an
administrative hearing, and all applicable towing and storage fees are paid
to the towing agent.



   (D)   Vehicle release. Upon the payment of all fees or posting of a
bond for such fees pursuant to division (C) above, the vehicle shall be
released to the owner of record or any person duly authorized by the owner to
accept possession of the motor vehicle, provided there is no other legal
action or investigation pending that requires continued impoundment of the
vehicle pursuant to applicable law.



   (E)   Monies. All monies posted pursuant to this section shall be in
the form of cash, money order or cashier’s check only, and be held by the
city until the Administrative Hearing Officer issues a decision, or, if there
is a judicial review, until the court issues its decision. Monies collected
shall be placed into the Police Department Alcohol Asset Forfeiture Fund.



(Ord. 2014-17, passed 5-19-2014)



§ 76.04  NOTIFICATION AND ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.



   (A)   Notice of impoundment. Within five business days after a
vehicle is impounded, the city shall notify the owner of the vehicle, by
personal service or by certified mail, of the impoundment and the owner’s
right to request an administrative hearing. The notice of impoundment shall
be in the form of the “Notice of Administrative Vehicle Impound” and
“Rights Pursuant to Notice of Administrative Vehicle Impound” prepared by
the Police Department, as amended from time to time, and shall include the
following information:



      (1)   The description of the vehicle, including year, make,
model, registration and vehicle identification number (VIN);



      (2)   The present location of the motor vehicle;



      (3)   The reason(s) for impoundment of the vehicle;



      (4)   The opportunity for the owner to submit a hearing
request to contest the impoundment, and the consequences of the failure to
submit a hearing request; and



      (5)   The opportunity for the owner to reclaim the vehicle,
and the consequences of the failure to reclaim the vehicle.



   (B)   Service. In addition to personal service on the operator of
the vehicle, if any, at the time of impoundment, the notice of impoundment
shall be served personally or by certified mail to the address of the vehicle
owner, and lienholder, if any, as registered with the Secretary of State. The
date the notice is deposited in the United States mail or personally
delivered to the owner’s address shall be deemed the date of service.



   (C)   Hearing requests. The owner of record or lessee may contest
the impoundment by filing a timely written request for an administrative
hearing to challenge whether a violation of this chapter has occurred. Such
request shall be filed no later than ten business days after service of the
notice of impoundment.



   (D)   Hearing dates. If a hearing is requested, an administrative
hearing date shall be assigned that follows the city’s scheduled
administrative hearing calendar, which hearing shall be convened no earlier
than the next available administrative hearing date and no later than 45 days
after the date of the city’s receipt of the hearing request.



   (E)   Hearing location notification. The vehicle owner or lessee
requesting the hearing, and the lienholder, if any, shall be notified by
first class mail of the date, time and location of the scheduled
administrative hearing. The owner or lessee and interested parties shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing, and the parties
may be represented by counsel, at their expense. The hearing shall follow the
procedures for administrative hearings as described in Chapter 11 of this
code, provided that where any conflict exists between Chapter 11 of this code
and the provisions of this Chapter 76 as to the administrative hearing
concerning the impoundment of the vehicle, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.



   (F)   Nonresidents. If the owner of record lives outside Lake
County, Illinois, the owner may file a request for a non-appearance hearing
as allowed for under Chapter 11 of this code.



   (G)   Finding for city. If, after the administrative hearing, the
hearing officer determines by a preponderance of evidence that the vehicle
was used in connection with prohibited conduct as provided in this chapter,
the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the
vehicle civilly liable to the city for the administrative penalty fee and any
towing and storage fees.



   (H)   Debts owing. A penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter shall
constitute a debt due and owing to the city.



   (I)   Finding for vehicle owner. If, after the hearing, the
Administrative Hearing Officer does not determine by a preponderance of
evidence that the vehicle was used in connection with prohibited conduct as
provided in this chapter, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding
for the owner and for return of the vehicle and any impoundment penalty fee,
bond or towing and storage fees previously paid.



   (J)   Hearing request not filed. If a request for an administrative
hearing is not received by the City within the period provided in §
76.03(C), the owner shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to a
hearing and the hearing officer will enter a default order in favor of the
city in the amount of the administrative penalty fee.



(Ord. 2014-17, passed 5-19-2014)



§ 76.05  LIENHOLDER REQUIREMENTS.



   A lienholder asserting its right to possession of an impounded vehicle
pursuant to its conditional sales agreement with a lessee may obtain
possession of such vehicle by paying the applicable administrative penalty
fee and towing and storage fees. The lienholder must submit a photocopy of
the conditional sales agreement and title certificate, an affidavit stating
that the purchaser is in default of the agreement, and an indemnification
certificate executed by an authorized agent of the lienholder, all on forms
prepared by or acceptable to the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 2014-17, passed 5-19-2014)



§ 76.06  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.



   Any impounded vehicle that is not claimed within 35 days after the
administrative hearing officer issues a written decision, or for which the
penalty fee and applicable towing and storage fees have not been paid, or
where no bond has been posted, and no judicial review is pending; said
vehicle shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the
disposition of abandoned vehicles.



(Ord. 2014-17, passed 5-19-2014)



CHAPTER 77:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Bicycle operation



   II.   Speed limits



   III.   Stop signs



   IV.   Yield right-of-way



   V.   One-way streets and alleys



   VI.   No through truck route



   VII.   No right turn on red



   VIII.   Signalized intersections



   IX.   School zones as posted



   X.   No U-turns



   XI.   No turns



SCHEDULE I.  BICYCLE OPERATION.



   (A)   No bicycle shall be operated upon the streets designated
below, but shall be ridden upon the sidewalks where available, unless the
operator of such bicycle is a duly licensed motor vehicle operator and has a
valid motor vehicle operator’s license in his or her possession.



   (B)   Such streets include:



      (1)   Waukegan Road;



      (2)   Route 41;



      (3)   Green Bay Road;



      (4)   Western Avenue from Westleigh Road north to business
district; Franklin to Thomas on east side;



      (5)   Sheridan Road;



      (6)   Deerpath from Waukegan Road east to Oakwood Avenue;



      (7)   Deerpath east from Western Avenue to Lake Road;



      (8)   Westleigh Road from Route 41 east to Sheridan Road;



      (9)   McKinley Road;



      (10)   Old Elm Road from Route 41 to east limits; and



      (11)   Route 60.



(Prior Code, § 40-1-1508(4)(d))



SCHEDULE II.  SPEED LIMITS.



 

Street
 

Miles per Hour

 

Ord.

 

Date Passed





Ahwahnee Road
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Alden Lane
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



All municipal lots
 

15

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Beverly Place
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Buena Road
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Burr Oak Road
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Clover Avenue
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Conway Road
 

25 from Telegraph Road to the western end

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Conway Farms Road
 

25

 

05-05

 

3-17-2005



Deerpath
 

35 from Waukegan Road (Ill. Rt. 43) to Green Bay Road

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




25 from Green Bay Road to easterly terminus

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Everett Road
 

35

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Forest Park Beach parking lot/drive
 

15

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Franklin Place
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Gage Lane
 

30

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Grove Court
 

25 its entire length to White Oak Road

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Illinois Road
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Kennedy Road (Illinois Route 60)
 

45

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Laurel Avenue
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Longwood Drive
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Mayflower Road
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



McKinley Road (north)
 

35 from Woodland Road to north city limits

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




30 from Illinois Road to Woodland Road

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



McKinley Road (south)
 

35 from Old Elm Road to Westleigh Road

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Morningside Drive
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Onwentsia Road
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Park Avenue
 

20

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ridge Road
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ringwood Road North
 

25 from Sheridan Road to Overlook Drive

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Rosemary Road
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Sheridan Road
 

35 from south city limits to Westleigh Road

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




30 from Westleigh Road to north city limits

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Skokie Highway (Illinois Route 41)
 

50 from south city limits for 3/10 miles (Old Elm Road)

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




55 from 3/10 miles to 1-1/10 miles (Westleigh Road)

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




45 from 1-1/10 miles to 2-8/10 miles (Deerpath)

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




55 from 2-8/10 miles to 3-8/10 miles (north city limits)

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Summit Avenue
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Summit Place
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Thomas Place
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Valley Road
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Washington Circle
 

25

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Washington Road
 

25 from Washington Circle to Illinois Road

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Waukegan Road
 

45 from southern city limits to 1/4 mile south of Everett Road

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




35 from 1/4 mile south of Everett Road to Conway Road

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




45 from Conway Road to northern city limits

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Western Avenue
 

25 from Illinois Road to Vine Avenue

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




25 between Illinois Road and Alden Lane

 

2010-55

 

12-6-2010




35 from Vine Avenue to Westleigh Road

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westleigh Road
 

30 from Sheridan Road to eastern terminus

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




30 from Route 41 to Route 43

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




35 from Sheridan Road to Route 41

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



White Oak Road
 

25 from Old Mill Road to Telegraph Road

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Wild Rose Lane
 

25 from Woodhill Lane to White Oak Road

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Willow Avenue
 

20

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Woodhill Lane
 

25 from Wild Rose Lane to Lawrence Avenue

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Woodland Road
 

25 from Green Bay Road to Western Avenue

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004





 



SCHEDULE III.  STOP SIGNS.



 

Street
 
Stop Sign
 

Ord.

 

Date Passed





Ahwahnee Lane
 
Eastbound at Ahwahnee Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ahwahnee Road
 
Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Alden Lane
 
Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Tara Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Tara Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Alexis Court
 
Northbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Alley south of Deerpath
 
Eastbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Alley east of McKinley Road
 
Masonic Temple
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Alley north of Ryan Place
 
Eastbound at Washington Circle
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Alley north of Thomas Place
 
Westbound at Western Avenue (extended)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Alley north of 1301 N. Western Avenue
 
Westbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Alley north of Westminster
 
Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Arbor Lane
 
Westbound at Oak Knoll Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Telegraph Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Arcady Drive
 
Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Fairway Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Fairway Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ash Lawn Drive
 
Eastbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ashley Road
 
Eastbound at Havenwood Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Havenwood Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Aspen Drive
 
Northbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Atteridge Road
 
Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Woodland Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Bank Lane
 
Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Illinois Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Illinois Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Market Square
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Vine Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Wisconsin Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Barberry Lane
 
Eastbound at Lake Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Barnswallow Road
 
Westbound at Buena Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Valley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Basswood Road
 
Southbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Beverly Place
 
Northbound at Grandview Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Grandview Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Longwood Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Longwood Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Timber Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Timber Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Big Oaks Court
 
Eastbound at Oak Knoll Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Birch Court
 
Eastbound at Basswood Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Blackthorn Lane
 
Southbound at Basswood Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Bluffs Edge Drive
 
Southbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Bowling Green Drive
 
Eastbound at Estate Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Estate Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Oak Knoll Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Breckenridge Avenue
 
Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Breckenridge Court
 
Northbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Briar Lane
 
Eastbound at Beverly Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Beverly Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Bridgeview
 
Westbound at Sir William Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Telegraph Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Bridle Lane
 
Westbound at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Broadsmore Drive
 
Eastbound at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Buena Road
 
Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Quail Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Quail Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Sandpiper Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Sandpiper Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Butler Drive
 
Northbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Castlegate
 
Westbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Cherokee Road
 
Eastbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Linden Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Timber Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Timber Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Cherry Avenue
 
Westbound at Washington Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Chiltern Drive
 
Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Mellody Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Christina Lane
 
Southbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Church Road
 
Southbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Circle Lane
 
Northbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Clover Avenue
 
Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



College

 
 
Eastbound at Sheridan Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Washington Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Washington Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Conway Farm Drive
 
Southbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Kennedy Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Saunders Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Saunders Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Tallgrass Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Tallgrass Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Conway Road
 
Eastbound at Oak Knoll Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Oak Knoll Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



County Place
 
Southbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Coventry Drive
 
Westbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Crabtree Lane
 
Westbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Deerpath
 
Eastbound at Lake Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Oakwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Oakwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Deerpath Square
 
Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



DeFontaine Lane
 
Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Franz Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Devonshire Lane
 
Northbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Wedgewood Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Douglas Drive
 
Southbound at McCormick Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Edgecote Lane
 
Westbound at Mellody Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Edgewood Road
 
Southbound at Woodland Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Efher Avenue
 
Eastbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Elm Tree Road
 
Northbound at Spruce Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Woodland Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Woodland Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Estate Lane
 
Northbound at Bowling Green Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Bowling Green Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Estate Lane East
 
Westbound at Estate Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Oak Knoll Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Oak Knoll Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Estes Avenue
 
Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Everett Road
 
Westbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Everett School Road
 
Eastbound at Telegraph Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Evergreen Drive
 
Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Jennifer Court
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Jennifer Court
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Exeter Place
 
Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Inverlieth Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Fairview Avenue
 
Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Fairway Drive
 
Northbound at Arcady Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Arcady Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Lawrence Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Falls Circle
 
Westbound at Valley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Farnham Lane
 
Eastbound at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Field Court
 
Southbound at Route 60
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Field Drive
 
Westbound (facing Bears Private Drive) at Chicago Bears Private Drive (1000
North Field Drive)
 

2010-33

 

6-7-2010



Eastbound at Field Court
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Route 60
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Fiore Drive
 
Northbound at Lawrence Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Forest Avenue
 
Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Forest Hill Road
 
Southbound at Cherokee Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Greenwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Linden Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Linden Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Forest Park Beach Drive
 
Westbound at Lake Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Foster Place
 
Eastbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Fox Trail Court
 
Southbound at Lakewood Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Franklin Place
 
Eastbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Franz Drive
 
Westbound at DeFontaine Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Mar-Lane Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Gage Lane
 
Eastbound at Skokie Highway
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Gavin Court
 
Eastbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Glenwood Road
 
Eastbound at Beverly Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Golf Lane
 
Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Granby Road
 
Westbound at McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Grandview Lane
 
Eastbound at Beverly Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Beverly Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Cherokee Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Cherokee Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Linden Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Linden Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Longwood Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Longwood Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Green Bay Road
 
Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Green Briar
 
Westbound at Maywood
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Greenvale Road
 
Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Greenview Place
 
Westbound at Maywood Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Greenwood Avenue
 
Eastbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Timber Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Harlan Court
 
Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Harlan Lane
 
Southbound at Christina Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Hastings Road
 
Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Havenwood Lane
 
Northbound at Ashley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Ashley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound al Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Hawthorne Place
 
Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Elm Tree Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Heather Lane
 
Eastbound at Illinois Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Heritage Court
 
Southbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Heron Road
 
Westbound at Buena Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Highland Avenue
 
Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Highview Terrace
 
Eastbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Sign at exit from South Park
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Hilldale Place
 
Eastbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Holland Court
 
Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Honeysuckle Road
 
Westbound at Basswood Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Illinois Road
 
Eastbound at Bank Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Bank Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at College Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Mayflower Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Mayflower Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Oakwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Oakwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Washington Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Washington Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Inverlieth Road
 
Eastbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Inverlieth Terrace
 
Westbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ivy Court
 
Eastbound at Maywood Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



June Terrace
 
Northbound at Washington Circle
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Kathryn Lane
 
Northbound at Jennifer Court
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Keith Lane
 
Northbound at Havenwood Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Kimberly Lane
 
Eastbound at Harlan Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Harlan Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Kimmer Court
 
Northbound at Lawrence Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



King Muir Road
 
Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Knollwood Road
 
Northbound exit at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound exit at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Kurtis Lane
 
Eastbound at Kathryn Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Lake Road
 
Northbound at Cemetery Gate
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at entrance to municipal boat launching area
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Spring Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Spring Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Lakewood Drive
 
Southbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Oak Knoll Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Laurel Avenue
 
Eastbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Lawrence Avenue
 
Westbound at Oak Knoll Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Telegraph Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Sir William Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Sir William Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Leland Court
 
Southbound at Conway Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Lexington Drive
 
Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Linden Avenue
 
Eastbound at Beverly Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Littlefield Court
 
Southbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Longmeadow Lane
 
Eastbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Longwood Drive
 
Eastbound at Beverly Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Beverly Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Mallard Lane
 
Eastbound at Valley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Maplewood Road
 
Eastbound at Mayflower Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Mar-Lane Drive
 
Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Mayflower Road
 
Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Maywood Road
 
Northbound at Washington Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



McCormick Drive
 
Westbound at McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Turicum Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Turicum Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



McKinley Road
 
Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Illinois Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Meadow Lane
 
Northbound at Woodland Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Mellody Road
 
Westbound at Savanna Court/Rue Foret
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Melody Road
 
Eastbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Merritt Lane
 
Northbound at Arbor Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Mills Court
 
Westbound at McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Minthaven Road
 
Southbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Morningside Drive
 
Eastbound at Beverly Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Beverly Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Grandview Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Mount Vernon Avenue
 
Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Newport Court
 
Westbound at Conway Farms Drive
 

06-52

 

9-5-2006



Noble Avenue
 
Eastbound at Edgewood Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northcliffe Way
 
Westbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northcroft Park, exit from
 
Westbound exit at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



North Gate
 
Eastbound at Bank Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Forest Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northmoor Road
 
Westbound at Maywood Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Oakdale Avenue
 
Eastbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Oak Knoll Drive
 
Northbound at Conway Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Conway Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Estate Lane East
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Estate Lane East
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Oakwood Avenue
 
Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Illinois Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Illinois Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Vine Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Woodland Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Woodland Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Old Barn Lane
 
Southbound at Bowling Green
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Old Bridge Road
 
Westbound at Conway Farms Road
 

06-52

 

9-5-2006



Old Colony Road
 
Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Old Elm Road
 
Eastbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Old Mill Road
 
Eastbound at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Telegraph Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Telegraph Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Onwentsia Road
 
Eastbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Poplar Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Poplar Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Overlook Drive
 
Westbound at Ringwood Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Park Drive in Forest Park
 
Westbound at Lake Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Park Avenue
 
Westbound at McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Parliament Court
 
Eastbound at Wedgewood Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Pembroke Drive
 
Eastbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Pine Croft Lane
 
Westbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Pine Lane
 
Westbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Polo Drive
 
Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Poplar Road
 
Westbound at Basswood Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Onwentsia Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Prairie Avenue
 
Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Public Safety Building, entrance drive to
 
Southbound rear parking lot
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Public Safety Building, exit drive from
 
Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Quail Drive
 
Eastbound at Buena Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Buena Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ravine Park Drive
 
Eastbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Willow Street
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Red Fox Lane
 
Northbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ridge Lane
 
Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ridge Road
 
Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Kennedy Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Kennedy Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Kimberly Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Kimberly Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Mellody Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ringwood Road (north)
 
Westbound at Sheridan Road (two signs)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ringwood Road (south)
 
Westbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Rockefeller Road
 
Northbound at McCormick Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at McCormick Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Rosemary Road
 
Westbound at Illinois Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Mayflower Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Washington Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Washington Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Rose Terrace
 
Westbound at McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Rue Foret
 
Northbound at Mellody Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ryan Place
 
Eastbound at Washington Circle
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Washington Circle
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Washington Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Saddle Run
 
Westbound at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Sandpiper Lane
 
Eastbound at Buena Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Buena Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Valley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Valley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Saunders Road
 
Eastbound at Conway Farms Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Savanna Court
 
Southbound at Mellody Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Scott Street
 
Westbound at McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Shawford Way
 
Eastbound at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Sheridan Road
 
Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westminster
 

05-39

 

11-17-2005



Southbound at Westminster
 

05-39

 

11-17-2005



Sir William Lane
 
Southbound at Lawrence Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



South Gate
 
Eastbound at Bank Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Forest Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Spring Lane
 
Eastbound at Lake Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Lake Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Mayflower Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Spruce Avenue
 
Westbound at Edgewood Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Lake Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Sheridan Road (two signs)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Stable Lane
 
Northbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Westleigh Road
 

06-52

 

9-5-2006



Stone Gate Road
 
Northbound at Illinois Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Stone Gate Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Stoneleigh Court
 
Eastbound at Wedgewood Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Wedgewood Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Stratford Court
 
Eastbound at Wedgewood Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Suffolk Lane
 
Northbound at Kennedy Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Kennedy Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Summerfield Drive
 
Eastbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Summit Avenue
 
Southbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Woodland Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Summit Place
 
At Summit Avenue
 

2011-17

 

7-18-2011



Westbound at Woodland Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Sunset Place
 
Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Sussex Lane
 
Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Tallgrass Lane
 
Westbound at Conway Farms Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Tanglewood Court
 
Southbound at Conway Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Tara Lane
 
Southbound at Alden Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Telegraph Road
 
Northbound at Conway Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Thomas Place
 
Eastbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Timber Lane
 
Eastbound at Beverly Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Beverly Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Cherokee Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Cherokee Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Greenwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Greenwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Linden Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Linden Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Turicum Drive
 
Northbound at McCormick Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at McCormick Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Valley Road
 
Southbound at Heron Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Quail Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Sandpiper Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Sandpiper Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Vine Avenue
 
Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Oakwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Oakwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Walden Lane
 
Eastbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Walden Road
 
Westbound at Ringwood Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Wallace Road
 
Southbound at Kennedy Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Suffolk Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Walnut Road
 
Westbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Washington Circle
 
Northbound at Illinois Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Washington Road
 
Northbound at College Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at College Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Illinois Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Illinois Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Rosemary Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Rosemary Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Walnut Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Walnut Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Waveland Road
 
Eastbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Wedgewood Court
 
Southbound at Wedgewood Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Wedgewood Drive
 
Eastbound at Oak Knoll Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Western Avenue
 
Northbound at Alden Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Alden Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Western Avenue (cont’d)
 
Northbound at Woodland Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Woodland Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westleigh Road
 
Westbound at McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Ridge Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westminster
 
Eastbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Lake Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Oakwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Oakwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound al Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westmoreland Road
 
Southbound at Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



White Oak Drive
 
Southbound at Old Mill Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Telegraph Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Wild Rose Lane
 
Eastbound at White Oak Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Wildwood Road
 
Westbound at Breckenridge Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Ryan Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Wilshire Road
 
Westbound at Breckenridge Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Mount Vernon Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Wilson Drive
 
Northbound at Bowling Green Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Wimbledon Court
 
Eastbound at Wedgewood Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Wind Haven Court
 
Westbound at Sir William Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Windridge Drive
 
Northbound at Arbor Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Arbor Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Winston Road
 
Northbound at Green Briar Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Greenview Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Greenview Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Highview Terrace
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Northmoor Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Northmoor Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Winwood Drive
 
Eastbound at Waukegan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Wisconsin Avenue
 
Westbound at McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Oakwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Woodbine Lane
 
Eastbound at Lake Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Woodbine Place
 
Southbound at Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Wooded Lane
 
Northbound at Green Briar Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Greenview Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Greenview Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Highview Terrace
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northbound at Northmoor Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound at Northmoor Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Woodhill Lane
 
Northbound at Lawrence Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Woodland Road
 
Westbound at Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Sheridan Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Summit Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Summit Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Eastbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westbound at Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Woodlawn Avenue
 
Westbound at Washington Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Woodstream Court
 
Southbound at Mount Vernon Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004





 



SCHEDULE IV.  YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY.



 

Street
 
At
 
Direction
 

Ord.

 

Date Passed





On Barberry Lane
 
at Elm Tree Road
 
Westbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Castlegate Court
 
at Burton Drive
 
Eastbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Chiltern Drive
 
at Mellody Road
 
Westbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Edgecote Drive
 
at Mellody Road
 
Northbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Evergreen Drive
 
At Jennifer Court
 
Southbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Hawthorne Place
 
intersection of “Y”
 
Southbound from east
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



at Westminster
 
Westbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Linden Avenue
 
at Buena Road
 
Eastbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



at Buena Road
 
Westbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



at Valley Road
 
Eastbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Louis Avenue
 
at Buena Road
 
Eastbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



at Buena Road
 
Westbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



at Valley Road
 
Eastbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Marion Avenue
 
at Buena Road
 
Eastbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



at Buena Road
 
Westbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



at Valley Road
 
Eastbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Meadow Lane
 
at Elm Tree Road
 
Southbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Niles Avenue
 
at Buena Road
 
Eastbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



at Buena Road
 
Westbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



at Valley Road
 
Eastbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On North Avenue
 
at Buena Road
 
Westbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



at Buena Road
 
Eastbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



at Buena Road
 
Eastbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On private alley (east end)
 
at Carroll Road
 
Northbound
 

05-36

 

10-20-2005



On private alley (northwest end)
 
at Carroll Road
 
Northbound
 

05-36

 

10-20-2005



On private alley (southeast end)
 
at Carroll Road
 
Southbound
 

05-36

 

10-20-2005



On private alley (west end)
 
at Symphony Street
 
Southbound
 

05-36

 

10-20-2005



On Ringwood Road
 
at Mayflower Road
 
Westbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Stone Avenue
 
at Buena Road
 
Eastbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



at Buena Road
 
Westbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



at Valley Road
 
Eastbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Summit Place
 
at Oakwood Avenue
 
Southbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Tallgrass Lane
 
at Conway Farms Drive
 
Westbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Walnut Road
 
at Deerpath
 
Southbound
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004





 



SCHEDULE V.  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



 

Street/Alley
 
Description
 

Ord.

 

Date Passed





Armour Circle
 
Along Armour Circle and to south side of island
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northerly along King Muir Road to east side of island
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southerly along King Muir Road to west side of island
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Bank Lane
 
Northerly from Deerpath to South Gate
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northerly from North Gate to Wisconsin
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Castlegate Court
 
Westerly from Burton Drive to Waukegan Road (north side of island)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Easterly from Waukegan Road to Burton Drive (South side of island)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Deerpath Circle
 
Northerly from Deerpath to King Muir Road (east side of island)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southerly from King Muir Road to Deerpath (west side of island)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Deerpath Square
 
Southerly from Deerpath to Kennington Terrace (west side of island)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northerly from Kennington Terrace to Deerpath (east side of island)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Market Square
 
Easterly from Bank Lane to Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southerly from North Gate to South Gate (west end of island)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westerly from Western Avenue to Bank Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



North Gate
 
Easterly from Forest Avenue to Bank Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Skokie Highway (U.S. Route 41), exit ramps
 
Northerly from Skokie Highway to Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Northerly from Skokie Highway to Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southerly from Skokie Highway to Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



South Gate
 
Westerly from Bank Lane to Forest Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Walden Lane
 
Easterly from the west side of the Walden Lane west bridge to Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004





 



SCHEDULE VI.  NO THROUGH TRUCK ROUTE.



 

Street
 
Restricted Area
 

Ord.

 

Date Passed





Conway Road
 
Its entire length in the city
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Everett Road
 
Its entire length in the city
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Gage Lane
 
Its entire length in the city
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Green Bay Road
 
Its entire length in the city
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Oakwood Avenue
 
Woodland Road to Wisconsin Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Old Elm Road
 
Its entire length in the city
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ridge Road
 
Its entire length in the city
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Telegraph Road
 
Its entire length in the city
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Woodland Road
 
Western Avenue to Oakwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004





 



SCHEDULE VII.  NO RIGHT TURN ON RED.



 

Restricted Area
 

Ord.

 

Date Passed



On Academy Woods Drive proceeding west at its intersection with Kennedy Road
(Route 60)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Deerpath proceeding east or west, at its intersection with Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Green Bay Road proceeding north or south, at its intersection with Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On McKinley Road proceeding north, at its intersection with Woodland Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On McKinley Road proceeding south, at Woodland Road, except when green arrow
is displayed
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



On Waukegan Road (Route 43) proceeding north, at its intersection with
Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




 



SCHEDULE VIII.  SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS.



 

Intersection
 

Ord.

 

Date Passed





Gloucester Crossing and Waukegan Road (Route 43)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Green Bay Road and Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Illinois Road and Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Kennedy Road (Route 60) at Field Court
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Kennedy Road (Route 60) at Academy
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Kennedy Road and Field Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



McKinley Road and Woodland Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Old Elm at Sheridan (South McKinley)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Skokie Highway (Route 41) and Kennedy Road (Route 60)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Skokie Highway (Route 41) and Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Skokie Highway (Route 41) and Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Waukegan Road (Route 43) at Westmoreland
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Waukegan Road (Route 43) and Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Waukegan Road (Route 43) and Everett Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Waukegan Road (Route 43) and Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Waukegan Road (Route 43) and Kennedy Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westleigh at Sheridan
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westleigh Road and Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Woodland Road and Western Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004





 



SCHEDULE IX.  SCHOOL ZONES AS POSTED.



 

School
 

School Zone

 

Ord.

 

Date Passed





Cherokee School
 
Forest Hill
 
Northbound
 
100 ft. north of the center of Greenwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Forest Hill
 
Southbound
 
100 ft. north of the center of Greenwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Forest Hill
 
Northbound
 
100 ft. south of the center of Cherokee Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Forest Hill
 
Southbound
 
100 ft. north of the center of Cherokee Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Green Bay Road
 
Northbound
 
350 ft. south of the center of Cherokee Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Green Bay Road
 
Southbound
 
250 ft. north of the center of Cherokee Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Timber Lane
 
Northbound
 
100 ft. south of the north curb of Greenwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Timber Lane
 
Southbound
 
100 ft. north of the north curb of Cherokee Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Deerpath School
 
Deerpath
 
Eastbound
 
300 ft. west of the east curb of the exit drive by Golf Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Deerpath
 
Westbound
 
200 ft. east of the east curb of the exit drive by Golf Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Everett School
 
Telegraph Road
 
Northbound
 
625 ft. south of the center of Lawrence Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Telegraph Road
 
Southbound
 
225 ft. north of the center of Lawrence Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Lake Forest Country Day School
 
Green Bay Road
 
Northbound
 
200 ft. south of traffic signal on the east side of the road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



(Distance between the traffic signals is 50 ft.; this traffic signal is for
the pedestrian crossing)
 
Southbound
 
200 ft. north of traffic signal on the west side of the road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Lake Forest High School
 
McKinley Road
 
Northbound
 
200 ft. south of Noble Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



McKinley Road
 
Southbound
 
200 ft. north of the north school driveway
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



School of St. Mary
 
Illinois Road
 
Eastbound
 
Green Bay Road to Oakwood Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Illinois Road
 
Westbound
 
Oakwood Avenue to Green Bay Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Oakwood Avenue
 
Northbound
 
Vine Avenue to Illinois Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Oakwood Avenue
 
Southbound
 
Illinois Avenue to Vine Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Sheridan School
 
Sheridan Road
 
Northbound
 
190 ft. south of the center of the exit drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Sheridan Road
 
 
382 ft. south of the center of the entrance drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Sheridan Road
 
Southbound
 
650 ft. north of the center of the entrance drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



St. Patrick’s School
 
Everett Road
 
Eastbound
 
700 ft. east of Route 43
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Everett Road
 
Westbound
 
150 ft. west of Evergreen Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004





 



SCHEDULE X.  NO U-TURNS.



 

Street
 
Restricted Area
 

Ord.

 

Date Passed



Deerpath
 
Green Bay Road to McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Route 60 (Kennedy Road)
 
Throughout its entire length in Lake Forest
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Western Avenue
 
Illinois Road to Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westminster
 
Green Bay Road to McKinley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




 



SCHEDULE XI.  NO TURNS.



 

Street
 
Direction
 

Ord.

 

Date Passed



Skokie Highway (U.S. Route 41)
 
Northbound at Old Elm Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Kennedy Road (State Route 60)
 
Eastbound at Ridge Road between 7:00 and 9:00 a.m.
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




 



CHAPTER 78:  PARKING AND LOADING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Restricted parking areas



   II.   Curb loading zones



   III.   Reserved



   IV.   Bus stops



   V.   Parking east of Sheridan Road



   VI.   On-street parking prohibited



   VII.   No parking; tow-away zone



   VIII.   City parking lots



   IX.   City parking lot time limits



   X.   Parking time limits (15 minutes)



   XI.   Parking time limits (90 minute)



   XII.   Parking time limits (two hour)



   XIII.   No parking during school hours



   XIV.   No parking between 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.



SCHEDULE I.  RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS.



 

Area
 
Restrictions
 

Ord.

 

Date Passed



Forest Park Beach parking lot
 
The parking area adjoining the Forest Park Beach
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Forest Park municipal parking lots and Forest Park Drive
 
The parking area located at the south turn of Forest Park Drive, and that
parking area located along the entire length of Forest Park Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




 



SCHEDULE II.  CURB LOADING ZONES.



 

Location
 
Description
 

Ord.

 

Date Passed



Crystal Point
 
On Franklin and on the west side of Western Avenue as designated
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Helanders, Inc.
 
Along the east side of Bank Lane between North Gate and Westminster as
designated
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Market Square Court
 
Along the east side of Bank Lane between Market Square Court and South Gate
as designated
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Plaza Shopping Center
 
Along the east side of Bank Lane between Vine Avenue and Illinois Road as
designated
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Walgreen Drug Store
 
Along the west side of Western Avenue just north of Deerpath as designated
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Western and Westminster
 
Along the north side of Westminster just west of Western Avenue as designated
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




 



SCHEDULE III.  RESERVED.



SCHEDULE IV.  BUS STOPS.



 

Direction
 
Location
 

Ord.

 

Date Passed



Northbound
 
North end of Chicago Northwestern Railroad Depot waiting room
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Southbound
 
Located in city’s Northshore Parking Lot on the intersection of E. Deerpath
and Western Ave. just over the train tracks
 

2016-29

 

5-2-2016




 



SCHEDULE V.  PARKING EAST OF SHERIDAN ROAD.



 

Location
 

Ord.

 

Date Passed





Ashley Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Barat Court
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Barberry Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Bluffs Edge Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Circle Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Crabtree Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Deerpath
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Douglas Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Elm Tree Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Havenwood Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Hawthorne Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Keith Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Kendler Court
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Illinois Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Lake Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Loch Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Maple Court
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Maplewood Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Mayflower Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



McCormick Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Meadow Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Overlook Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Pine Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ringwood Drive (north)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Ringwood Drive (south)
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Rockefeller Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Rosemary Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Spring Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Spruce Avenue
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Stone Gate Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Thorne Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Turicum Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Walden Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westleigh Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Westminster
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Woodbine Lane
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Woodbine Place
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Woodland Road
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004





 



SCHEDULE VI.  ON-STREET PARKING PROHIBITED.



 

Location
 

Days

 

Hours

 

Ord.

 

Date Passed



Atteridge Road (north side: westerly from Woodland Avenue extending
approximately 175 feet)
 

Monday through Friday

 

8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m.

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Woodland Road (north side: westerly from Oakwood Avenue to Green Bay Road)
 

Monday through Friday

 

3:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m.

 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




 



SCHEDULE VII.  NO PARKING; TOW-AWAY ZONE.



 

Area
 
Description
 

Ord.

 

Date Passed



Deerpath Road
 
Between McKinley and Lake Roads
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Forest Park Beach and boat ramp
 
Its entire length
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004



Lake Road
 
Between Westminster and the Forest Park Boat Ramp Drive
 

04-49

 

8-2-2004




 



SCHEDULE VIII.  CITY PARKING LOTS.



 


Lot No.

 

Location

 

Common Name

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed






2

 
East side of CNWRR

West side of McKinley Road

North side of Westminster
 
Westminster Lot
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



3

 
West side of Forest Avenue

Opposite Post Office
 
Forest Avenue Lot
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



5

 
East side of CNWRR

West side of McKinley Road

North side of Deerpath

South side of Westminster
 
Northwestern RR
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



6

 
East side of Everett Fire Station
 
Everett Fire Station
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



7

 
East side of McKinley Road

South side of Deerpath
 
Deerpath Lot
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



8

 
East side of CNWRR

West side of McKinley Road

South side of Deerpath
 
North Shore Lot
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



9

 
East side of Bank Lane

North side of first lot on northeastern corner of Illinois Road and Bank Lane
 
Bank Lane Lot
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



10

 
West side of Oakwood Avenue

North side of Deerpath
 
Oakwood Lot
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



11

 
East side of Oakwood Avenue

West side of Forest Avenue

North side of City Hall
 
City Hall Lot
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



12

 
East side of Oakwood Avenue

South side of Wisconsin Avenue
 
Quarta Lot
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



13

 
Either side of Telegraph Road from Everett Road south approximately 800 feet
 
Milwaukee Road Train Station Lot
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



15

 
Parking area adjoining the Forest Park Beach and driveway leading thereto
 
Forest Park Beach Lot
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



16

 
Parking area adjoining the Forest Park Ramp and the driveway leading thereto
 
Boat Ramp Lot
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



17

 
West side of McKinley Road at Scott Street
 
Scott Street Lot
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



18

 
East side of CNWRR

West of Sheridan Road

North side of Old Elm Road
 
Fort Sheridan Commuter Lot
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



19

 
East side of North Western Avenue from a point 130 feet north of Woodland
Road continuing north approximately 725 feet; and

East side of North Western Avenue from a point 228 feet north of the center
line of Franklin Place to a point 280 feet south of the center line of
Franklin Place
 
North Western Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



20

 
East side of North Western Avenue from Illinois Road south to Vine Avenue
 
North Western Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



21

 
East side of Bank Lane South of Illinois Road
 
Bank Lane Remote
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



22

 
South side of Wisconsin avenue west of Bank Lane
 
Wisconsin Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



23

 
Parking area adjoining the Lake Forest Library and driveway leading thereto
 
Lake Forest Library
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



24

 
Parking area adjoining 361 East Westminster and driveway leading thereto
 
Temporary City Hall
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



25

 
Northeast corner of Bank Lane and Illinois Road
 
Bank Lane Parking Deck
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016




 



   Hereafter, the number of short-term spaces in the Quarta Lot, Lot 12,
shall be fixed at eight spaces in a location to be set and approved under the
administrative authority of the City Manager; and said spaces will be marked
with appropriate signage.



(Ord. 2016-57, passed 10-3-2016)



SCHEDULE IX.  CITY PARKING LOT TIME LIMITS.



 


Lot No.

 

Common Name

 

Time Limit

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





3
 
Forest Avenue Lot
 
Three hours (entire lot)
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


5
 
Northwestern RR
 
Three hours (a portion of the southern 1/2 of the lot, not to exceed
approximately 65 spaces), 3 spaces on the north side are 30 minutes; 3 spaces
on the south side are 60 minutes.
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


9
 
Bank Lane Lot
 
Three hours (entire lot)
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


11
 
City Hall Lot
 
Three hours (entire lot except for 20 spaces that are 90 minutes)
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


12
 
Quarta Lot
 
Three hours (southeast portion of lot, 11 spaces)
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


23
 
Lake Forest Library
 
Three hours (entire lot)
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


24
 
Lake Forest Historical Society
 
Three hours (entire lot) (361 E. Westminster)
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


25
 
Bank Lane Parking Deck
 
Three hours (upper level)
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016




 



   The time limits for parking in Lots 3, 9 and 11 may be extended
pursuant to the City Manager’s administrative authority, but shall not be
less than the three-hour time limit established above.



(Ord. 2016-57, passed 10-3-2016)



SCHEDULE X.  PARKING TIME LIMITS (15 MINUTES).



 


Street

 

Side

 

Area

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



Bank Lane
 
East side
 
North of Northgate
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


262 Deerpath
 
North side
 
Last space before Bank (1 space)
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


297 E. Illinois
 
South side
 
Third space west of Western (1 space)
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Northgate
 
North side
 
Bank Lane to Forest Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


747 Oakwood
 
East side
 
4 spaces starting at Westminster north
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


842 Western
 
West side
 
2 spaces in front of 842 Western
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016



 



SCHEDULE XI.  PARKING TIME LIMITS (90 MINUTE).



 


Street

 

Side

 

Area

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Bank Lane
 
East side
 
Illinois Road to Wisconsin Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


West side
 
Illinois Road to Wisconsin Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


West side
 
Seven spaces in front of 580 N. Bank Lane
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Deerpath
 
North side
 
In front of the Public Library property
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Green Bay Road to Oakwood Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Deerpath
 
North side
 
Western Avenue to Oakwood Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Oakwood Avenue to Western Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Forest Avenue
 
East side
 
Deerpath to Westminster
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Illinois Road
 
North side
 
Western Avenue to Oakwood Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Green Bay Road to Western Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Oakwood Avenue
 
East side
 
Vine Avenue to Wisconsin Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


West side
 
Illinois Road to Deerpath
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South Gate
 
South side
 
Forest Avenue to Bank Lane
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Summit Avenue
 
East side
 
Westminster Avenue to Summit Place
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Vine Avenue
 
North side
 
Green Bay Road to Oakwood Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Westminster
 
North side
 
Forest Avenue to Western Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Forest Avenue to Western Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Wisconsin Avenue
 
North side
 
Western Avenue to Oakwood Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Bank Lane to Western Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016




 



SCHEDULE XII.  PARKING TIME LIMITS (TWO HOUR).



 


Street

 

Side

 

Area

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Gloucester Crossing
 
North side
 
Parking in Settlers Square
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
West of Waukegan Road Striped and Signed
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Laurel Avenue
 
South side
 
Western to approximately 105 Laurel
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Market Square
 
North side
 
Western Avenue to Bank Lane
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Western Avenue to Bank Lane
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


West side
 
North Gate to South Gate
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Sunset Place
 
South side
 
Green Bay Road to Summit Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Western Avenue
 
East side
 
Illinois to 936 North Western
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


West side
 
Woodland Road to Thomas Place
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Western Avenue
 
West side
 
North approximately 340 feet from a point approximately 48 feet north of Vine
Avenue to Wisconsin Avenue to Thomas Place
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016




 



SCHEDULE XIII.  NO PARKING DURING SCHOOL HOURS.



 


Street

 

Side

 

Area

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Alden Lane
 
North side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Burr Oak Road
 
East side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


West side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Edgewood Road
 
East side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


West side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Franklin Place
 
North side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Greenleaf Avenue
 
East side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


West side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Griffith Avenue
 
East side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


West side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Mills Court
 
North side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Noble Avenue
 
North side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Park Avenue
 
North side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Ravine Park Drive
 
North side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Rose Terrace
 
North side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Spruce Avenue
 
North side
 
Westerly from Edgewood Road to Willow Street
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Easterly from Edgewood Road to Sheridan Road
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Tara Lane
 
East side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


West side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Thomas Place
 
North side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Willow Road
 
East side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


West side
 
Throughout its entire length
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016




 



SCHEDULE XIV.  NO PARKING BETWEEN 3:00 A.M. AND 5:00A.M.



 


Street

 

Side

 

Area

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Atteridge Road
 
North side
 
Woodland Road to Green Bay Road
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Bank Lane
 
West side
 
580 North Bank Lane to Vine Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Deerpath
 
North side
 
Walnut Road to 165 East Deerpath
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
165 East Deerpath to Western Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Forest Avenue
 
East side
 
Deerpath to Westminster
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Granby Road
 
North side
 
Wisconsin Avenue to McKinley Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
McKinley Road to Wisconsin
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Illinois Road
 
North side
 
Western Avenue to Oakwood Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Green Bay Road to Western Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Market Square
 
North side
 
Western Avenue to Bank Lane
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


West side
 
North Gate to South Gate
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Bank Lane to Western Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


North Gate
 
North side
 
Bank Lane to Forest Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Oakwood Avenue
 
West side
 
Deerpath to Vine Avenue

Vine Avenue to Woodland Road
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Ryan Place
 
North side
 
Washington Road to Western Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Western Avenue to Washington Road
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Scott Street
 
North side
 
Wisconsin Avenue to McKinley Road
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
McKinley Road to Wisconsin Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South Gate
 
South side
 
Forest Avenue to Bank Lane
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Summit Avenue
 
East side
 
Westminster to Woodland Road
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Western Avenue
 
West side
 
North limits to Illinois Road
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


East side
 
Illinois Road to north limits
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Wildwood
 
West side
 
Illinois Road to Ryan Place
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


East side
 
Ryan Place to Illinois Road
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Wisconsin Avenue
 
North side
 
Western Avenue to Oakwood Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


South side
 
Oakwood Avenue to Western Avenue
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016


Woodlawn Road
 
South side
 
Washington Road to east end
 
2016-57
 
10-3-2016




 



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   AIRPORTS AND AIRCRAFT



      91.   ANIMALS AND FOWL



      92.   BOATS, DOCKS AND WATERWAYS



      93.   CEMETERIES



      94.   FIRE PREVENTION



      95.   HEALTH AND SANITATION



      96.   LIBRARY



      97.   PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS



      98.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      99.   TREE PRESERVATION AND LANDSCAPING



      100.   WEEDS AND BRUSH



CHAPTER 90:  AIRPORTS AND AIRCRAFT



Section




General Provisions




   90.01   Definitions




Aircraft




   90.15   Landing and taking off of aircraft




Aerial Spraying




   90.30   Permit



   90.31   Permit application



   90.32   Permit requirements



   90.33   Insurance



   90.34   Presence of city staff



   90.35   Severability



 



   90.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AERIAL SPRAYING. The application or discharge of any substance from an
aircraft.



   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or
designed for navigation of or flight in the air, except a parachute or other
contrivance designed for such navigation but used primarily as safety
equipment.



   AIRPORT or HELIPORT. Any area, either on water or land, within the city
which is designated as such by action of the City Council for the landing and
taking off of aircraft.



   OPERATOR. The pilot and/or owner and/or lessee of the aircraft.



(Prior Code, § 3-1)  (Ord. 1261, passed 10-17-1981)




AIRCRAFT




§ 90.15  LANDING AND TAKING OFF OF AIRCRAFT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to land upon or take off from any
property within the city in an aircraft except upon or from an airport or
heliport without prior written approval of the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 3-8)  (Ord. 1261, passed 10-17-1981)  Penalty, see § 90.99




AERIAL SPRAYING




§ 90.30  PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in aerial spraying within
the city without first obtaining a permit from the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-9)  (Ord. 1261, passed 10-17-1981)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.31  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   An application for permit for aerial spraying shall be applied for to
the City Manager not less than five days before the date of the proposed
operation, and shall be valid for the date or dates specified.



(Prior Code, § 3-10)



§ 90.32  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Prior to issuance of a permit, the operator shall submit a
specimen label of the substance to be applied and application rate thereof, a
sample of the substance, and an accurate schedule of the operation, including
times of application, proposed coverage in acres, and amount of substance to
be used.



   (B)   No permit shall be issued unless and until the Director of
Parks and Forestry has determined that the substance has been approved by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency for aerial spraying and has
determined that the substance proposed, application rate and other data are
in compliance with all of the requirements of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.



   (C)   The firm or individual performing the work, including the
equipment operator, will be required to furnish all appropriate licenses as
required by the state for pesticide, herbicide or other aerial applications.



(Prior Code, § 3-11)



§ 90.33  INSURANCE.



   Prior to the issuance of a permit, the operator shall deliver to the
City Manager a certificate of insurance issued by a company acceptable to the
City Manager, covering the proposed operation in amounts as set by Council
for personal liability and property damage.



(Prior Code, § 3-12)



§ 90.34  PRESENCE OF CITY STAFF.



   A city staff member shall be present at all times immediately prior to
and during any aerial spraying.



(Prior Code, § 3-13)



§ 90.35  SEVERABILITY.



   The intention of the City Council is hereby expressed that the
provisions of this chapter are severable and that the invalidity of any
section hereof, or of any portion of any section hereof, shall not affect any
other section, or portion of section of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-15)  (Ord. 1261, passed 10-17-1981)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provisions of §§ 90.30 through 90.35 shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $750 for each offense, and each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.



      (2)   In addition, any cost of collection may be assessed in
§ 10.99(B).



(Prior Code, § 3-14)  (Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)



CHAPTER 91:  ANIMALS AND FOWL



Section




General Provisions




   91.001   Definitions



   91.002   Cruelty to animals



   91.003   Dangerous animals



   91.004   Disturbing the quiet



   91.005   Other animal disturbance



   91.006   Strays



   91.007   Hindering enforcement



   91.008   Killing dangerous animals



   91.009   Farm animals



   91.010   Rabies



   91.011   Quarantine of biting animals



   91.012   Alternate confinement



   91.013   Redemption of impounded animals



   91.014   Fees and charges



   91.015   Disposition of unclaimed animals




Licenses for Dogs and Cats




   91.030   Duty to register and license



   91.031   Registration and license



   91.032   Annual license fee



   91.033   Inoculation against rabies



   91.034   Collar and tag



   91.035   Unauthorized removal of tag



   91.036   Exceptions




Dogs




   91.050   Running at large



   91.051   Confinement of dangerous dogs



   91.052   Biting and attacking dogs



   91.053   Disturbing quiet, damaging property, public nuisance



   91.054   Female dogs in heat



   91.055   Unlawful treatment of dogs



   91.056   Prohibitions



   91.057   Control of defecation




Cats




   91.070   Unlawful treatment of cats




Hunting and Trapping




   91.085   Generally



 



   91.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 91.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein below. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
“shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.



   ANIMAL. An animal, other than man.



   BEACH. That portion of the beach and shore area of Lake Michigan lying
between the north property line of Forest Park and a point 100 feet north of
steel jetty “5A” located north of the sailboat storage area.



   BITE. An abrasion of the skin.



   CAT. Any feline.



   CITY. The City of Lake Forest, Lake County, Illinois.



   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal which has, without provocation, either
bitten, injured or attacked any person who was conducting himself or herself
in a peaceful and lawful manner or any animal which shall cause an annoyance
or reasonable fear of bodily injury to any person by attacking or threatening
to attack any such person or otherwise exhibiting fierce, dangerous or
vicious propensities or any animal which has, without provocation either
bitten, injured or attacked any other animal.



   DOG. Any canine.



   FARM ANIMAL. An animal commonly found on and maintained on a farm,
including without limitation any kind or species of:



      (1)   Cows;



      (2)   Horses;



      (3)   Pigs or swine;



      (4)   Chickens or other poultry;



      (5)   Sheep; and



      (6)   Goats.



   LEASH. A leash, cord or chain or similar device not exceeding 16 feet
in length, securely fastened to the collar or harness of a dog, cat or other
animal, and held or physically controlled by the owner or such other person
having control of said dog.



   LICENSE YEAR. The period between May 1 in a calendar year and April 30
in the following calendar year.



   OWNER. Any person, firm, partnership, trustee, association, corporation
or any family member owning, keeping, harboring or otherwise maintaining a
dog, cat or other animal. When used in this context of property ownership, an
OWNER is any person who owns, occupies or otherwise controls the property in
question.



   PARK. Includes West Park, South Park, Everett Park, Waveland Park,
Deerpath Community Park, Northcroft, Elawa and Townline Community Park.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, trustee, association or
corporation.



   RUNNING AT LARGE. A dog off the premises of its owner and not under the
immediate eye and control of the owner or person acting for the owner.



   SCHOOL GROUND. Land, play area owned or maintained by School Districts
67 and 115.



(Prior Code, § 6-1)  (Ord. 1443, passed 6-16-1984; Ord. 1843, passed
6-17-1989; Ord. 93-34, passed 6-7-1993; Ord. 06-49, passed 9-5-2006; Ord.
2009-21, passed 6-1-2009)



§ 91.002  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the city in any
way.



   (B)   Any person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or
abandons any animal shall be guilty of a violation of this section.



(Prior Code, § 6-2)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.003  DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous animal or any vicious
animal of any kind to run at large within the city.



(Prior Code, § 6-3)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.004  DISTURBING THE QUIET.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, have in his or her
possession or to harbor any animal which, by frequent or habitual barking,
howling, yelping, bawling or other loud noise, shall cause annoyance of any
family or person, or shall disturb the peace or quiet of any person,
neighborhood or place within the city.



(Prior Code, § 6-4)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.005  OTHER ANIMAL DISTURBANCE.



   Any animal causing a disturbance, damage or is a nuisance may be
apprehended upon the order of the Chief of Police.



(Prior Code, § 6-4.1)



§ 91.006  STRAYS.



   lt shall be unlawful to permit any poultry, horses, cattle, swine,
sheep or goats to run at large; and any such poultry or animal running at
large within the city shall be impounded.



(Prior Code, § 6-5)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.007  HINDERING ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful to hinder or molest any police officer, community
service officer, animal warden or other authorized person while engaged in
the enforcement of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-6)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.008  KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   Police officers are authorized to kill any dangerous animal kind when
it is necessary for the protection of any person or property.



(Prior Code, § 6-7)  (Ord. 93-10, passed 2-18-1993)



§ 91.009  FARM ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, have, harbor or otherwise
maintain any farm animal in the city unless located on a farm or stable in
compliance with the provisions of Chapter 159 of this code of ordinances.



(Ord. 06-49, passed 9-5-2006)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.010  RABIES.



   (A)   (1)   Any animal suffering from rabies is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance and such animal may be killed by any police officer
or other person charged with the enforcement of this subchapter, if the same
cannot be safely apprehended and impounded.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of any person keeping, harboring or
otherwise maintaining any such animal to place it immediately in a veterinary
hospital or, upon demand, to surrender such animal to any police officer,
community service officer, animal warden or other person charged with the
enforcement of this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of every person who discovers
any animal suffering with rabies or who discovers that any person, dog, cat
or other animal has been bitten by a dog, cat or other animal suffering with
rabies to report such fact immediately to the Police Department.



      (2)   Such report shall give the name, if known, and the place
of residence of the person keeping, harboring or otherwise maintaining such a
dog, cat or other animal, the place where the same can be found, and the
license numbers of any such animal, if known.



      (3)   Any such animal shall be immediately confined in a
veterinary hospital or taken up and impounded and securely kept until it can
be determined whether any such animal is afflicted with rabies.



(Prior Code, § 6-9)  (Ord. 1243, passed 9-26-1981)



§ 91.011  QUARANTINE OF BITING ANIMALS.



   (A)   (1)   If an owner has notice that his or her animal has
bitten any person or other animal, it shall be unlawful for such owner to
kill such animal or to sell or give such animal away, or to permit or allow
such animal to be taken beyond the limits of the city except to a licensed
veterinary hospital.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of such owner to immediately report
the incident to the Police Department and to immediately place such animal in
a licensed veterinary hospital where such animal shall be quarantined for a
period of at least ten days or, upon the request of any police officer,
community service officer, animal warden or other person charged with the
enforcement of this section, to deliver such animal to them for such
placement.



      (3)   The owner shall immediately furnish the Police
Department with the name and location of said hospital and a certificate of a
licensed veterinarian stating whether or not such animal shows symptoms of
rabies.



      (4)   At the expiration of the quarantine period and prior to
the release of such animal, the owner shall furnish the Police Department
with another certificate of a licensed veterinarian stating that such animal
does not have rabies.



      (5)   All costs of maintaining any such animal in a veterinary
hospital shall be the obligation and responsibility of the owner and shall be
paid by the owner.



   (B)   In all cases where any animal that has bitten a person or
other animal is killed or dies within ten days from time of the bite, it
shall be the duty of the person killing such animal, or if the animal is in
the possession of the owner at the time of such death, the owner of such
animal, to notify the Police Department and to immediately deliver the head
of such animal intact to said Department, or cause the same to be done.



(Prior Code, § 6-10)  (Ord. 1843, passed - - ; Ord. 2016-16, passed
6-20-2016)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.012  ALTERNATE CONFINEMENT.



   Notwithstanding the provisions § 91.011, the owner of an animal which
has bitten any person may, in lieu of the delivery and quarantine of such
animal as provided in § 91.011 above shall:



   (A)   Present evidence to the Chief of Police that the animal has
been inoculated against rabies more than 30 days but less than one year prior
to the biting;



   (B)   Present evidence to the Chief of Police that:



      (1)   The victim of the animal bite was a member of the family
of the owner of the biting animal;



      (2)   Upon examination by a licensed veterinarian, it is the
opinion of the licensed veterinarian that confinement as provided in §
91.011 would be injurious to the animal; and



      (3)   If a written letter from the victim of the animal bite
gives his or her agreement to confine the animal at home rather than as
provided in § 91.011.



   (C)   Have the animal examined by a licensed veterinarian who shall
make an examination of the animal to determine if the animal exhibits any
signs of rabies, and who shall thereafter:



      (1)   Take such animal into custody for a period of ten days
if such examination disclosed any sign or symptoms of rabies and notify the
Police Department thereof;



      (2)   If such examination discloses that no signs or symptoms
are present, order the animal confined for a period of ten days in the home
of the owner, or upon the owner’s premises, in an enclosure adequate to
ensure, in the opinion of the police officer, community service officer or
animal warden, that the animal will not be in contact with other persons or
animals; or



      (3)   Have such animal examined for rabies by a licensed
veterinarian on the first and tenth days of such confinement. The
veterinarian shall, within 24 hours of each such examination, report the
results thereof to the Chief of Police. It shall be the duty of the owner to
ensure the making of such reports.



   (D)   No animal displaying any signs or symptoms of rabies shall be
released from any confinement without the prior approval of the Chief of
Police;



   (E)   If an examination of any animal discloses signs or symptoms of
rabies, such animal shall be delivered to a licensed veterinarian for
continued observation and/or testing;



   (F)   A member of the Police Department shall impound for the
remaining period of observation any animal whose owner fails to comply with
the requirements of this section;



   (G)   No dog which is running at large at the time of the bite shall
be eligible for the alternate confinement authorized by this section; and



   (H)   It is the responsibility of the owner to provide upon request
by the examining veterinarian, community service officer, animal warden or a
law enforcement official, a certificate or certificates of vaccination,
signed by a licensed veterinarian, dated, with an adequate description of the
animal.



(Prior Code, § 6-10.1)  (Ord. 1243, passed 9-26-1981)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.013  REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   (A)   The Police Department or any other person charged with the
keeping of the pound, upon receiving any animal shall make a complete
registry, entering the breed, color and sex of such animal and whether
licensed.



   (B)   If licensed, there shall be entered the name, address and
telephone number of the owner and the number of the license tag.



   (C)   Not later than 24 hours after the impounding of any animal,
the owner shall be notified by mail sent to his or her address listed on the
animal register or, if the owner of the animal is unknown, notice shall be
posted at the Police Department describing the animal and the time and place
of taking.



(Prior Code, § 6-11)



§ 91.014  FEES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   The owner of any animal so impounded or the person claiming to
be the owner of any unlicensed animal may redeem such animal in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter upon payment of the license fee, if
unpaid, and an impounding fee as set out in the fee schedule as most recently
adopted by the City Council, such fee payments to be made at the Public
Safety Building, 255 West Deerpath, Lake Forest, Illinois.



   (B)   Upon presentation of a proper receipt for payment of license
fee and/or impounding fee, as applicable, to the pound keeper and after
payment to the pound keeper of his or her then established maintenance charge
per animal for each day or fraction thereof that the animal was impounded,
such animal shall be released in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-11.1)  (Ord. 1356, passed - -; Ord. 1416, passed
2-18-1984; Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 91.015  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED ANIMALS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department or such person
as may be in charge of the pound to keep all animals impounded in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   If any impounded animal is not redeemed at the expiration of
the third day after the day notice was mailed or posted as provided herein,
such animal may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of without further notice;
provided, however, that if any animal has not been destroyed or otherwise
disposed of, any person may redeem such animal in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter after the time for redemption by the owner has
passed.



(Prior Code, § 6-12)




LICENSES FOR DOGS AND CATS




§ 91.030  DUTY TO REGISTER AND LICENSE.



   (A)   Every owner who keeps, harbors or otherwise maintains a dog or
cat more than four months of age in the city shall register such dog or cat
and procure and pay for a license for the same not later than May 1 in any
license year.



   (B)   Any dog or cat purchased or otherwise acquired after May 1 in
any license year shall also be registered and licensed as provided herein no
later than 15 days after the same is purchased or otherwise acquired, and dog
or cat less than four months of age shall also registered and licensed as
provided herein not later than 15 days after the same becomes four months of
age.



(Prior Code, § 6-13)  (Ord. 736, passed 6-15-1968)



§ 91.031  REGISTRATION AND LICENSE.



   (A)   (1)   The application for registration and license shall be
made to the Finance Clerk and shall state the name, address and telephone
number of the owner, the breed, color, sex, and name of the dog or cat to be
registered.



      (2)   The Finance Clerk shall note this information in a dog
or cat register at the time of registration.



   (B)   (1)   Upon payment of the license fee required herein, the
Finance Clerk shall register the dog or cat in the dog or cat register.



      (2)   A metal license tag shall be issued for each dog and cat
registered.



      (3)   The shape of the tag may be changed every license year,
and each tag shall have stamped thereon the license year for which it was
issued and have a number of the license certificate.



      (4)   In case a license tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate
will be issued by the Finance Clerk.



   (C)   No license issued hereunder shall be transferable; provided,
however, that whenever an owner to whom a license has been issued hereunder
ceases to keep, harbor or otherwise maintain the dog or cat for which such
license was issued, such owner may transfer such license to another dog or
cat kept, harbored or otherwise maintained by him or her, upon application to
the Finance Clerk.



   (D)   No more than three dogs, six months or older, may be licensed
to a premises unless said premises satisfies the requirements for a kennel
consistent with the provisions of Chapter 159, Zoning.



(Prior Code, § 6-14)  (Ord, 678, passed 12-18-1965; Ord. 2016-16, passed
6-20-2016)



§ 91.032  ANNUAL LICENSE FEE.



   The annual license fee shall be set by the City Council, by motion, and
may be changed from time to time, by motion, as the City Council deems
necessary.



(Prior Code, § 6-15)  (Ord. 736, passed 6-15-1968; Ord. 821, passed
5-3-1971; Ord. 1580, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 91.033  INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner who keeps, harbors or
otherwise maintains a dog or cat more than four months of age in the city to
have the same inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian annually.



   (B)   The type and brand of the anti-rabies vaccine use and the
method of inoculation shall be approved by the Department of Agriculture of
the state and the United States Department of Agriculture.



   (C)   Evidence of such inoculation shall consist of a certificate
signed by the person administering the vaccine.



   (D)   Any dog or cat which is not inoculated against rabies as
required herein is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and such dog or
cat may be apprehended and impounded upon the order of the Chief of Police or
other person in charge with the enforcement of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-16)  (Ord. 736, passed 6-15-1968; Ord. 831, passed
9-25-1971; Ord. 853, passed 5-13-1972)



§ 91.034  COLLAR AND TAG.



   Every owner shall provide each dog more than four months of age kept,
harbored or otherwise maintained by him or her in the city, with a sturdy
collar to which the aforesaid license tag shall be securely fastened, and it
shall be the owner’s duty to make certain that the collar and tag are worn
at all times by the dog when off the owner’s premises.



(Prior Code, § 6-17)  (Ord. 736, passed 6-15-1968)



§ 91.035  UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF TAG.



   It shall be unlawful for any person other than a police officer,
community service officer, animal warden or other person charged with the
enforcement of this subchapter to remove a license tag from any dog without
the owner’s or his or her agent’s permission.



(Prior Code, § 6-18)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.036  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of §§ 91.030, 91.031, 91.032 and 91.034 shall not
apply to dogs or cats while receiving treatment or temporary care in
veterinary hospitals, or while being kept in boarding kennels or pet shops.



(Prior Code, § 6-19)  (Ord. 1243, passed 9-26-1981)




DOGS




§ 91.050  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   (A)   Except when permitted on private property by the owner of the
private property and subject to any rules set forth by that property owner,
no dog shall be permitted to run at large.



   (B)   No dog shall be permitted, except on a leash, to use or be
upon any public street, sidewalk or parkway or park.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any dog
owned, kept, harbored or otherwise maintained by him or her either to run at
large within the city limits or to use or be upon any public street, sidewalk
or parkway except on a leash.



   (D)   Any dog which runs at large in violation of the provisions of
this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and such dog shall
be apprehended and impounded if found running at large by any police officer,
community service officer, animal warden or other person charged with the
enforcement of this section.



(Prior Code, § 6-20)  (Ord. 93-34, passed 6-7-1993; Ord. 2009-21, passed
6-1-2009)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.051  CONFINEMENT OF DANGEROUS DOGS.



   (A)   Any dog of fierce, dangerous or vicious propensities shall be
confined by its owner on the owner’s premises at all times in such a manner
that it cannot reach persons who may have occasion to lawfully enter upon
said premises.



   (B)   (1)   Any dog of fierce, dangerous or vicious propensities
which is not confined on its owner’s premises as provided herein is hereby
declared a public nuisance and such dog may be apprehended and impounded upon
the order of the Chief of Police or other person charged with the enforcement
of this section.



      (2)   The owner shall have no right to redeem such dog unless
he or she shall remove the same from the city immediately upon redemption and
shall not thereafter keep, harbor or maintain such dog in the city at any
time.



(Prior Code, § 6-21)  (Ord. 93-34, passed 6-7-1993)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.052  BITING AND ATTACKING DOGS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog to prevent such
dog from biting or attacking any person or other animal in the city. Any dog
which may unprovokedly bite or attack any person or other animal in the city
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and such dog may be apprehended
and impounded by any police officer, community service officer, animal warden
or other person charged with the enforcement of this section.



   (B)   If such dog is impounded, the owner shall have no right to
redeem the dog if it has without provocation attacked or bitten any person or
persons or other animal in the city on two or more occasions within any
24-month period, unless he or she shall remove such dog from the city
immediately upon redemption and shall not thereafter keep, harbor or
otherwise maintain such dog in the city at any time.



(Prior Code, § 6-22)  (Ord. 93-34, passed 6-7-1993)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.053  DISTURBING QUIET, DAMAGING PROPERTY, PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an owner to keep, harbor or otherwise
maintain a dog in the city which shall disturb the quiet of any person other
than its owner, or which shall cause danger or fear to any person or
neighborhood.



   (B)   Further, any dog which shall habitually cause damage to the
property of any person other than its owner, or which shall habitually cause
danger, or disturbance, or fear to any person or neighborhood is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded upon
the order of the Chief of Police or other person charged with the enforcement
of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-23)  (Ord. 93-34, passed 6-7-1993)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.054  FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT.



   (A)   The owner of any female dog in heat shall not keep, harbor or
otherwise maintain such dog in the city unless the same is confined in a
boarding kennel or veterinary hospital or in the owner’s house during the
entire period such dog is in heat.



   (B)   Any female dog in heat which is not so confined is hereby
declared a public nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded upon the
order of the Chief of Police, or other person charged with the enforcement of
this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-25)  (Ord. 93-34, passed 6-7-1993)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.055  UNLAWFUL TREATMENT OF DOGS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously shoot,
poison, kill, injure, abuse or ill-treat any dog.



   (B)   Any person who kills or injures a dog while driving a vehicle
shall stop at the scene of the accident and render such assistance as
practicable and shall immediately report the incident to the Police
Department.



(Prior Code, § 6-26)  (Ord. 678, passed - -; Ord. 93-34, passed 6-7-1993) 
Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.056  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   The owner of any dog shall not permit or allow such dog to be
in or on any beach, school ground, church, public building, school,
restaurant, store, market or any place where food or drink is commercially
dispensed or sold.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs leading
sight or hearing impaired persons, any police canine, or dogs exhibited at
any authorized dog or pet show, or in any authorized dog training schools.



(Prior Code, § 6-27)  (Ord. 93-34, passed 6-7-1993)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.057  CONTROL OF DEFECATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to walk a dog on any
property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person unless
such person has in his or her immediate possession a sanitary and practical
means or device for the prompt removal of excrement and a depository for the
transmission of excrement to a receptacle located upon property possessed by
such person.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person in control of, causing or
permitting any dog to be on any property, public or private, not owned or
possessed by such person to fail to remove excrement left by such dog to a
proper receptacle located on property owned or possessed by such person.
Division (A) above and this division (B) shall not apply to a visually
impaired person while walking his or her guide dog.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a collection of
animal excrement anywhere in the city that would constitute a nuisance to
others.



   (D)   Dog runs shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.



(Prior Code, § 6-27.1)  (Ord. 93-35, passed 9-16-1993; Ord. 2016-16, passed
6-20-2016)  Penalty, see § 91.999




CATS




§ 91.070  UNLAWFUL TREATMENT OF CATS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously shoot,
poison, kill, injure, abuse or ill-treat any cat.



   (B)   Any person who kills or injures a cat while driving a vehicle
shall stop at the scene of the accident and render such assistance as
practicable and shall immediately report the incident to the Police
Department.



(Prior Code, § 6-28)  (Ord. 1243, passed 9-26-1981)  Penalty, see § 91.999




HUNTING AND TRAPPING




§ 91.085  GENERALLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or to engage in trapping or
killing any animal other than as prescribed by ordinance in the city



(Prior Code, § 6-30)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of any section in this
chapter shall unless otherwise specified herein, be fined in an amount not
less than $25 or more than $750 for each offense.



      (2)   In addition, any cost of collection may be assessed in
accordance with § 10.99(B) of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 6-11.2)



      (3)   Notwithstanding anything in this section, to the extent
that fines are specified in the fee schedule approved from time-to-time by
the City Council for offenses under this chapter, the fee schedule shall
control.



   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provisions of §§ 91.030 through 91.032 regarding registration and licensing
of dogs and cats shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each
offense; provided, however, that penalties due under this division (B) may be
satisfied by the following payments, if paid within the following listed time
limits after the last date that registration or licensing fees are due.



 

0 through 10 days
 
$15


11 through 20 days
 
$25


21 through 30 days
 
$35



 



      (2)   All such payments shall be made at the Municipal
Services, 800 Field Drive, Lake Forest, Illinois or such other location as
may be identified in any notice issued by the city.



      (3)   In addition, any cost of collection may be assessed in
accordance with § 10.99(B) of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 6-15.1)



   (C)   (1)   (a)   Any owner who fails to comply with the
provisions of § 91.052 with respect to any dog or dogs will be subject to
the penalties set forth in division (C)(3) below.



         (b)   Each violation within any five-year period,
regardless of the dog or dogs involved, shall be logged against the violating
owner, and such owner’s accumulated violations shall be determinative of
the applicable fine under division (C)(3) below.



      (2)   (a)   Any owner who owns a dog that is deemed a
public nuisance pursuant to § 91.052 will be subject to the penalties set
forth in division (C)(3) below.



         (b)   Each violation with respect to a particular dog
shall be logged against the violating owner, and such owner’s accumulated
violations shall be determinative of the applicable fine under division
(C)(3) below.



      (3)   (a)   Any owner who is subject to a fine pursuant to
§ 91.052 shall pay the applicable fine based on the following schedule:



 

First offense
 

$100



Second offense
 

$500



Third and subsequent offenses
 

$750




 



         (b)   1.   To the extent that an owner would face a
different fine based on the accumulated violations calculated under divisions
(C)(1) and (C)(2) above, the higher the fine amount shall apply.



            2.   All such payments shall be made at the Public
Safety Building, 255 West Deerpath, Lake Forest, Illinois, or such other
location as may be identified in any notice issued by the city.



(Prior Code, § 6-22.1)



   (D)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §§ 91.050
or 91.053 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each
offense provided, however, that any penalty for such violations may be
satisfied by the following payments if paid within the following listed time
limits from the date of such violation.



 



 

0—10 Days

 

11—20 Days

 

21—30 Days



First offense
 

$40

 

$55

 

$70



Second offense
 

$50

 

$75

 

$100



Third offense
 

$100

 

$125

 

$150




 



      (2)   All such payment shall be made at the City Hall, 220
East Deerpath, Lake Forest, Illinois, or such other location as may be
identified in any notice issued by the city.



      (3)   In addition, any cost of collection may be assessed in
accordance with § 10.99(B) of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 6-24)



(Ord. 93-34, passed 6-7-1993; Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003; Ord. 2008-31,
passed 10-6-2008; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



CHAPTER 92:  BOATS, DOCKS AND WATERWAYS



Section



   92.01   Obstruction or pollution of watercourses



§ 92.01  OBSTRUCTION OR POLLUTION OF WATERCOURSES.



   It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person, firm or corporation
to obstruct or pollute any watercourse or source of water supply in the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 93:  CEMETERIES



Section




General Provisions




   93.01   Establishment of cemeteries




Cemetery Commission




   93.15   Created



   93.16   Vacancies; powers of Commissioners



   93.17   Reports



   93.18   Additional regulations



   93.19   Special tax




Finances




   93.45   Sale of lots



   93.46   Operating Fund



   93.47   Other reserve funds



   93.48   Donations



   93.49   Investment of funds




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 93.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF CEMETERIES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to establish a
cemetery, or to bury any person outside an established cemetery, within the
city limits or within a mile thereof.



(Prior Code, § 10-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99




CEMETERY COMMISSION




§ 93.15  CREATED.



   (A)   (1)   There is hereby created a Cemetery Commission for the
city.



      (2)   The Cemetery Commission shall consist of five residents
of the city, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City
Council for a term of two years.



   (B)   (1)   All members of the committees, boards and commissions
of the city shall serve for a term of two years and shall be eligible to be
reappointed for two consecutive two-year terms and not eligible to be
reappointed to the same position for three years thereafter.



      (2)   The term of the Chairperson of any such committee, board
or commission shall be one year and the Chairperson may be reappointed for
two consecutive one-year terms; the Chairperson shall not be eligible for
reappointment as Chairperson thereafter.



   (C)   (1)   The foregoing shall not apply to committees, boards
and commissions of the city where the terms of the members of such are fixed
by statute as is the case for members of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the
Library Board, the Board of Trustees of the Firefighters Pension Fund and the
Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund.



      (2)   If any of the foregoing statutes do not establish a term
for the Chairperson of any of the foregoing committees, boards and
commission, then the provisions of division (A) above with reference to the
term of the Chairperson shall apply.



      (3)   It is the sense of the City Council that the members of
the committees, board and commissions whose terms are fixed by statute shall
serve a maximum of six years and shall not be eligible for reappointment to
the same position for three years thereafter.



(Prior Code, § 10-8)  (Ord. 797, passed 1-16-1971; Ord. 93-25, passed - -)



§ 93.16  VACANCIES; POWERS OF COMMISSIONERS.



   (A)   In case of the death or resignation or removal permanently
from the city of any one or more of the members of said Board of Cemetery
Commissioners before his, her or their term of office expires, at the regular
meeting of the City Council then next following, the Mayor shall nominate a
person who shall be a resident freeholder of the city to fill such vacancy
and when confirmed by the Council, the person so nominated shall become a
member of said Board for the unexpired term of the member whom he or she
succeeds.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of said Cemetery Commissioners to take
sole charge of the lots conveyed to the city for the purpose of a cemetery by
the Lake Forest Cemetery Association and trustees of the Lake Forest
Association, by deed dated July 1, 1863, recorded in Book 35, Page 201 of
Lake County Records, in accordance with the conditions and covenants of said
conveyance, and the orders of the City Council.



   (C)   The Commissioners shall appoint one of their number to serve
as Treasurer, and he or she shall file such bond, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his or her duties, as may be required by the Council.



   (D)   The Treasurer shall deposit all money with a regularly
designated city depository within 24 hours of the time such money comes into
his or her hands, and shall deposit all securities for safekeeping with such
a depository upon terms to be approved by the City Council within 24 hours of
the time such securities come into his or her hands.



   (E)   The Commissioners shall certify to the City Council their
desire to have any plat of the cemetery, heretofore recorded, vacated, when
the city shall at once proceed to have it done when it does not conflict with
the rights of persons who have already purchased lots.



   (F)   (1)   The Commissioners shall have power to employ a
competent person to survey the premises, and shall cause the whole or so much
thereof as they may deem expedient to be laid off into lots suitable for the
burial of the dead, and shall present to the City Council a plat showing the
plan and arrangement of such lots; which plat, when approved by the Council,
shall be acknowledged by the Mayor and the City Clerk in behalf of the city,
before any officer authorized by law to take acknowledgments of deeds, and
shall be recorded in the Recorder’s office of the county, and such record
shall have all the force and effect that is by law given to any recorded city
plat.



      (2)   Such plat shall also be recorded by the City Clerk, in
the manner required by § 1, Article VIII of the City Charter.



(Prior Code, § 10-9)  (Ord. 93-18, passed 4-5-1993; Ord. 1663, passed
12-13-1986)



§ 93.17  REPORTS.



   The Commissioners shall at least once in every two years make an
itemized report to the county judge of all trust funds in their hands and the
securities taken therefor.



(Prior Code, § 10-10)



§ 93.18  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Commissioners are hereby empowered to make and enforce all
such rules and regulations concerning the cemetery, not conflicting with the
deed or conveyance to the city, as to them may seem wise and proper.



   (B)   (1)   They shall keep proper books of record of all their
transactions, of receipts and disbursements, all of which shall be open at
all times to the inspection of the Mayor and Finance Committee of the City
Council.



      (2)   They shall, on the first Monday in May in each year,
make a full detailed report of all their doings during the year previous,
showing the amount of moneys received, and from what sources, amount
expended, and for what purposes, the number of lots sold and to whom sold,
number remaining unsold, and any other facts of interest to the parties
concerned.



   (C)   (1)   The said Cemetery Commissioners are hereby authorized
to fix the prices for the sale of lots in Lake Forest Cemetery, and to alter
such prices from time to time as in their discretion shall be just and right.



      (2)   The sale of lots in said cemetery to persons not
resident in Lake Forest should be discouraged; provided, that said
Commissioners by a majority vote of all members thereof may in exceptional
cases, where in their opinion the circumstances will warrant, sell and convey
lots in said cemetery to persons other than actual residents of the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-11)



§ 93.19  SPECIAL TAX.



   (A)   Should the Commissioners deem it necessary or advisable at any
time that a tax should be levied for the improvement of the cemetery, they
shall certify to the City Council the amount required, and the City Council
shall include the amount thus certified to them in the sum certified by the
Council to the City Clerk as the amount required for the annual tax levy for
city purposes.



   (B)   The proceeds of the tax as fast as it is paid to the City
Treasurer (shall by him or her) be paid to the Cemetery Commissioners on the
warrant of the Mayor, countersigned by the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 10-12)




FINANCES




§ 93.45  SALE OF LOTS.



   (A)   (1)   Upon the sale of any lot, the Sextant of the
Commissioners shall receive payment therefor, and shall give to the purchaser
a receipt, specifying the number of the lot or lots purchased, and the amount
paid therefor; and upon the presentation to the City Clerk of any such
receipt showing a payment in accordance with the scale of prices established
by the Commissioners as hereinafter provided, the Clerk shall forthwith issue
to the holder thereof a deed of the lot or lots purchased, signed by the
Mayor and City Clerk on behalf of the city, with the city seal affixed, and
acknowledged before some officer authorized by law to take the acknowledgment
of deeds.



      (2)   The City Clerk shall be entitled to receive from the
purchaser a sum as set out in the fee schedule for each deed, as his or her
fee for issuing and obtaining the acknowledgment of the same; he or she shall
retain the Treasurer’s receipt as a voucher, and shall keep in a book
provided by the city for the purpose, a complete register of all the deeds so
issued.



   (B)   The deed provided for in this section shall contain the
following with other covenants:



      (1)   That the premises shall be used for burial purposes
only; and



      (2)   That all moneys received from the sale of lots shall be
applied for ornamenting and improving, fencing and otherwise protecting the
cemetery grounds, the payment of Sextant and other assistants’ services,
and other necessary expenses incurred by the city in connection with the
grounds.



(Prior Code, § 10-26)  (Ord. 2006-13, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 93.46  OPERATING FUND.



   (A)   The Commissioners and Sextant shall place all receipts arising
from operation of the cemetery in the Operating Fund.



   (B)   Such Fund and the interest or income derived from such fund
shall be used for the proper care and maintenance of the cemetery and for
one-time improvement projects.



(Prior Code, § 10-27)  (Ord. 2006-13, passed 4-3-2006)



§ 93.47  OTHER RESERVE FUNDS.



   The Commissioners may also set aside from time to time as especial
trust funds such other reserve funds from moneys received from the sale of
lots as they may deem advisable for the purpose of keeping the cemetery and
the lots therein permanently in good order and repair, and the interest or
income derived from such trust funds shall be applied only to that purpose
and shall not be diverted from such use.



(Prior Code, § 10-28)



§ 93.48  DONATIONS.



   The Commissioners may receive by gift or bequest, real or personal
property, or the income or avails of property which shall be conveyed in
trust to the Cemetery Commission for the improvement, maintenance, repair,
preservation and ornamentation of such lot or lots, vault or vaults, tomb or
tombs, or other structures in the cemetery as may be designated by the terms
of such gift or bequest and in accordance with such rules and regulations
therefor, as shall be made by the Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 10-29)



§ 93.49  INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.



   The Commissioners shall keep the trust funds designated in §§ 93.46,
93.47 and 93.48 invested in safe interest or income paying securities.



(Prior Code, § 10-30)



CHAPTER 94:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section




Fire Prevention Code




   94.01   Fire Prevention Code; adopted




Open Fires




   94.15   Defined



   94.16   Proximity to buildings



   94.17   Within fire limits



   94.18   In streets, alleys, sidewalks and the like



   94.19   Prohibition



   94.20   Special permit



   94.21   Authority to require extinguishment



   94.22   In park areas




Service Stations




   94.35   Gas pumps




Fees




   94.50   Fire prevention and life safety inspection fee schedule



   94.51   Ambulance fees



 



   94.99   Penalty




FIRE PREVENTION CODE




§ 94.01  FIRE PREVENTION CODE; ADOPTED.



   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosions, the
following codes and standards, as modified herein, are hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein, and shall constitute and be deemed to be
the Fire Prevention Code of the city:



         (a)   Fire Prevention Code, 2000 Edition, National Fire
Protection Association; and



         (b)   National Fire Protection Act I, 2000 Edition,
National Fire Protection Association Inc.



      (2)   Divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above shall be called
collectively, the Fire Prevention Code.



   (B)   (1)   However, the adoption of this subchapter shall not be
construed as preventing the enforcement of or repealing of the provision of
any ordinance, regulation, standard or code adopted by the city that is more
restrictive than the provisions of this section.



      (2)   In the event that any provision of this section shall be
in conflict with any other subchapter, regulation, standard or code adopted
by the city, the more restrictive provision (as determined by the Director of
Community Development) shall apply.



      (3)   One copy of the Fire Prevention Code has been on file in
the office of the City Clerk for use and examination by the public for at
least 30 days prior to the adoption of the Fire Prevention Code, and such
copy shall continue to be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for
use and examination by the public after adoption of the Fire Prevention Code.



   (C)   Amendments to division (A) above sets forth specific
amendments to the 1994 NFPA Fire Prevention Code, which has been superseded
by the 2000 NFPA Fire Prevention Code. To the extent applicable, the specific
amendments to the 1994 Fire Prevention Code as set forth in Subsection
16-11(A) of the City Code shall be deemed specific amendments to the 2000
Fire Prevention Code as adopted in division (A)(1)(a) above, and the Director
of Community Development may promulgate rules to identify which provisions of
the 2000 Fire Prevention Code are affected by the terms and provisions of
this section.



   (D)   The sections of the Fire Prevention Code, 2000 Edition,
adopted pursuant to division (A) above herein are hereby amended and modified
as follows.



      (1)   Passim: Wherever the phrase “(name of jurisdiction)”
or the word “jurisdiction” appear, they shall be deemed to refer to the
City of Lake Forest, Illinois.



      (2)   Passim: Wherever the phrase “code official” appears,
it shall be deemed to refer to the Chief of the Lake Forest Fire Department
or his duly designated agent or agents.



      (3)   Section 1-8 “Board of Appeals” is amended by
deleting Section 1-8 and adding thereto a new section designated Section 1-8
“Board of Appeals” which section shall read as follows:



         1-8.1   The Construction Codes Commission of the City of
Lake Forest shall act as a Board of Appeals.



         1-8.2   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the
authority having jurisdiction shall have a right to appeal to the
Construction Codes Commission of the City of Lake Forest.



         1-8.2.1   The Construction Codes Commission shall have
the authority to grant exceptions to the decisions of the authority having
jurisdiction subject to the following:



            (a)   Requests for appeal shall be filed in
writing by the legal owner of the property containing all such information as
the Commission may require.



            (b)   Upon receiving a request, the Commission
shall only approve such request if evidence is provided showing that:



               (1)   The conditions upon which the request
is based are unique to the property or structure and not generally applicable
to other property in the City; and



               (2)   The alleged difficulty or hardship in
conforming with the requirements of this Chapter is caused by this Chapter
and has not been created by any persons presently or formerly having an
interest in the property; and



               (3)   The proposed variation will not
increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety, or substantially
diminish or impair property values within the area; and



               (4)   The proposed variation will be
consistent with the intent of the Fire Prevention Code and all applicable
ordinances. This may involve the approval of substitution of materials or
construction techniques, including but not limited to compartmentation,
two-hour noncombustible construction materials, secured two-hour wall
construction, enclosed stairways and exits, self-closing fire rated doors,
etc. and cost benefit and economical benefit analysis.



         1-8.3   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the
Construction Codes Commission of the City of Lake Forest shall have a right
to appeal to the City Council. Requests for appeal shall be filed within 14
days by the legal owner of the property, on forms provided by the City
Council. Appeals to the City Council shall be prosecuted in accordance with
procedures set forth by the City Council from time-to-time and pursuant to
the standards set forth in Section 1-8.2.1(b) of this Code. All decisions of
the City Council shall be final.



      (4)   Section 1-18 “Plan Review” is amended by adding
thereto new subsections designated Section 1-18.1(a) and 1-18.1(b), which
shall read as follows:



         1-18.1(a)   Fees will be collected for all plan reviews
required and shall be in accordance with the most recent fee schedule,
approved by the City Council and on file in the Office of the Director of
Community Development.



         1-18.1(b)   Additional Fees.



            (1)   Red Tag Fees: A fee of $150.00 for each
24-hour period during which work took place without permits may be added to
the regular permit fee for any work that has proceeded without first securing
a permit.



            (2)   Re-plan review or Re-inspection Fees: If
negligence or poor workmanship on the part of the contractor, makes it
necessary for the inspector to review or inspect the project more than two
times, a fee shall be charged in addition to the fee schedule for each
additional inspection and for administration time. The Fire Chief shall make
an estimate of the time required for these procedures and set a fee based on
time spent to reimburse the City for expenses incurred.



      (5)   Section 6-3 “Elevators, Escalators, and Conveyors”
is amended by adding thereto a new Section 6-3.1.2.1, which shall read as
follows:



         6- 3.1.2.1   Existing elevators shall have a period of 5
years from date of adoption of this ordinance to have the following updated:



            (a)   Door Restrictors on the car door.



            (b)   Emergency Battery Pack, Light and Alarm.



            (c)   Phase Reversal/Failure Protection.



            (d)   Emergency Phone direct to the Public Safety
Building to line #847-234-2133.



            (e)   Fire Service Recall with more than 25 feet
of travel.



      (6)   Chapter 7 “Fire Protection Systems”, Section 7-3
“Automatic Sprinklers” is amended by deleting Section 7-3.1 and 7-3.2 and
adding thereto a new Section 7-3.1 and 7-3.2 which shall read as follows:



         7-3.1   General.



            7-3.1.1   Automatic sprinklers shall be installed
and maintained where required, in full operating condition.



            7-3.1.2   For the purpose of determining sprinkler
protection in existing buildings, the Director of Community Development shall
be the authority having jurisdiction.



         7-3.2   Where Required.



            7-3.2.1   Automatic sprinklers shall be installed
and maintained in full operating condition in all parts of all buildings with
the following exceptions:



               (a)   One- and two-family dwellings, unless
required by the City of Lake Forest Building Code.



               (b)   Buildings, housing occupancies or
processes which, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, the addition of an
automatic fire sprinkler system would increase rather than decrease the
hazard to life or the property of others.



               (c)   Existing buildings built under and in
full compliance with the codes in force at the time of construction, or
alteration thereof and that have been properly maintained and continually
occupied as originally permitted, shall be exempt from this ordinance when in
the opinion of the Fire Chief no life safety hazard exist.



            7-3.2.2   Existing buildings or areas within
existing buildings that are renovated or altered after the adoption of this
ordinance, shall be required to have a sprinkler system installed in
accordance with 7-3.2.1 above. For the sake of this ordinance, renovation and
alteration shall not include cosmetic improvements to the interior or
exterior of the building, such as painting, wallpapering, floor covering,
repair or replacement of siding, windows, roofing, or doors. Renovation or
alteration shall include any one of the following:



               (a)   Replacement or updating of any two or
more building services of the structure, floor or area of the floor, to
include HVAC, Plumbing, and Electric, or



               (b)   Renovation or alteration costs
exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the professionally assessed valuation of the
structure, or



               (c)   Renovation or alterations that result
in a change in occupancy classification or sub-classification (as described
in NFPA 101, Life Safety Code) that increase the risk to life safety from
exposure to fire, or



               (d)   Renovation or alterations that result
in a change in Hazard of Contents classification (as defined in NFPA 101,
Life Safety Code) that increases the potential risk to life and safety.



            7-3.2.3   Where renovation or alterations involve
50% or less of the total square footage of the building or 50% or less of the
total square footage of the floor involved, only those areas being renovated
or altered shall be required to have a sprinkler system installed.



            7-3.2.4   Where renovation or alterations involve
more than 50% of the square footage of the building or more than 50% of the
total square footage of the floor involved, than the entire building or the
entire floor shall be required to have a sprinkler system installed.



      (7)   Section 7-7.2.14 “One and Two Family Dwellings” is
amended by adding thereto a new Subsection (4) and Exception No. 3 which
shall read as:



         (4)   A heat detector shall be installed in each
attached garage.



         Exception No. 3: Existing one- and two family dwellings
that met the existing code at the time of construction, and meet State
minimum guidelines. When the dwelling experiences building additions,
remodeling or alterations after date of this ordinance, all dwelling changes
will be subject to evaluation by the Director of Community Development toward
meeting this code requirement.



      (8)   Amendment to Chapter 7, Section 9 of the NFPA. Section
7-9, entitled “Carbon Monoxide Alarms and Monitors,” of the NFPA Fire
Prevention Code/2000, as previously adopted by reference and amended, is
hereby amended in its entirety, so that said Section 7-9 of the NFPA Fire
Prevention Code as adopted by the City shall hereafter be read as follows:



Section 7-9 Carbon Monoxide Alarms and Monitors



         7-9.1   Definitions.



         1.   Carbon Monoxide Alarm. An electrical device which
meets the requirements of UL Standard 2034 for detecting and warning
individuals of the presence of carbon monoxide.



         2.   Carbon Monoxide Monitor. An electrical device for
detecting and warning individuals of the presence of carbon monoxide. These
devices do not meet UL Standard 2034 because they detect and alarm for
smaller quantities of carbon monoxide then UL 2034 allows.



      7-9.2   General.



      1.   Carbon monoxide alarms where required by this code shall
meet the current UL Standard 2034 or its equivalent. Carbon monoxide alarms
shall be installed per the requirements of NFPA 720.



         2.   Carbon monoxide monitors where allowed by this code
shall be installed and maintained per the manufacturer’s recommendations.



         7-9.3   Where Required - Living Spaces.



         1.   Carbon monoxide alarms are required in any building
with sleeping facilities that relies on combustion of fossil fuel for heat,
ventilation, hot water or fireplace within the building, and for buildings
with attached garages.



            a.   Exception No. 1: Sleeping facilities in
existing buildings built under and in full compliance with the codes in force
at the time of construction or alteration thereof and that have been properly
maintained and continually occupied as originally permitted.



            b.   Exception No. 2: Carbon monoxide alarms may
be replaced by carbon monoxide monitors where individuals, whose age,
pregnancy or chronic health conditions make them adversely susceptible to low
levels of carbon monoxide.



         2.   In buildings with multi-sleeping facilities, with
completely separate fossil fueled steam or hot water heating appliances are
located in an area completely separated from the sleeping quarters, the
carbon monoxide alarm does not need to be in the sleeping area but must have
one alarm in the fossil fueled appliance area.



         3.   Existing building, with sleeping facilities, that
are renovated or altered and the work would normally require a City permit to
accomplish, after adoption of this ordinance shall be required to install a
carbon monoxide alarm per this ordinance.



         4.   Existing buildings with sleeping facilities that
replace a furnace or hot water heater with a fossil fueled furnace or hot
water heater or install a fireplace shall be required to install a carbon
monoxide alarm per this ordinance.



         7-9.4   Parking Garages



         1.   If a parking garage does not meet the requirements
for Open Air Parking Structure (NFPA 101,3.3.139), an automatic Carbon
Monoxide system must be installed as follows:



            a.   The system must be connected to the NFPA 88A
(Parking Structure) required ventilation system, where upon activation, the
system will automatically turn on and exhaust the fumes to the exterior.



            b.   The ventilation system must have a manual,
key operated override for emergency use.



               i.   The override must be capable of turning
the system on when shut down and turning the system off if activated.



               ii.   The required key switch and proper
signage will be mounted in an easily accessible area next to the garage
entrance, in a location approved by the fire department.



            c.   Systems must be tested and recertified to
manufacturers spec at least annually. Test results will be forwarded to the
fire department.



(Prior Code, § 16-11(1))  (Ord. 560, passed 3-5-1962; Ord. 698, passed
1-9-1967; Ord. 1244, passed 9-26-1981; Ord. 1272, passed - -; Ord. 95-4,
passed 4-3-1995; Ord. 01-24, passed 7-19-2001; Ord. 03-42, passed 9-8-2003;
Ord. 04-12, passed 1-15-2004)




OPEN FIRES




§ 94.15  DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OPEN FIRE. An intentionally ignited bonfire, grass fire or other
similar burning conducted by any person or persons in the open air or in an
incinerator or similar device, where from the flame, smoke, burning embers or
ash enter or discharge into the open air.



(Prior Code, § 16-23)  (Ord. 01-24, passed 7-19-2001)



§ 94.16  PROXIMITY TO BUILDINGS.



   It shall be unlawful to build, ignite or maintain any open fire in such
a way, or so close to any building or other structure, as to endanger such
building or structure.



(Prior Code, § 16-24)  (Ord. 01-24, passed 7-19-2001)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.17  WITHIN FIRE LIMITS.



   It shall be unlawful to build, ignite or maintain any open fire within
the fire limits of the city, as defined in § 163, Article XVII, Chapter I of
the Building Code of Lake Forest of 1931, as amended by ordinance passed and
approved February 7, 1955, except by express permission of the Fire Chief or
his or her duly authorized representative.



(Prior Code, § 16-25)  (Ord. 01-24, passed 7-19-2001)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.18  IN STREETS, ALLEYS, SIDEWALKS AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful to build, ignite or maintain any open fire or to
burn leaves, trash, rubbish or any other substances on any street or alley
pavement, or on any vehicle parking area, paved area, sidewalk, curb or
gutter of the city, except as hereinafter set forth in § 94.22.



(Prior Code, § 16-26)  (Ord. 1642, passed 11-15-1986; Ord. 97-7, passed
3-20-1997; Ord. 01-24, passed 7-19-2001)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.19  PROHIBITION.



   It shall be unlawful to build, ignite or maintain any open fire at any
place within the city except as hereinafter provided.



(Prior Code, § 16-27)  (Ord. 97-7, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 01-24, passed
7-19-2001)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.20  SPECIAL PERMIT.



   (A)   The City Manager and Fire Chief may grant a special permit to
build, ignite or maintain an open fire for the purpose of burning leaves or
other landscape material for natural area management purposes.



   (B)   An application for such permits, shall be in writing and
addressed to the City Manager.



   (C)   The City Manager and Fire Chief shall establish open burning
standards and guidelines which impose reasonable conditions upon each permit
including, but not limited to, a limitation of time, place and duration and a
requirement of insurance.



(Prior Code, § 16-28)  (Ord. 1462, passed 10-13-1984; Ord. 97-7, passed
3-20-1997; Ord. 01-24, passed 7-19-2001)



§ 94.21  AUTHORITY TO REQUIRE EXTINGUISHMENT.



   (A)   The Fire Chief, the Director of Public Services, their
authorized representatives or any police officer of the city, acting
individually or collectively, shall have the authority to direct and require
that any fire within the city be extinguished immediately, when, in their
opinion, such open fire creates a hazard or constitutes a violation of this
subchapter.



   (B)   Failure to obey such an order or directive, whether delivered
orally or otherwise, shall be deemed to constitute a violation of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 16-29)  (Ord. 01-24, passed 7-19-2001)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.22  IN PARK AREAS.



   The restrictions set forth above shall apply to open fires built,
ignited or maintained in the duly designated areas in the parks of the city,
in accordance with parks rules and regulations or with the permission of the
Superintendent of Parks.



(Prior Code, § 16-30)  (Ord. 01-24, passed 7-19-2001)




SERVICE STATIONS




§ 94.35  GAS PUMPS.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain or erect any gasoline pump or tank in
any public street, alley or sidewalk.



(Prior Code, § 16-37)  (Ord. 01-24, passed 7-19-2001)  Penalty, see §
94.99




FEES




§ 94.50  FIRE PREVENTION AND LIFE SAFETY INSPECTION FEE SCHEDULE.



   The city may require fees for inspections and permits. When such fees
are required by the city, such fees shall be in an amount not less than the
following, or such greater amount as may be established, updated or amended
from time to time by the City Council as part of its review and adoption of
an annual fee ordinance.



(Ord. 2009-39, passed 12-7-2009)



§ 94.51  AMBULANCE FEES.



   (A)   Whenever the city provides ambulance services, the city will
impose a fee.



   (B)   For purposes of such fee, the city incorporates by reference
the fee schedule established under 42 U.S.C. § 1395(m)(1), as may be amended
from time to time.



(Ord. 2009-39, passed 12-7-2009)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   In addition to the specific penalty provisions
contained in the Fire Prevention Code, any person, firm or corporation who
fails to comply fully with any provisions of § 94.01 shall be fined in the
amount set forth in the general penalties section of the city code, as it may
be amended from time to time.



      (2)   Failure to comply with the time limits of an abatement
notice or other corrective notice issued by the Fire Marshal shall constitute
a violation for each day that such noncompliance continues being regarded as
a new and separate offense.



      (3)   In the event of a conflict between the Fire Prevention
Code and this penalty provision, the more severe and expansive penalty or
remedy shall control.



(Prior Code, § 16-11(1))



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of §§ 94.15 through 94.22 shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $15 nor more than $750 for each and every offense; provided however
that violations may be satisfied by the following payments if paid within the
listed time limits.



 

If Paid Within
 
First Offense
 
Second/Subsequent Offense


0—10 days
 
$15
 
$50


11—20 days
 
$20
 
$75


21—30 days
 
$25
 
$100



 



      (2)   (a)   In addition, any cost of collection of fines or
other amounts due to the city under this division (B) may be assessed in
accordance with § 10.99(B) of this city code.



         (b)   All such payments shall be made at the Municipal
Services Building, 800 Field Drive, Lake Forest, Illinois.



      (3)   Each incident of violation, even though it may occur on
the same day, shall be a separate and distinct incident, and a separate
notice of violation shall be written and served upon the violator for each
such incident.



(Prior Code, § 16-31)



(Ord. 01-24, passed 7-19-2001; Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)



CHAPTER 95:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section




General Provisions




   95.001   Acts generally prohibited



   95.002   Definitions




Health Officer




   95.015   Office created



   95.016   Appointment



   95.017   Duties



   95.018   Reports




Registrar of Vital Statistics




   95.030   Designated



   95.031   Reports



   95.032   Records




Nuisances




   95.045   Stagnant pools of water



   95.046   Dangerous structures




Ice Vending Machines




   95.060   License required



   95.061   Fee and conditions



   95.062   Construction



   95.063   Lighting, painting and signs



   95.064   Off-street parking and loading



   95.065   Regulations



   95.066   Enforcement




Rats on Private Property




   95.080   Rats on private property



   95.081   Enforcement of subchapter




Advertising




   95.110   Generally



   95.111   Bills on public and private property



   95.112   Samples or merchandise




Litter; Handbills




   95.125   Litter in public places



   95.126   Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent
scattering



   95.127   Sweeping refuse and waste into gutters prohibited; duty to
keep public places free of refuse and waste



   95.128   Litter from or by vehicles



   95.129   Throwing or distributing handbills in public places



   95.130   Depositing commercial handbills on uninhabited or vacant
premises



   95.131   Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly posted



   95.132   Dropping litter from aircraft



   95.133   Posting notices prohibited




Property Maintenance




   95.145   Refuse and waste on private property



   95.146   Maintenance of property



   95.147   Placement of refuse and waste on vacant lots




Abandoned Vehicles




   95.160   Inoperable and abandoned vehicles declared to be a nuisance



   95.161   Inoperable or abandoned vehicle disposal required




Prohibition of Smoking in Public and
Other Places




   95.175   Reserved



   95.176   Purpose



   95.177   Definitions



   95.178   Prohibition of smoking in public places



   95.179   Prohibition of smoking in public places and outdoor venues



   95.180   Prohibition in places of employment



   95.181   Designation of other no-smoking area



   95.182   Signs



   95.183   Severability



   95.184   Effective date




Enforcement




   95.195   Abatement of nuisances and enforcement



 



   95.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.001  ACTS GENERALLY PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act which endangers the public
health or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public.



(Prior Code, § 19-1)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.002  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein
below. When not inconsistent with the context, words, used in the present
tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number include the
singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.



      ABANDONED VEHICLE.



         (a)   Any vehicle which is left on any public or private
property and in view of the general public for such time and under such
circumstances as to appear that the owner has voluntarily relinquished all
right, interest and possession with the intention of terminating his or her
ownership, shall be considered an ABANDONED VEHICLE.



         (b)   Any vehicle which is upon private property and
which has not been moved for a period of at least 15 days and is unlicensed
by the state and the appropriate municipal authority, shall be considered an
ABANDONED VEHICLE.



         (c)   No motor vehicle shall be considered abandoned if
the owner has been granted permission by the city to store said vehicle on
his or her own property, or if such motor vehicle is stored within a garage
or building when not in use, or if the property owner can present proof that
the vehicle is in operating condition and is licensed by the state and the
appropriate municipal authority or that application for such license has been
made within the time period allowed by the state and by the municipal
authority.



      AGENT. The authorized or acting representative of the owner or
occupant of real property within the city.



      AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance used or designated for navigation or
for flight in the air. The word AIRCRAFT shall include helicopters and
lighter than air dirigibles and balloons.



      AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A container as required and
authorized by the ordinances of the city for the collection and storage of
rubbish, waste, refuse or other matter.



      CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY. Any property upon which three or more
public nuisance and/or nuisance activities or conditions, as defined in this
subchapter or elsewhere in this code of ordinances, have occurred during any
120-day period as the result of three separate factual events that have been
separately investigated by the city or any law enforcement agency. A property
that is found to be a CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY shall remain a CHRONIC
NUISANCE PROPERTY until such time that the City Manager or the Manager’s
designee certifies that the property has remained nuisance-free for 12
consecutive months.



      CITY. The City of Lake Forest.



      COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original copies of any matter or literature:



         (a)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise,
product, commodity or things;



         (b)   Which directs attention to any business or
mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity for the purchase of
either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales;



         (c)   Which directs attention to or advertises any
meetings, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which
an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit;
provided, however, that the terms of this section shall not apply when no
admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of
defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performances,
exhibition or event of any kind when either or any of the same is held, given
or takes place in connection with dissemination of information which is not
restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace,
safety and good order; and further provided, however, that nothing contained
in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking
place of any kind without a license where such a license is or may be
required by any law of this state or under any ordinance of this city; or



         (d)   Which while containing reading matter other than
advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit
and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.



      COMMERCIAL WASTE. All garbage, refuse, litter or rubbish from any
commercial business, including, but not limited to, stores, markets, office
buildings, restaurants, shopping centers, theaters and schools.



      DEPRECIATION OF PROPERTY VALUE. Property maintained (in relation
to surrounding property) so as to establish a prevalence of depreciated
values, impaired investments, and social and economic maladjustments to such
an extent that the capacity to pay taxes is reduced and tax receipts from
such particular area are inadequate for the cost of public services rendered
therein.



      FIRE HAZARD. Dry or dead shrub, tree, combustible refuse and
waste, or any material growing on a public street, public sidewalk or upon
private property within the city which by reason of its size, manner of
growth and location constitutes a fire hazard to a building, improvement,
crop or other property, or when dry, will in reasonable probability
constitute a FIRE HAZARD.



      GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



      INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES. Any motor vehicle which, for a period
of at least seven days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been altered,
damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven
under its own motor power. INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include a motor
vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under
its own power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations, nor
to any motor vehicles that are kept within a building when not in use, or to
a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in wrecking or
junking of motor vehicles.



      LITTER. Garbage, refuse, waste and rubbish as defined herein and
all other material which if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited tends or
may tend to create a danger to public health, safety, welfare and property
value. This term shall include such material whether it be on public or
private property.



      NEWSPAPER. Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by
general law, and any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department
of the United States in accordance with federal statute or regulation and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law; and in addition thereto shall mean and include any periodical or
current magazine regularly published with not less than four issued per year
and sold to the public.



      NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any
sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper or booklet or any other printed or otherwise produced original or
copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions
of a commercial handbill or newspaper.



      NUISANCE. Any and all sources, conditions or situations causing
danger, trouble, annoyance or inconvenience to others and which is
detrimental to public health, safety, welfare or property value. A NUISANCE
is one form of an offense.



      OCCUPANT. Any person in possession or having the right to
possession of real property within the city.



      OWNER. Any person having any interest, legal, equitable,
beneficial or otherwise, in real property within the city.



      PARK. A park reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other public area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to
active or passive recreation.



      PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation
of any kind.



      POLLUTED WATER. A swimming pool, pond or other body of water
which is unattended, unfiltered, or not otherwise maintained, resulting in
the water becoming polluted; POLLUTED WATER means water contained in a
swimming pool, pond or other body of water, which includes, but is not
limited to, bacterial growth, including algae, remains of insects, remains of
deceased animals, reptiles, rubbish, refuse, debris, papers and any other
foreign matter or material which because of its nature or location
constitutes an unhealthy, unsafe or unsightly condition.



      PROPERTY. Any real property within the city which is not a street
or highway.



      PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys
or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds
and buildings.



      REFUSE AND WASTE. Unused or discarded matter and material having
no substantial market value, and which consists of such matter and material
as: rubbish, refuse, debris and matter of any kind including, but not limited
to, rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, title, rocks, bricks, soil, building
materials, crates, cartons, containers, boxes, machinery or parts thereof,
scrap metal and other pieces of metal, ferrous or non-ferrous, furniture,
inoperative vehicles and parts, trimmings from plants, and trees, cans,
bottles and barrels.



      RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and non-combustible wastes such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, tree stumps, tree limbs, dirt,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery and all similar materials.



      STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.



      VEHICLE. A machine propelled by power other than human power
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or
slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include,
without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy
and wagon.



   (B)   In the event that an offense is not specifically defined in
this subchapter then the definitions of the offense as is found in the
Illinois Criminal Code of 2012, being 720 ILCS 5, as it may from time to time
be amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as the definitions of such
offense in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 49-1)  (Ord.  1540, passed 9-3-1985; Ord. 01-18, passed
6-21-2001; Ord. 2016-55, passed 10-17-2016)



HEALTH OFFICER



§ 95.015  OFFICE CREATED.



   There is hereby created the Office of Health Officer, an administrative
office of the city. The Office of Health Officer shall consist of the Health
Officer, Deputy Health Officers, and such other personnel as the Health
Officer may designate from time to time to assist with the performance of the
duties set forth in this Code.



(Prior Code, § 19-8) (Ord. 2016-55, passed 10-17-2016)



§ 95.016  APPOINTMENT.



   The City Manager shall serve as the Health Officer. The Deputy Health
Officers shall be the Director of Community Development, the Chief of Police,
and such other persons as the Health Officer may designate from time to time.
The Deputy Health Officers shall jointly aid in the performance of all duties
set forth in this subchapter, under the direction of the Health Officer.



(Prior Code, § 19-9) (Ord. 2016-55, passed 10-17-2016)



§ 95.017  DUTIES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to enforce all
ordinances, rules and regulations containing provisions for the protection of
public health, provided, however, that the duties of the Health Officer shall
not include any such duties that are within the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Lake County Health Department, Illinois Department of Public Health, or State
Board of Health.



   (B)   The Health Officer shall maintain liaison with the County
Health Department, and shall inform, coordinate with, and assist the
officers, sanitarians and technicians of the County Health Department in
making inspections in the city, and in enforcing such statutes, ordinances,
rules and regulations of the city, the state and of the County Board of
Health as pertain to public health in the city.



(Prior Code, § 19-10) (Ord. 2016-55, passed 10-17-2016)



§ 95.018  REPORTS.



   (A)   The Health Officer shall make such reports to the City Council
as may be required.



   (B)   He or she shall also make recommendations for rulings, orders,
or ordinances respecting the public health whenever he or she is requested to
do so, or whenever he or she deems it advisable or necessary so to do.



(Prior Code, § 19-12) (Ord. 2016-55, passed 10-17-2016)



REGISTRAR OF VITAL STATISTICS



§ 95.030  DESIGNATED.



   The City Clerk of the city shall be ex officio local Registrar of Vital
Statistics for the city



(Prior Code, § 19-19)



§ 95.031  REPORTS.



   A report of all births, stillbirths and deaths shall be made to the
local Registrar of Vital Statistics, which report shall contain all
information required by the Vital Records Act, 410 ILCS 535, as amended.



(Prior Code, § 19-20)



§ 95.032  RECORDS.



   The local Registrar shall keep a record showing all births, stillbirths
and deaths occurring within the city, which record shall include all
information required to be kept by the Act hereinabove described.



(Prior Code, § 19-21)



NUISANCES



§ 95.045  STAGNANT POOLS OF WATER.



   (A)   Any stagnant pool of water in the city is hereby declared to
be a nuisance.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
permit any such nuisance to remain or exist on any property under its control.



(Prior Code, § 19-28)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.046  DANGEROUS STRUCTURES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to permit any building, structure or
place to remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health
in any way.



   (B)   Any such structure, building or place is hereby declared to be
a nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 19-29)  Penalty, see § 95.999



ICE VENDING MACHINES



§ 95.060  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   lt shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain a
coin-operated machine, which vends ice, located and used the city unless a
license therefor has been issued by the city.



(Prior Code, § 19-37)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.061  FEE AND CONDITIONS.



   (A)   The fee for any license issued hereunder shall be as set out
in the fee schedule for each machine for each license year or any fraction
thereof, provided however, that no fee shall be due from any person holding a
valid food store license issued by the city.



   (B)   Each license year shall commence on May 1.



   (C)   No refunds or pro-rations shall be made on any license issued
hereunder and no license shall be transferable to any other person or machine.



   (D)   No license shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation
who is not in compliance with the ordinances of the city (other than traffic
ordinances) or who is in default in any payment to the city.



(Prior Code, § 19-38)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.062  CONSTRUCTION.



   No license shall be issued, take effect or remain in effect unless the
ice vending machine and the maintenance thereof shall conform to the
ordinances and regulations of the city and to the recommendations of the
Public Health Service of the United States Department of Health, Education
and Welfare as set forth in Public Health Service Publication No. 546 (1957)
and of the Health Department of the county.



(Prior Code, § 19-39)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.063  LIGHTING, PAINTING AND SIGNS.



   (A)   All ice vending machines shall be so painted, constructed,
illuminated and located on a lot as not to constitute a traffic hazard or a
nuisance.



   (B)   No blinking, unshaded or colored lights shall be used to
illuminate or advertise ice vending machines.



   (C)   All signs displayed in conjunction with, painted on or located
on the property on which an ice vending machine is located shall conform to
the sign ordinance of the city.



   (D)   The surface finish of a vending machine shall be in one
over-all non-luminous color.



   (E)   All permitted signs may be in the same color and one
additional contrasting non-luminous color.



   (F)   No insignia or design of any kind may be painted on or affixed
to a vending machine except such signs as are permitted under the provisions
of this section.



(Prior Code, § 19-40)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.064  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.



   (A)   Not less than three off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each dispensing unit contained in any ice vending machine.



   (B)   All loading, unloading or servicing of an ice vending machine
shall be performed on private premises.



(Prior Code, § 19-41)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.065  REGULATIONS.



   Each licensee shall comply with the following regulations.



   (A)   The following information shall be displayed on each ice
vending machine in a place where it may be easily read by a customer:



      (1)   Name of licensee;



      (2)   Address of licensee; and



      (3)   Telephone number of licensee to which calls for service
for the machine can be made during ordinary business hours.



   (B)   All vending machines shall be constructed so that coins are
returned to customers in the event the machine fails to deliver ice.



   (C)   (1)   Each such vending machine shall be serviced as often
as required to furnish ice vending service on a 24 hour per day, seven day
per week basis.



      (2)   If a machine is out of service, adequate notice shall be
posted on the machine.



      (3)   No machine shall be permitted to remain out of service
or operation for more than ten consecutive days without notice of such fact
being communicated to the Health Office by the licensee.



(Prior Code, § 19-42)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.066  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to enforce this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 19-43)



RATS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 95.080  RATS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and it shall be unlawful
for an owner or any person occupying or having any interest in private
property to permit rats to be present.



(Prior Code, § 19-48)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.081  ENFORCEMENT OF SUBCHAPTER.



   (A)   The Health Officer or Deputy Health Officer is charged with
the enforcement of this subchapter, and he or she or his or her authorized
representative may enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for
the purpose of inspecting such premises for the presence of rats as described
herein.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
prevent such Health Officer or his or her duly authorized representative from
entering upon private property for the purpose of carrying out his or her
duties hereinafter, or to interfere with such Health Officer or his or her
authorized representative in the lawful performance of his or her duties
under the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 19-49)  Penalty, see § 95.999



ADVERTISING



§ 95.110  GENERALLY.



   It shall be unlawful to advertise an unlawful business or article in
the city; and it shall be unlawful to injure or deface any lawful
advertisement or notice.



(Prior Code, § 49-2)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.111  BILLS ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No persons shall post, stick, stamp, tack, paint or otherwise,
fix, or cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard,
billcard, poster, advertisement or other device calculated to attract the
attention of the public, to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or
curbstone, flag stone or any other portion or part of any public way, lamp
post, electric light, telegraph, telephone or trolley line pole, hydrant,
tree or tree-box or upon the piers, columns, trusses, girders, railings,
gates or other parts of any public bridge or viaduct, or upon any pole box or
fixture of the fire alarm or police telegraph system, except such as may be
required or permitted by laws of the state and the ordinances of the city.



   (B)   No person shall post, stick, stamp, tack, paint or otherwise
fix, or cause the same to be done by another person, any notice, placard,
bill, handbill, sign, poster, card advertisement or other device calculated
to attract the attention of the public, upon any building or part thereof or
window, without first obtaining the consent of the owner, lessee or occupant
of such premises or structure.



(Prior Code, § 49-3) (Ord. 2016-55, passed 10-17-2016)  Penalty, see §
95.999



§ 95.112  SAMPLES OR MERCHANDISE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation by himself or
herself, or his, her or its agents or servants to distribute, cast, throw or
place, or cause to distribute, cast, throw or place, in, upon or along any of
the streets, alleys or public places of the city, or upon the premises or
yards of private residences therein, or within any dwelling or building in
the city any samples or merchandise or medicinal preparations for the purpose
or with the intent of advertising or making known in a general promiscuous
manner any business, occupation, proposition, medical treatment, medicine, or
any other article whatsoever.



(Prior Code, § 49-4) (Ord. 2016-55, passed 10-17-2016)  Penalty, see §
95.999



LITTER; HANDBILLS



§ 95.125  LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk
or other public places within the city except in public receptacles, in
authorized private receptacles for collection or in an official city disposal
facility.



(Prior Code, § 49-5)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.126  PLACEMENT OF LITTER IN RECEPTACLES SO AS TO PREVENT SCATTERING.



   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent such litter from
falling upon, or being carried or deposited by the elements upon, any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.



(Prior Code, § 49-6)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.127  SWEEPING REFUSE AND WASTE INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED; DUTY TO KEEP
PUBLIC PLACES FREE OF REFUSE AND WASTE.



   (A)   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or
other public place within the city the accumulation of refuse and waste from
any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.



   (B)   Persons owning or occupying any premises within the city shall
keep the sidewalk and gutter in front of their premises free of refuse and
waste.



(Prior Code, § 49-7)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.128  LITTER FROM OR BY VEHICLES.



   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
city unless such vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered as to prevent
any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street,
alley or other public place or upon private property nor shall any person
drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of
which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, place
mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, refuse, waste or foreign matter of any
kind.



(Prior Code, § 49-8)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.129  THROWING OR DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle, sidewalk, street or other public place
within the city; nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any
commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not
be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city for
any person to handout or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof
any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.



(Prior Code, § 49-9)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.130  DEPOSITING COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS ON UNINHABITED OR VACANT PREMISES.



   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.



(Prior Code, § 49-10)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.131  PROHIBITING DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS WHERE PROPERLY POSTED.



   (A)   Generally. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any
commercial or noncommercial handbill, magazine, newspaper or other printed
matter upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so
or if there is placed on said premises a sign bearing the words: “No
Trespassing,” “No Peddlers or Agents,” “No Advertisements” or any
similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises
do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to
have any such printed matter in or upon such inhabited private premises. On
properties with no such limitations, printed matter must be placed or
deposited in a manner to secure and prevent such matter from being blown or
drifted about such private premises, neighboring properties, sidewalks,
streets or other public places.



   (B)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
the distribution of regular mail by the United States Postal Service nor to
home delivery of newspapers as defined herein or other printed matter
delivered pursuant to the order, request or subscription of the owner or
occupant of the premises; provided, however, that all such matter shall be
placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried
or deposited by wind, rain or other natural elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.



(Prior Code, § 49-11) (Ord. 2016-55, passed 10-17-2016)  Penalty, see §
95.999



§ 95.132  DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT.



   No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the
city any litter, handbill or any other object.



(Prior Code, § 49-12)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.133  POSTING NOTICES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall post or fix to any lamp post, public utility pole or
shade tree, place in the ground within the public right-of-way, or affix to
any public structure or building any notice, poster or sign or device
calculated to attract the attention of the public except as may be authorized
or required by law.



(Prior Code, § 49-13) (Ord. 2016-55, passed 10-17-2016)  Penalty, see §
95.999



PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



§ 95.145  REFUSE AND WASTE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or unoccupied
private property within the city whether or not owned by such person except
that the owner or person in control of the private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.



(Prior Code, § 49-14) (Ord. 2016-55, passed 10-17-2016)  Penalty, see §
95.999



§ 95.146  MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY.



   It is hereby declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing,
occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in this city to
maintain such premises in such manner that any of the following conditions
are found to be exist thereon:



   (A)   Buildings which are abandoned, boarded up or in part boarded
up, partially destroyed or left unreasonably in a state of partial
construction;



   (B)   Unpainted buildings, buildings with extensive peeling paint,
dry rot, warping and termite infestation;



   (C)   Broken or missing windows constituting hazardous conditions
and inviting trespassers and malicious mischief;



   (D)   Overgrown vegetation or obnoxious vegetation including
vegetation on the public parkway immediately adjacent to private property:



      (1)   Causing detriment to neighboring properties or property
values or causing a hazardous condition to pedestrian and/or vehicular
traffic;



      (2)   Likely to harbor rats, vermin and other nuisances;



      (3)   Grass or weeds more than eight inches high, except
native grasses in designated natural areas, open lands, wetlands and on golf
courses; and



      (4)   Vegetation that is a fire hazard because it is near
other combustibles, extends into a public right-of-way or extends across a
property line.



   (E)   Dead trees, weeds and debris:



      (1)   Constituting an unsightly appearance;



      (2)   Dangerous to public safety and welfare, or



      (3)   Detrimental to nearby property or property values.



   (F)   Trailers, campers, boats and other mobile equipment stored
within the front yard zoning setback applicable to the property for longer
than 30 days;



   (G)   Inoperative, abandoned, wrecked or dismantled vehicles stored
on the premises for longer than 30 days;



   (H)   Parking of any form of motor driven bike, scooter or vehicle
on mud, grass or any non-all weather surface;



   (I)   Attractive nuisances dangerous to children in the form of:



      (1)   Abandoned and broken equipment including, but not
limited to, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers;
and



      (2)   Hazardous pools and ponds.



   (J)   Broken or discarded furniture and household equipment in
visible yard areas for longer then ten days;



   (K)   Clothes lines in front yard areas;



   (L)   Packing boxes and other debris stored in yards and visible
from public streets for longer than three days;



   (M)   Property including, but not limited to, building exteriors
which are maintained in such condition as to become so defective, unsightly
or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes
depreciable diminution of the property values of surrounding property or is
materially detrimental to proximal properties and improvements. This
includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or disposing of or the
scattering over the property or premises of any of the following:



      (1)   Lumber, junk, trash or debris;



      (2)   Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment
including, but not limited to, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers,
cans or containers;



      (3)   Stagnant water;



      (4)   Any device, decoration, design, fence or structure which
is unsightly by reason of its condition or its inappropriate location; and



      (5)   Rubbish, litter, garbage and commercial waste.



   (N)   Maintenance of premises so out of harmony or conformity which
is unsightly by reason of its condition or its inappropriate location;



   (O)   Maintenance of an activity or condition in violation of the
provisions set forth in §§ 95.126 and 95.127;



   (P)   Maintenance of an activity or a condition on a property
identified as a public nuisance or nuisance as set forth in the city code,
including, but not limited to, Chapters 50, 99, 113 and this chapter and §§
135.010 through 135.013, 135.040 through 135.042, 135.060, 135.061, 135.105
through 135.108, 135.120, 135.121, 135.135 through 135.139 of the city code;
and



   (Q)   Maintenance of any nuisance condition or activity on a chronic
nuisance property.



(Prior Code, § 49-15)  (Ord. 2008-16, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 01-18, passed
6-21-2001; Am. Ord. 2016-55, passed 10-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.147  PLACEMENT OF REFUSE AND WASTE ON VACANT LOTS.



   No person shall throw or deposit refuse or waste on any open or vacant
private or public property within the city, whether owned by such person or
not.



(Prior Code, § 49-16)  Penalty, see § 95.999



ABANDONED VEHICLES



§ 95.160  INOPERABLE AND ABANDONED VEHICLES DECLARED TO BE A NUISANCE.



   Abandoned and inoperable motor vehicles as defined herein, whether on
public or private property, are hereby declared to be a nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 49-17)



§ 95.161  INOPERABLE OR ABANDONED VEHICLE DISPOSAL REQUIRED.



   All persons are required to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicle or
any abandoned motor vehicle under their control upon written notice received
from the corporate authorizes or from the Chief of Police or any member of
his or her Department designated by him or her commanding such disposition of
said inoperable or abandoned motor vehicle within 15 days from the date of
such notice.



(Prior Code, § 49-18)  Penalty, see § 95.999



PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC AND OTHER PLACES



§ 95.175  RESERVED.



§ 95.176  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter may be cited as the “Lake Forest Smoking Ban
Ordinance,” the purpose of which is to protect the public health, comfort
and environment by prohibiting smoking in all public places and places of
employment, in order to ensure that nonsmokers may breathe air free from the
hazardous effects of secondhand smoke.



(Ord. 2006-43, passed 8-7-2006)



§ 95.177  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE.  Any device that may be used to deliver
aerosolized or vaporized nicotine to the person inhaling from the device,
including. but not limited to. an e-cigarette. e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen, or
e-hookah. This definition includes any component, pan, or accessory of such a
device, whether or not sold separately, and includes any substance intended
to be aerosolized or vaporized during the use of the device. This definition
does not include drugs, devices, or combination products authorized for sale
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, as those terms are defined in the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person who is employed by a business, and shall include
the owner or operator of a sole proprietorship or other similar business
entity.



   EMPLOYER. Any business that employs one or more employees.



   ENCLOSED AREA. All space in any structure or building that is enclosed
on all sides by any combination of walls, windows or doorways, extending from
floor to the ceiling.



   OUTDOOR DINING AREA. Any part of a restaurant that is not in an
enclosed area where employees are required or permitted to work.



   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed area of a business within the city
where one or more employees are required or permitted by an employer to work
in the course of their employment, and includes, without limitation, common
work areas, private offices, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting
rooms, cafeterias, elevators, employee lounges, stairs, hallways, restrooms,
medical facilities, private clubs, restaurants and the interior of a vehicle
of public conveyance. A PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT does not include a private
dwelling unit, unless the dwelling is also used as a day care facility for
children or adults; provided that rooms in nursing homes or long-term care
facilities occupied by one or more persons who have requested in writing a
room where smoking is permitted shall be considered private dwelling units.



   PUBLIC PLACE.



      (1)   Any area that is open to and used by the general public,
or any area to which the public is invited or in which the public is
permitted, including without limitation:



         (a)   Vehicles of public conveyance, including their
loading areas and platforms;



         (b)   Common or public areas (including without
limitation lobbies, hallways, reception areas, public restrooms and
elevators) of apartment buildings, condominiums, dormitory buildings, nursing
home care facilities and other multiple family residential structures;



         (c)   Common or public areas (including without
limitation lobbies, hallways, reception areas, public restrooms and
elevators) of any building or structure that is accessible to the public,
including without limitation office, commercial and industrial buildings,
banks and financial institutions, educational institutions, health care
facilities such as hospitals, clinics and doctor’s offices, museums,
libraries, restaurants, polling places, government and city-owned buildings,
food stores, cafeterias, theaters, auditoriums, train and bus stations,
hotels, motels, and retail and service establishments;



         (d)   Rooms, chambers, halls or other enclosed areas
within which meetings, hearings, or gatherings are held, to which the public
is invited or in which the public is permitted, including specifically, but
without limitation, any enclosed area under the control of the city; and



         (e)   Any outdoor public area, including parks, beaches,
Market Square.



      (2)   PUBLIC PLACE shall not include a private dwelling unit,
unless said dwelling is also used as a day care facility for children or
adults; provided that rooms in nursing homes or long-term care facilities
occupied by one or more persons who have requested in writing a room where
smoking is permitted shall be considered private dwelling units; or



   RESTAURANT. Any coffee shop, cafeteria, luncheonette, sandwich stand,
soda fountain, private and public school cafeteria or eating establishment,
and any other eating establishment, organization, club, including veterans’
club, boardinghouse or guesthouse, which gives or offers for sale food to the
public, guests, patrons or employees, as well as kitchens in which food is
prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering facilities.



   SMOKE or SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying a lighted
cigar, cigarette, pipe or other combustible substance in any manner or in any
form. This definition shall also include the inhaling or exhaling of the
byproduct of the burning of any smoking materials or other release of gaseous
vapors from electronic smoking devices (as defined in this section). This
definition does not include the burning or carrying of incense in a religious
ceremony or the use of matches or lighters for nonsmoking purposes.



(Ord. 2006-43, passed 8-7-2006; Ord. 2017-74, passed 12-18-2017)



§ 95.178  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   It shall be unlawful to smoke in any enclosed area of any public place.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or lessee, as the case may be,
in control of a public place to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area
in a public place.



(Ord. 2006-43, passed 8-7-2006)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.179  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND OUTDOOR VENUES.



   It is unlawful to smoke in the following unenclosed public places:



   (A)   The seating areas of all outdoor arenas, stadiums and
amphitheaters;



   (B)   Public parks, beaches and vehicle platforms and loading areas,
and recreation areas, except for those areas of the Deerpath Golf Course
located at least 75 feet from the clubhouse building;



   (C)   School grounds;



   (D)   Outdoor dining areas;



   (E)   Public sidewalks within 25 feet of a public entrance of an
enclosed area of either a public place or place of employment; and



   (F)   Market Square including sidewalks.



(Ord. 2006-43, passed 8-7-2006)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.180  PROHIBITION IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   Smoking shall be prohibited in any enclosed area of any place
of employment.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any employer to knowingly permit
smoking in any enclosed area of any place of employment.



(Ord. 2006-43, passed 8-7-2006)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.181  DESIGNATION OF OTHER NO-SMOKING AREA.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to limit the owner, occupant
or lessee of a public place or a place of employment to further prohibit
smoking by designating outdoor areas not otherwise subject to the
restrictions of this subchapter as a place where smoking is also prohibited,
provided the owner, occupant or lessee conspicuously posts signs wherever
smoking is prohibited in the same manner set forth in § 95.182 of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-43, passed 8-7-2006)



§ 95.182  SIGNS.



   (A)   Each owner, lessor, lessee, employer or other person in
control of a public place shall post conspicuous “No Smoking” signs in
the enclosed area of any public place where smoking in prohibited.



   (B)   Such “No Smoking” signs shall have a white field with the
words “No Smoking” printed in red letters, four inches high with a
one-half inch face, or shall bear the international “No Smoking” symbol,
which consists of a pictorial representation of a cigarette enclosed in a
circle with a bar across it.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or
obscure any sign posted pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-43, passed 8-7-2006)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.183  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision or part of this subchapter or application thereof to
any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remainder of the
subchapter and the application of the provision or part thereof to other
persons not similarly situated or to other circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.



(Ord. 2006-43, passed 8-7-2006)



§ 95.184  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   (A)   In general.



      (1)   The provisions of this subchapter shall take effect as
of September 1, 2006.



      (2)   All premises affected by this subchapter which are in
existence on the approval date hereof shall cause such signs to be posted in
a conspicuous location within the public place on or before September 1, 2006.



      (3)   All premises affected by this subchapter which are
established subsequent to the approval date hereof shall cause such signs to
be so posted as a condition to obtaining applicable business licensing.



   (B)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding the effective date in division (A)
above, the provisions of this subchapter shall take effect on May 1, 2007 for
any restaurant or establishment holding either a Class B-1, B-2, C through
C-7, D, E or E-1 liquor license issued by the city.



(Ord. 2006-43, passed 8-7-2006)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 95.195  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Abatement of nuisances; notice to remove.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to permit or maintain the existence of any nuisance on any property under
his, her, or its control, including, but not limited to, any nuisance
specifically recognized by this Chapter 95.



      (2)   The City Manager, Chief of Police, and Director of
Community Development, or their designees, are hereby authorized to abate any
nuisance existing in the city, whether such nuisance is one specifically
recognized by ordinance or not.



      (3)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, is hereby
authorized and empowered to notify the owner or occupant of any property
within the city or the agent of such owner or occupant to properly correct
the nuisance located on such owner’s property which is dangerous to public
health, safety, welfare or property value.



      (4)   Such notice shall be effective by mailing the same by
certified mail, postage fully prepaid, or by personal delivery, to the owner,
tenant or agent at their last known place of residence, or to the person to
whom was sent the tax bill for general taxes for the last preceding year on
the property on which the nuisance is found.



   (B)   Action upon noncompliance. Upon failure or neglect or refusal
of any owner, occupant or agent so notified to properly correct the offense
which is dangerous to the public health, safety, welfare or property value
within the time prescribed by the written notice provided for in division (A)
above, which time period shall not be less than five days after delivery or
mailing of such notice, the City Manager, or his or her designee, is hereby
authorized and empowered to effect the correction of such nuisance as
provided in this section.



   (C)   Costs charged to owner.



      (1)   The city may provide for the removal of a nuisance from
private property when the owner of such property, after reasonable notice,
refuses or neglects to remove such nuisance, and may collect from such owner
the reasonable cost thereof, including direct administrative expenses and
overhead costs for third-party services, and any attorneys’ fees; amounts
not paid within 30 days after notice of the cost of abatement will also
accrue interest at a rate of 12% per annum.



      (2)   This cost is a lien upon the real estate affected,
superior to all subsequent liens and encumbrances, except tax liens, if
within 60 days after such cost and expense is incurred the city, or person
performing the service by authority of the city, in his or her or its own
name, files notice of lien in the office of the Recorder in the county in
which such real estate is located or in the office of the Registrar of Titles
of such county if the real estate affected is registered under the Land Sales
Registration Act of 1999, being 765 ILCS 86, as amended.



      (3)   The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting
out:



         (a)   A description of the real estate sufficient for
identification thereof;



         (b)   The amount of money representing the cost and
expense incurred or payable for the service; and



         (c)   The date or dates when such cost and expense was
incurred by the city.



      (4)   However, the lien of such city shall not be valid as to
any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have risen subsequent
to removal of the nuisance and prior to the filing of such notice, and the
lien of such city shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor
or other lienor whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the
filing of such notice.



      (5)   Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or
persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the
lien shall be released by the city or person in whose name the lien has been
filed and the release may be filed of record in the case of filing notice of
lien.



      (6)   The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as
in case of mortgages or mechanics’ liens. An action to foreclose this lien
shall be commenced within two years after the date of filing notice of lien.



      (7)   In addition to the foregoing, no permits, inspection
approvals or transfer stamps may be issued for any real estate where amounts
arising from any such nuisance abatement have not been paid in full.



   (D)   Alternates.



      (1)   In addition to or as an alternative to the foregoing,
the City Manager or his or her designee may issue an ordinance violation
citation, returnable in the appropriate courtroom of the County Circuit
Court, Branch Court Division, for violation of a particular section or
sections of this subchapter.



      (2)   Further, and as an additional or alternate method of
enforcement, the City Manager may authorize the City Attorney to commence a
civil proceeding to correct the offense under applicable statutory provisions.



   (E)   Procedure in case of emergency. When the conditions which
constitute the nuisance pose an immediate threat to the public peace, health
or safety, the City Manager may order the offense corrected immediately.



   (F)   Chronic nuisance property.



      (1)   After the city has given notice that a property is a
chronic nuisance property, the city may initiate abatement or enforcement
actions with respect to any new, recurring or continued nuisance condition or
activity on such chronic nuisance property without further notice.



      (2)   The city may record on the chain of title for such
property in the County Recorder’s office a notice that such property is a
chronic nuisance, provided that a further notice shall later be recorded at
such time that the property ceases to be a chronic nuisance property.



      (3)   In addition to or in lieu of the actions authorized
divisions (A) through (E) above, the city may request a court of competent
jurisdiction for injunctive relief, a cease and desist order, or any other
necessary or convenient relief to abate all nuisances on a chronic nuisance
property.



(Prior Code, § 49-19)  (Ord. 93-2, passed 1-21-1993; Ord. 01-18, passed
6-21-2001; Ord. 2008-16, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 2016-55, passed 10-17-2016)



§ 95.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
fined in accordance with the fee schedule adopted annually by the City
Council or, if no applicable fine or other penalty is provided therein or
otherwise specifically provided by this chapter, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 10.99 of this city code. In addition, any cost of
collection of fines or other amounts due to the city may be assessed in
accordance with § 10.99(B) of this city code.



   (B)   Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.



   (C)   The remedies herein provided shall not be deemed or considered
exclusive, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to restrict or
limit the city in taking or maintaining any other or additional remedy either
in law or in equity given it for the definition, declaration and abatement of
nuisances.



(Ord. 817, passed 4-17-1971; Ord. 93-2, passed 1-21-1993; Ord. 01-18, passed
6-21-2001; Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003; Ord. 2006-43, passed 8-7-2006; Ord.
2016-55, passed 10-17-2016)



CHAPTER 96:  LIBRARY



Section




Library Trustees




   96.01   Board created



   96.02   Members; appointment and term of office



   96.03   Removals



   96.04   Purpose



   96.05   Powers and duties




LIBRARY TRUSTEES




§ 96.01  BOARD CREATED.



   There is hereby created a Board of Library Trustees for the management
and control of the city library, in accordance with the provisions of the
Illinois Local Library Act, 75 ILCS 5, as well as the city’s home rule
authority under Article VII, § 6 of the Illinois Constitution of 1970.



(Prior Code, § 22-1)  (Ord. 1571, passed 1-6-1986; Ord. 2009-01, passed
1-2-2009)



§ 96.02  MEMBERS; APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   The Board of Library Trustees shall consist of nine members,
not more than one of whom shall be a member of the City Council, as is
provided in the above cited statute.



   (B)   Members shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the
approval of the City Council, and shall serve for a three-year term with
one-third of the library trustees having their terms expire annually.



   (C)   No individual shall serve for more than two three-year terms.



   (D)   Members shall receive no compensation.



   (E)   Officer positions will be determined by members.



   (F)   Vacancies may be filled in the manner in which original
appointments are made.



   (G)   The term of each trustee shall commence with July 1.



(Prior Code, § 22-2)  (Ord. 1571, passed 1-6-1986; Ord. 2009-01, passed
1-2-2009)



§ 96.03  REMOVALS.



   The Mayor may, with the approval of the Council, remove any member of
the Library Board for misconduct or neglect of duty, as is provided by
statute.



(Prior Code, § 22-3)  (Ord. 1571, passed 1-6-1986; Ord. 2009-01, passed
1-2-2009)



§ 96.04  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The Board of Library Trustees is a quasi-independent board
providing library service for residents of the city.



   (B)   The Board of Library Trustees has full control and management
powers of the city library.



(Ord. 2009-01, passed 1-2-2009)



§ 96.05  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board of Library Trustees shall have the following powers and
duties:



   (A)   Exercise sole charge and exclusive control of all moneys
collected for and belonging to the library and deposited to the credit of the
Library Fund, with full fiduciary responsibilities;



   (B)   Make reports to the City Council as required;



   (C)   Make and adopt bylaws, rules and regulations not inconsistent
with the city code for their own guidance and internal operations;



   (D)   Purchase, lease, sell or dispose of any real or personal
property of the city library; and



   (E)   Enter into contracts, and take title to any property acquired
by the city library, for library purposes.



(Ord. 2009-01, passed 1-2-2009)



CHAPTER 97:  PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS



Section




General Provisions




   97.001   Picnics



   97.002   Fires



   97.003   Profane language



   97.004   Reserved



   97.005   Jet or engine-powered equipment



   97.006   Preservation of natural resources



   97.007   Vehicle repairs




Park and Recreation Board




   97.020   Establishment; term of office



   97.021   Powers and duties



   97.022   Charter application




Director of Parks and Recreation




   97.035   Creation of office



   97.036   Appointment



   97.037   Duties



   97.038   Promulgation of rules and regulations



   97.039   Authority to prohibit use of facilities




Deerpath Park Golf Course




   97.050   Management; restrictions



   97.051   Fees



   97.052   Golf carts



   97.053   Animals



   97.054   Authority to prohibit use of facilities




Forest Park




   97.065   Beach area



   97.066   Boat launching and storage area



   97.067   Parking at Forest Park



   97.068   Alcoholic beverages



   97.069   Fees for nonresident daily access and proof of residency



   97.070   Watercraft registration; abandoned watercraft




Senior Resources Commission




   97.085   Creation; composition; term



   97.086   Purpose



   97.087   Powers and duties




Elawa Farm Commission




   97.115   Creation; purposes



   97.116   Composition; term; qualifications



   97.117   Chairperson; quorum; conduct of meetings



   97.118   Powers and duties



   97.119   Indemnification




CROYA Adult Board




   97.130   Creation; composition; term



   97.131   Purpose



   97.132   Powers and duties




Gorton Community Center Commission




   97.145   Creation; appointment; term; composition



   97.146   Purpose



   97.147   Powers and duties



   97.148   Executive Director



   97.149   Termination of agreements



   97.150   Assistance with certain liabilities



 



   97.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 97.001  PICNICS.



   Picnics will be permitted in all areas of the public parks unless
prohibited by signs or as otherwise prohibited by the Director of Parks and
Recreation.



(Prior Code, § 27-1)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971; Ord. 1683, passed 4-6-1987)



§ 97.002  FIRES.



   No person shall light or make use of any fire on the bathing beach or
in any park outside of a designated fireplace in picnic areas, without first
having obtained written permission from the Director of Parks and Recreation
and a bonfire/ceremonial burn permit from the Fire Department.



(Prior Code, § 27-2)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971; Ord. 1683, passed 4-6-1987; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016) 
Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.003  PROFANE LANGUAGE.



   No person shall use profane, offensive or vulgar language and no person
shall conduct himself or herself in a rough or boisterous or offensive manner
while in any public park.



(Prior Code, § 27-3)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.004  RESERVED.



§ 97.005  JET OR ENGINE-POWERED EQUIPMENT.



   Jet or engine powered equipment is prohibited in the public parks,
except upon written authorization of the Director of Parks and Recreation.



(Prior Code, § 27-5)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.006  PRESERVATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES.



   (A)   No person shall remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs
or plants or any other natural resources from any public park, public street,
alley or other public place.



   (B)   Nor shall any person damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove
any tree or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or
plant on any such public place.



   (C)   No person shall damage, deface or injure by any means any
grass areas, or in any way disturb the existing environment or usefulness of
any public area.



(Prior Code, § 27-6)  (Ord. 810, passed 5-3-1971; Ord. 1683, passed
4-6-1987)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.007  VEHICLE REPAIRS.



   (A)   No person shall perform repairs of any kind to any vehicle,
watercraft, or trailer in a public park or parking lot, except minor
emergency repairs necessary to remove such vehicles therefrom.



   (B)   Nor shall any person grease, wash or change the oil in a
vehicle in a public park or parking lot.



(Prior Code, § 27-7)  (Ord. 810, passed 5-3-1971; Ord. 1683, passed
4-6-1987; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)  Penalty, see § 97.999



PARK AND RECREATION BOARD



§ 97.020  ESTABLISHMENT; TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established a Lake Forest Park and
Recreation Board, which shall consist of seven members, to be appointed by
the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.



      (2)   The term of office for each member shall be two years,
or until their successors are appointed and have qualified, except that the
members of the Board first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that
the term of one member shall expire annually thereafter.



   (B)   One of the members of the Board shall be named Chairperson of
the Board by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council at the time of their
appointment and shall hold their office as such Chairperson until their
successor is appointed.



   (C)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of any Board member, the
Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a successor to
serve for the unexpired term.



   (D)   It is the sense of the City Council that the members of the
boards and commissions whose terms are fixed shall serve a maximum of six
years, and shall not be eligible for reappointment to the same position for
three years thereafter.



   (E)   The members shall serve without compensation.



(Prior Code, § 27-15)  (Ord. 96-44, passed 12-19-1996; Ord. 2011-28, passed
11-21-2011)



§ 97.021  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Park and Recreation Board shall have such powers and duties as are
now or may hereafter be given to it by law or the City Council, which shall
include the following powers and duties.



   (A)   The Board shall serve as an advisory body in regard to all
matters concerning the development, finances, operation and overall policies
of recreation programs, forestry services, playgrounds, recreation center,
golf course, beach and all other city-owned park and recreation facilities,
and make recommendations thereon to the City Council, City Manager and to
others as may be appropriate.



   (B)   The Board shall act as a liaison between the residents and
City Council in park and recreation



matters and investigate and make recommendations to the City Council
concerning any and all matters related to division (A) above.



   (C)   (1)   The Board shall advise the Director of Parks and
Recreation with respect to policy issues in the preparation of the annual
operating budget and program plan for consideration by the City Council.



      (2)   The Board shall work with the Director of Parks and
Recreation to implement the annual budget and program plan following adoption
by the City Council.



   (D)   (1)   The Board shall have the power to adopt by-laws,
rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions hereof or with the
law.



      (2)   Any by-laws, rules and regulations in effect at the time
of adoption of this chapter will be deemed to be in effect unless otherwise
modified by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 27-16)  (Ord. 96-44, passed 12-19-1996; Ord. 2011-28, passed
11-21-2011)



§ 97.022  CHARTER APPLICATION.



   In all other respects, the provisions of the Charter and 65 ILCS
5/11-95-1 et seq. shall govern.



(Prior Code, § 27-17)  (Ord. 405, passed 4-5-1954; Ord. 1128, passed
9-10-1979; Ord. 96-44, passed 12-19-1996)



DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION



§ 97.035  CREATION OF OFFICE.



   There is hereby created the office of Director of Parks and Recreation,
an administrative office of the city.



(Prior Code, § 27-23)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971)



§ 97.036  APPOINTMENT.



   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be appointed by the City
Manager.



(Prior Code, § 27-24)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971)



§ 97.037  DUTIES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Parks and Recreation
to manage, protect, improve, beautify and control the public parks in the
city, subject to the direction of the City Manager and the City Council, and
to enforce all ordinances pertaining to trees, plants and shrubs in or on any
public street, alley, parkway or other public place in the city excepting in
any area specifically designated to be under the jurisdiction of some other
agency of the city, state or federal government.



   (B)   He or she shall take all appropriate measures toward the
prevention and suppression of tree and plant diseases, and shall cooperate
with the residents of the city to aid in the prevention and suppression of
tree and plant diseases, and to promulgate the proper planting and care of
trees and shrubs throughout the city.



(Prior Code, § 27-25)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 97.038  PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall prescribe and publish rules
and regulations governing proper control and operation of the public parks of
the city and from time to time alter, amend and supplement such rules and
regulations as he or she shall see fit; and such uniform rules and
regulations shall be binding and shall be filed for use and examination by
the public in the office of the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 27-26)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971)



§ 97.039  AUTHORITY TO PROHIBIT USE OF FACILITIES.



   The Director of Parks and Recreation, or his or her duly authorized
representative, shall have the authority to prevent persons from using any
park grounds or facilities when in his or her judgment, the condition of the
premises is such that damage to said areas and facilities would result.



(Prior Code, § 27-27)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971)



DEERPATH PARK GOLF COURSE



§ 97.050  MANAGEMENT; RESTRICTIONS.



   Except as may hereinafter be provided, use of the facilities at
Deerpath Park Golf Course shall be restricted to those persons paying the
dues or fees hereinafter set forth.



(Prior Code, § 27-37)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971)



§ 97.051  FEES.



   (A)   The license fees shall be set by the City Council by motion,
and may be changed from time to time, by motion, as the Council deems
necessary.



   (B)   The fees for the Deerpath Park Golf Course shall be as set out
in the fee schedule.



   (C)   (1)   Payment of the full amount of the season fee will be
made prior to use of the golf course.



      (2)   Season privilege players failing to pay seasonal fees
within ten days of notification by the Finance Department will be excluded
from playing and seasonal privileges until fees are paid.



   (D)   A city resident may have guests at resident fees, providing
the guest’s place of residence is beyond a 50-mile radius of the city.



(Prior Code, § 27-38)  (Ord. 945, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 978, passed
3-13-1976; Ord. 1088, passed 4-2-1979; Ord. 1216, passed 2-24-1981; Ord.
1300, passed 4-5-1982; Ord. 1411, passed 2-18-1984; Ord. 1488, passed
3-16-1985; Ord. 1587, passed 3-15-1986; Ord. 1680, passed 2-14-1987; Ord.
1990-5, passed 2-17-1990; Ord. 98-1, passed 1-5-1998; Ord. 04-06, passed
1-5-2004)



§ 97.052  GOLF CARTS.



   Privately owned, self-propelled golf carts shall not be allowed on the
golf course.



   (A)   The Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her duly
authorized representative shall have the authority to fully regulate the use
of self-propelled golf carts and when, in his or her judgment such use would
be harmful to the course, may prohibit such use.



   (B)   Any person operating a self-propelled golf cart on the
Deerpath Park Course shall pay a fee as reflected in the fee schedule for
such privilege.



   (C)   Resident and nonresident senior citizens are entitled to a
senior citizen golf carts rate.



(Prior Code, § 27-39)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971; Ord. 1088, passed 4-2-1979; Ord. 1011, passed 3-7-1977; Ord. 1216,
passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 1411, passed 2-18-1984; Ord. 1488, passed 3-16-1985;
Ord. 1587, passed 3-15-1986; Ord. 1680, passed 2-14-1987; Ord. 1990-5, passed
2-17-1990; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 97.053  ANIMALS.



   No animals shall be permitted on the golf course or in or around the
clubhouse.



(Prior Code, § 27-40)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.054  AUTHORITY TO PROHIBIT USE OF FACILITIES.



   The city reserves the right to deny the use of any of the facilities at
Deerpath Park Golf Course to any person for failure to observe the
regulations pertaining thereto.



(Prior Code, § 27-41)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971)



FOREST PARK



§ 97.065  BEACH AREA.



   (A)   The Lake Forest Beach is designated as that portion of the
Lake Michigan shore lying between the north property line of Forest Park, and
the north jetty of the protected boat launching basin.



   (B)   The bathing beach is designated as that portion of the beach
area of Lake Michigan lying between the jetty to Breakwater V and the north
jetty of the protected boat launching basin.



   (C)   The windsurfer and small sailing boat beach is designated as
that portion of the beach area of Lake Michigan lying between the jetty to
Breakwater V and the north property line of Forest Park.



   (D)   (1)   The City Manager and Director of Parks and Recreation
shall make such rules and regulations from time to time as are necessary for
the proper supervision, public safety and improved public use of said beach.



      (2)   Said rules and regulations shall be available for public
inspection at City Hall during normal business hours.



(Prior Code, § 27-49)  (Ord. 1445, passed 6-16-1984; Ord. 1683, passed
4-6-1987; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 97.066  BOAT LAUNCHING AND STORAGE AREA.



   (A)   The boat launching and storage area is designated as that
portion of the shore area of Lake Michigan lying between the north jetty of
tile protected boat launching basin and the south boundary line of Forest
Park.



   (B)   (1)   (a)   The use of the boat launching and storage
area is restricted to the launching and storage of boats and parking of
permitted vehicles.



         (b)   Permits and permit fees for the use of the boat
launching and storage area shall be in accordance with divisions (C), (D) and
(G) below.



      (2)   Vehicles which have a valid ramp launching, South beach,
or boat storage and launching permit affixed may park in this area.



      (3)   Penalties for violation of this section shall be as
provided in § 70.999 of the city code.



   (C)   (1)   Permits for the use of the boat storage and launching
facilities shall be obtained annually and shall be valid for the boating
season of the year in which it is issued.



      (2)   (a)   All boats required to be registered under
appropriate laws of the state shall furnish a copy of the state registration
at the time of application for permit.



         (b)   If the state boat registration expires or is
forfeited for any reason, the city permit shall be automatically and
immediately revoked and without refund.



   (D)   (1)   Fees as reflected in the annual fee schedule shall be
charged for annual permits for use of the boat launching and boat storage
areas.



      (2)   The fees for permits issued on or after August 1 of any
year shall be one-half of the annual fee(s) set forth annually.



   (E)   (1)   Boats or other watercraft shall not be launched or
landed at, or taken within 300 feet of the bathing beach at Forest Park,
except in case of emergency.



      (2)   This shall not apply to boats or watercraft used by the
life guards at the bathing beach in the performance of their duties.



   (F)   The city reserves the right to revoke any permits for use of
the boat launching and storage areas and to deny the use of the facilities
hereinabove described to any person or persons for failure to observe any
rules, regulations or ordinances pertaining thereto.



   (G)   (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing, a
senior citizen, who is a person 63 years of age or older in 1998, 64 years of
age or older in 1999 and 65 years of age or older in 2000 and is a resident
of the city, may obtain one such permit as provided for in division (D) at a
reduced rate upon appearing at the Recreation Center in person and providing
a valid driver’s license or identification card showing date of birth as
proof of age.



      (2)   Any additional permits purchased by such person during
the same permit year shall be set forth in division (D) above.



(Prior Code, § 27-50)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971; Ord. 849, passed 3-18-1972; Ord. 981, passed 5-3-1976; Ord. 985,
passed 6-19-1976; Ord. 1020, passed 6-19-1977; Ord. 1091, passed 3-17-1979;
Ord. 1094, passed 4-2-1979; Ord. 1164, passed 4-7-1980; Ord. 1232, passed
7-6-1981; Ord. 1297, passed 4-5-1982; Ord. 1412, passed 2-18-1984; Ord. 1488,
passed 3-16-1985; Ord. 1679, passed 2-14-1987; Ord. 1683, passed 4-6-1987;
Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 97.067  PARKING AT FOREST PARK.



   (A)   (1)   Parking at Forest Park is limited to the beach
parking area at the foot of the beach road and the parking lot at the south
end of Forest Park. Parking on Forest Park Drive, commonly known as “the
Ring Road,” may be authorized as needed by the Superintendent of Parks.



      (2)   The use of all parking areas shall be governed by the
provisions of the city code.



      (3)   The beach area shall be opened and closed in accordance
with regulations established by the City Manager, and may be closed at such
other times as required because of disorderly assemblages or emergency
conditions, as determined by the City Manager.



   (B)   Permanent Lake Forest residents who display a current city
vehicle license will be authorized to park in the parking areas of Forest
Park.



   (C)   (1)   For purposes of this subchapter, the following
persons shall be entitled to acquire Forest Park Beach resident parking
permits:



         (a)   Lake Forest College students or employees who bear
current vehicle license decals;



         (b)   Owners of property within the city who are not
city residents;



         (c)   Dependents of permanent city residents, who reside
within the city only temporarily during the summer season; and



         (d)   Individuals who are enrolled in summer school
sessions at Lake Forest educational institution; and who reside within the
city during such period.



      (2)   For purposes of this subchapter, the foregoing persons
shall be referred to as temporary residents and shall be authorized to park
at Forest Park by displaying on a vehicle a Forest Park Beach resident
parking permit.



   (D)   All persons who do not maintain permanent residence within the
corporate limits of the city (except temporary residents as described in
division (C) above) shall be considered to be nonresidents, and shall be
required to display on the vehicle a Forest Park Beach nonresident parking
permit before parking will be authorized.



   (E)   Parking permits may be obtained upon payment of fees reflected
in the fee schedule. No senior discount will be granted.



(Prior Code, § 27-51)  (Ord. 771, passed 3-14-1970; Ord. 810, passed
5-3-1971; Ord. 1413, passed 2-18-1984; Ord. 1679, passed 2-14-1987; Ord.
1683, passed 4-6-1987; Ord. 98-1, passed 1-5-1998; Ord. 03-43, passed
9-8-2003; Ord. 2010-27, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 97.068  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her
possession; or to consume, use, give away or sell any alcoholic beverages as
defined in the ordinance of the city as follows:



      (1)   Anywhere in any city-owned park in the city with the
exceptions of: (a) the area designated as the Deerpath Park Golf Course: and
(b) the beach area (as defined in § 111.001), but only for beer and wine
sold in an approved container provided by an authorized licensee pursuant to
a valid Class K liquor license; and



      (2)   In all city public school grounds and areas.



   (B)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the possession, consumption,
use, sale or giving away of alcoholic beverages from in any park or school
area pursuant to and in conformance with a license duly issued under the
provisions of Chapter 111 of the city code.



(Prior Code, § 27-52)  (Ord. 1024, passed 9-12-1977; Ord. 1441, passed
6-16-1984; Ord. 1683, passed 4-6-1987; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016; Ord.
2017-39, passed 6-19-2017)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.069  FEES FOR NONRESIDENT DAILY ACCESS AND PROOF OF RESIDENCY.



   (A)   All individuals not having proof of residency within the
corporate limits of the city or a parking passed issued pursuant to §
97.067(D) will be required to pay a fee as reflected in the fee schedule
pursuant to access Forest Park Beach between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. on Saturday, Sundays and holidays from Memorial Day to Labor Day.



   (B)   The City Manager may establish and enforce rules and post
appropriate signage to limit and identify locations from which nonresidents
may gain access to Forest Park Beach.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 5-4-2009; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 97.070  WATERCRAFT REGISTRATION; ABANDONED WATERCRAFT.



   All watercraft located or operating within the city shall be subject to
subject to the following provisions.



   (A)   Registration of watercraft.



      (1)   Any watercraft located on city property, including the
boat launching and storage area, shall be required to register with the City
Department of Parks and Recreation, regardless of whether registration with
the state is required under 625 ILCS 45/3-1.



      (2)   Registration stickers must be visibly posted on all
watercraft when located on city property.



   (B)   Abandoned and apparently deserted watercraft.



      (1)   A watercraft shall be deemed abandoned if:



         (a)   Left unattended for a period of 24 hours in the
boat launching basin; or



         (b)   Is located in the boat launching and storage area
and has not been moved or used for seven consecutive days or more and is
either:



            1.   Not properly registered with the city
pursuant to division (A) above; or



            2.   Is apparently deserted as provided in
division (B)(2) below.



      (2)   (a)   Any boat or watercraft located on city
property, including the boat launching and storage area, as described in §
97.066, is deemed to be apparently deserted when the owner of which is at
least 30 days past-due on the payment of all applicable permit or storage
fees.



         (b)   Until all past-due fines, storage, permit and
administrative fees and charges have been paid in full, the boat or
watercraft shall remain classified as apparently deserted.



      (3)   All abandoned watercraft are hereby declared a public
nuisance and are subject to all applicable provisions of the city code in
addition to those in this section.



   (C)   Impoundment and sale of abandoned watercraft.



      (1)   Abandoned watercraft shall be subject to impoundment by
the city pursuant to 625 ILCS 45/3C-1 et seq. (the “Act”).



      (2)   Failure to pay all outstanding fines, storage, permit,
administrative and impoundment fees and charges will result in disposal of
said watercraft pursuant to the Act.



      (3)   No watercraft shall be released from impoundment to the
owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to the watercraft until
all outstandingfines, storage, permit, administrative and impoundment fees
and charges have been paid.



      (4)   Notwithstanding the terms of the Act, the owner, lien
holder or other party legally entitled to the watercraft may request an
administrative hearing prior to disposition of the watercraft.



   (D)   Administrative hearing. Prior to the disposition of any
watercraft, an administrative hearing, under Chapter 11 of this city code of
ordinances, shall be available to any owner, lienholder or other person
legally entitled to the watercraft regarding the watercraft’s abandonment
and the amount of outstanding fines, storage, permit, administrative and
impoundment fees and charges.



   (E)   Storage lien. The provisions of this section shall be in
addition to, and not a limitation upon, the rights that the city may have to
file a storage lien against any watercraft that has failed to pay all
outstanding fines, storage, permit, administrative and impoundment fees and
charges as may be authorized by law.



(Ord. 2011-05, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 2016-29, passed 5-2-2016; Ord. 2016-16,
passed 6-20-2016)  Penalty, see § 97.999



SENIOR RESOURCES COMMISSION



§ 97.085  CREATION; COMPOSITION; TERM.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Senior Resources Commission.



   (B)   The Commission shall consist of seven members, including the
Chairperson.



      (1)   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, shall appoint seven Commissioners with terms of office being two
years.



      (2)   (a)   At the expiration of the term of each
Commissioner or of each succeeding Commissioner, or in the event of a
vacancy, the



Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint a Commissioner to
hold the office for the unexpired term, or in the case of expiration, for a
term of two years, or until the Commissioner’s successor shall have been
appointed and qualified.



         (b)   No Commissioner may serve for more than six
consecutive years, except those Commissioners first appointed to initial
terms to fill a vacancy and may serve for three full two-year terms following
such initial appointments.



      (3)   (a)   Members of the Senior Resources Commission
shall be representatives from  the city and the Village of Lake Bluff.



         (b)   At least two and no more than three members shall
represent the Village of Lake Bluff and the remaining shall represent the
city.



         (c)   No members shall receive compensation.



      (4)   The Chairperson of the Senior Resources Commission shall
be designated by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 27-64)  (Ord. 96-45, passed 12-19-1996; Ord. 05-13, passed
5-9-2005; Ord. 2008-21, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 2012-07, passed 3-19-2012;
Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 97.086  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of the Senior Resources Commission is to serve as
an advisory board to the Mayor and City Council and, as appropriate, the
Village President and Village Board of Lake Bluff, and present
recommendations for the coordination and planning for the senior residents of
the city/village in order to preserve their dignity, independence and quality
of life.



   (B)   This includes, but is not limited to, the study and
development of service needs and alternatives.



   (C)   The Commission shall periodically review and update its
recommendations and resubmit them to the Mayor and City Council and, as
appropriate, the Village President and Village Board of Lake Bluff.



(Prior Code, § 27-65)  (Ord. 96-45, passed 12-19-1996; Ord. 2008-21, passed
7-21-2008; Ord. 2012-07, passed 3-19-2012; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 97.087  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers of the Commission shall be as follows:



   (A)   Study and evaluate the need for services for the older adult
population of the city and Lake Bluff, including comprehensive health status,
economic conditions, family needs, housing, in-home supports, vocational
activities, transportation, nutrition and legal services;



   (B)   Support senior housing initiatives in the city and Lake Bluff
as well as the fundraising efforts of the Foundation;



   (C)   Consider alternatives to institutional care through home
health service expansion, effective early detection of chronic conditions,
prevention of health problems where possible and support of individuals in
whatever way promotes maximum functioning and independence;



   (D)   Work with existing groups and agencies to fill gaps in service;



   (E)   (1)   Review existing public and private programs for
senior assistance and determine how they can be most useful to city and
Village of Lake Bluff residents; and



      (2)   Initiate and foster the cooperation between the Senior
Resources Commission, city staff and departments and all pertinent government
and private agencies, religious institutions, services organizations and
civic groups.



   (F)   (1)   Develop plans for new programs to meet needs not
adequately serviced, and consider how such new programs might be successfully
launched; and



      (2)   Implement and administer assignments of the Mayor and
City Council and, as appropriate, the Village President and Village Board of
Lake Bluff in furtherance of the purpose of this Commission.



   (G)   Provide directional recommendations for Senior Center
operations and programs to be sent for approval by City Council;



   (H)   Promote community education regarding the problems, needs and
status of senior residents; link senior residents needing services to
appropriate organizations, act as a resource for the residents in existing
institutional facilities and other service programs; and take other action to
promote senior residents’ use of the services provided;



   (I)   The Senior Resources Commission shall submit to the City
Council an annual request for appropriations for anticipated expenditures;



   (J)   Set charges/fees for small programs and activities of the
Senior Center without City Council’s approval; and



   (K)   The functions and Commission representation described herein
for and on behalf of the Village of Lake Bluff, shall be contingent on a
service contract or other mutual agreement between the city and the Village
of Lake Bluff being in effect.



(Prior Code, § 27-66)  (Ord. 96-45, passed 12-19-1996; Ord. 2008-21, passed
7-21-2008; Ord. 2012-07, passed 3-19-2012; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



ELAWA FARM COMMISSION



§ 97.115  CREATION; PURPOSES.



   (A)   There is hereby established the Elawa Farm Commission.



   (B)   The purpose of the Elawa Farm Commission is to advise the City
Council on policies, practices and action plans for the preservation,
conservation, restoration, use and operations of the Elawa Farm Building
Complex and Garden area, and to undertake such other duties in furtherance of
the foregoing, all in accordance with the powers and duties of the Commission
as set forth in this subchapter



(Prior Code, § 27-75)  (Ord. 02-04, passed 2-21-2002; Ord. 2012-29, passed
9-17-2012; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 97.116  COMPOSITION; TERM; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The Commission shall consist of seven Commissioners, including
a Chairperson, who shall serve without compensation.



   (B)   (1)   The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, shall
appoint seven Commissioners to the Commission.



      (2)   The initial term for three of the Commissioners shall be
for one year, and the initial term for four of the Commissioners shall be for
two years.



      (3)   Upon the expiration of the initial terms of the
Commissioners, all Commissioners shall be appointed for terms of two years.



      (4)   Commissioners may be re-appointed by the Mayor, provided
that no Commissioner shall serve more than six consecutive years.



   (C)   (1)   The Mayor shall appoint Commissioners based upon
their knowledge of, interest in, or commitment to outdoor and environmental
education and recreation, historic preservation, local history, horticulture
or matters relating to the foregoing.



      (2)   In addition, Commissioners shall be residents of the
city, unless:



         (a)   The Commissioner is a representative of another
agency or governmental entity whose participation will foster
intergovernmental cooperation in furtherance of the purposes and objectives
of the Commission; or



         (b)   The Commissioner possesses special training or
knowledge that furthers the purposes and objectives of the Commission;
provided, however, that no fewer than five Commissioners shall be residents
of the city.



   (D)   Notwithstanding the limitations in division (C) above, in the
event that the city enters into a contractual relationship with any funding
organization, the city may as a condition of such contract reserve at least
one Commissioner position for a representative of such organization.



(Prior Code, § 27-76)  (Ord. 02-04, passed 2-21-2002; Ord. 2012-29, passed
9-17-2012; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 97.117  CHAIRPERSON; QUORUM; CONDUCT OF MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Mayor shall, from time to time, designate one of the
Commissioners to serve as Chairperson; such Chairperson shall serve until the
expiration of his or her term, and may be re-designated as Chairperson for
any subsequent term in the discretion of the Mayor.



   (B)   (1)   Four Commissioners shall constitute a quorum for
conducting the business of the Commission.



      (2)   The Commission may transact any of its authorized
business upon the vote of a majority of the Commissioners voting on any
matter coming before it.



   (C)   The Commission may establish, combine or abolish subcommittees
of its Commissioners as it may from time to time deem appropriate.



   (D)   The Commission and any of its subcommittees shall comply with
the notice and other requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings Act, being 5
ILCS 120.



(Prior Code, § 27-77)  (Ord. 02-04, passed 2-21-2002; Ord. 2012-29, passed
9-17-2012)



§ 97.118  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Elawa Farm Commission shall have such powers and duties as
are now or may hereafter be given to it by law or by the City Council,
including the following:



      (1)   (a)   To serve as an advisory body to the City
Council for the purpose of establishing policies and standards concerning the
preservation, restoration, re-use, operation and programming of the Elawa
Farm Building Complex and Garden area, which area shall be delineated by the
City Council from time to time; and



         (b)   Such policies and standards shall focus on the
local community traditionally served by Elawa Farm while recognizing the
broader significance of Elawa Farm for preservation and conservation purposes.



      (2)   To review and make recommendations to the City Council
regarding annual operating budgets, capital improvement plans and budgets,
and strategic plans for the preservation, restoration, re-use, operation and
programming of the Elawa Farm Building Complex and Garden area;



      (3)   To formulate, review and recommend plans for the
improvement, maintenance, operation and management of the Elawa Farm Building
Complex and Garden area, which planning shall be undertaken in the context of
the policies, standards and budgets approved from time to time by the City
Council;



      (4)   To review and make recommendations regarding rental and
use agreements for the Elawa Farm Building Complex and Garden area, which
agreements shall ordinarily conform with established city policies for the
use of public facilities;



      (5)   To evaluate, and advise the City Council on, the
operations and activities occurring within the Elawa Farm Building Complex
and Garden area, including their adherence to fiscally responsible practices
and the applicable special use permit, agreements, strategic plans and
policies and standards affecting such area;



      (6)   To serve as the city’s chief liaison with any funding
organizations, including any such organizations with which the city may
contract from time to time;



      (7)   To serve as the city’s chief liaison between
residents, organizations and other agencies for the purpose of fostering
communication and cooperation between the city and such persons as it
pertains to the Elawa Farm Building Complex and Garden area;



      (8)   To interact and cooperate with such other boards,
commissions and other bodies within the city; and



      (9)   To undertake such other matters as the City Council may
direct from time to time.



   (B)   (1)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to delegate
any of the City Council’s final decision-making responsibility regarding
the Elawa Farm Building Complex and Garden area.



      (2)   In addition, the City Manager shall be responsible for
the implementation of all policies, agreements and directives of the City
Council regarding the Elawa Farm Building Complex and Garden area.



(Prior Code, § 27-78)  (Ord. 02-04, passed 2-21-2002; Ord. 2012-29, passed
9-17-2012; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 97.119  INDEMNIFICATION.



   (A)   The city shall indemnify and defend the Commissioners as
officials of the city for all acts and omissions relating to, or that could
reasonably be deemed to relate to, their powers, duties and responsibilities
under this subchapter.



   (B)   In addition, the city shall maintain such insurance as it
deems reasonable and prudent for the protection of the Commissioners against
any loss, claim or liability arising out of the use or operation of Elawa
Farm.



(Prior Code, § 27-79)  (Ord. 02-04, passed 2-21-2002; Ord. 2012-29, passed
9-17-2012)



CROYA ADULT BOARD



§ 97.130  CREATION; COMPOSITION; TERM.



   (A)   There is hereby created a CROYA Adult Board.



   (B)   The Adult Board shall consist of ten members, including the
Chairperson.



      (1)   (a)   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
City Council, shall appoint seven adult members, and with the advice and
consent of the City Council, and in consideration of the recommendation of
the CROYA Executive Committee, shall appoint three young adult members.



         (b)   The initial terms shall be: for three adult
members, one year; and four adult members, two years.



         (c)   All subsequent adult member’s terms shall be for
two years.



         (d)   The terms of the three young adult members shall
be for one year.



      (2)   (a)   At the expiration of the term of each Board
member or of each succeeding Board member, or in the event of a vacancy, the
Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint a Board member to
hold the office for the unexpired term, or in the case of expiration, for a
term of two years, or until the Board member’s successor shall have been
appointed and qualified.



         (b)   No Adult Board member may serve for more than six
consecutive years, except those Board members first appointed to initial
terms of one year may serve for three full two- year terms following such
initial appointments.



         (c)   No young Adult Board member may serve for more
than two consecutive years.



      (3)   (a)   Members of the CROYA Adult Board shall be
residents of the city, unless:



            1.   The Board member is a representative of an
agency or governmental entity whose participation will foster cooperation in
furtherance of the purposes and objectives of the Adult Board; or



            2.   The Board member possesses special training
or knowledge that furthers the



purposes and objectives of the Adult Board; provided, however that no fewer
than five Adult Board members shall be residents of the city.



         (b)   No members shall receive compensation.



      (4)   The Chairperson of the CROYA Adult Board shall be
designated by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council.



      (5)   The appointment of representatives of any outside agency
or governmental entity to the CROYA Adult Board and the receipt by any
outside agency or governmental entity of any benefits or services arising
under this subchapter shall be contingent on the existence of a current
service contract or other mutual agreement between the city and the
aforementioned agencies.



(Ord. 05-13, passed 5-9-2005; Ord. 2010-53, passed 12-6-2010)



§ 97.131  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of the CROYA Adult Board is to advise and make
recommendations to the Mayor, City Council, and, as appropriate, other
cooperating agencies or governmental entities, for the coordination and
planning of services related to the young adult populations of the city and
cooperating units of local government and in order to preserve their social
and emotional wellbeing and quality of life.



   (B)   Such recommendations include, but are not limited to, the
annual study and development of service needs and alternatives.



   (C)   The Board shall periodically review and update its
recommendations and submit them to the Mayor and Council and, as appropriate,
other cooperating agencies or governmental entities.



(Ord. 2010-53, passed 12-6-2010)



§ 97.132  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The CROYA Adult Board shall:



   (A)   Study and evaluate the need for services for the young adult
populations of the city and cooperating units of local government. Such
evaluations shall consider comprehensive health and wellness status, economic
conditions, family needs, vocational and social activities, leadership and
life skill development, and community engagement;



   (B)   Involve the residents, particularly young adults, in the
planning and development of youth activities and programs, link young adults
and their families needing services to appropriate providers, and promote
existing groups, schools and agencies to work cooperatively to fill service
gaps most effectively and economically;



   (C)   Promote and educate the public about the importance and need
for young adult services through an established and effective public
relations program;



   (D)   Support and advise in financial planning and secure adequate
budget support from the city and other appropriate community agencies;



   (E)   Support and advise the CROYA Foundation with financial
planning and adequate research in allocation of budget needs;



   (F)   Initiate and foster the cooperation between the CROYA Adult
Board and city staff and departments by providing encouragement, support and
working in partnership to provide a team approach to the consideration of
agency direction, concerns and practices; and



   (G)   Provide general oversight for CROYA staff by participating in
quarterly communication/goal- setting meetings with middle school and high
school district leadership and other social service providers germane to
CROYA operations and services.



(Ord. 2010-53, passed 12-6-2010)



GORTON COMMUNITY CENTER COMMISSION



§ 97.145  CREATION; APPOINTMENT; TERM; COMPOSITION.



   (A)   Creation.



      (1)   There is hereby created a Gorton Community Center
Commission.



      (2)   The Commission shall consist of at least seven members,
including the Chairperson.



   (B)   Appointment.



      (1)   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, shall appoint seven Commissioners.



      (2)   The Chairperson of the Commission shall be designated by
the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council.



      (3)   The Mayor shall serve as a non-voting ex officio member
of the Commission in addition to the appointed Commission members.



   (C)   Term.



      (1)   The initial terms of four Commissioners shall be one
year.



      (2)   The initial terms of three Commissioners shall be two
years.



      (3)   All subsequent terms shall be two years.



      (4)   At the expiration of the term of each Commissioner or of
each succeeding Commissioner, or in the event of a vacancy, the Mayor, with
the approval of the City Council, shall appoint a Commissioner to hold the
office for the unexpired term, or in the case of expiration, for a term of two



years, or until the Commissioner’s successor shall have been appointed and
qualified.



      (5)   No Commissioner may serve for more than six consecutive
years, except those Commissioners first appointed to initial terms of one
year may serve for three full two-year terms following such initial
appointments.



   (D)   Composition.



      (1)   The Mayor shall appoint Commissioners based upon their
knowledge of, interest in, or commitment to cultural, educational or
recreational endeavors, or matters relating to the foregoing.



      (2)   In addition, Commissioners shall be residents of the
city unless:



         (a)   The Commissioner is a representative of another
agency, governmental entity or party with whom the city has a contractual
relationship relating to the Gorton Community Center or its operation whose
participation will foster cooperation in furtherance of the purposes and
objectives of the Commission; or



         (b)   The Commissioner possesses special training or
knowledge that furthers the purposes and objectives of the Commission;
provided, however, that no fewer than five Commissioners, at any given time,
shall be residents of Lake Forest.



      (3)   No Commissioner shall receive compensation for his or
her service on the Commission.



(Ord. 2010-54, passed 12-6-2010)



§ 97.146  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Gorton Community Center Commission is to advise the
Mayor and City Council and submit recommendations for the operation,
maintenance, coordination and planning for the Property, Community Center,
and facilities for charitable, educational and cultural purposes in
accordance with the powers and duties of the Commission as set forth in this
subchapter and the Community Center’s mission statement.



(Ord. 2010-54, passed 12-6-2010)



§ 97.147  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Gorton Community Center Commission shall have the powers
and duties as set forth below. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
delegate any of the City Council’s final decision-making responsibilities
regarding the Community Center’s building or operation.



   (B)   The city shall indemnify and defend the Commissioners as
officials of the city for all acts and omissions relating to, or that could
reasonably be deemed to relate to, their powers, duties and responsibilities
under this subchapter.



   (C)   The Community Center Commission shall:



      (1)   Serve as an advisory body to the City Council for the
purpose of establishing policies and standards concerning the operation and
management of a community building or buildings for the promotion of
cultural, recreational and educational activities;



      (2)   Provide counsel and advice to the Executive Director,
hired by the City Manager, on the operation and management of the building,
grounds and facilities of the Gorton School at 400 East Illinois Road, Lake
Forest, Illinois as a public Community Center;



      (3)   Recommend rules, operating procedures and regulations as
necessary to implement the purposes and objectives of the Center;



      (4)   Coordinate with any not-for-profit corporation(s) that
have the mission of raising funds for the operation and maintenance of the
Community



Center in order to ensure that the city receives sufficient funds to meet the
expenditures required for the operation, maintenance and improvement of the
building and facilities;



      (5)   Assist the Executive Director in the preparation and
submittal to the City Council of a comprehensive operating and capital budget
in accordance with the city’s fiscal policy and consistent with guidelines
governing the other operating departments of the city;



      (6)   Formulate, review and recommend plans for the
improvement and maintenance of the building and facilities;



      (7)   Recommend dues, fees and rental rates for programs,
activities and entities utilizing the Community Center;



      (8)   Collaborate with users of the Community Center on
publicity, marketing and community education regarding the programs,
activities and purposes of the Community Center; and



      (9)   Undertake such other matters as the City Council may
direct from time to time.



(Ord. 2010-54, passed 12-6-2010)



§ 97.148  EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The City Manager shall be responsible for the implementation
of all policies, agreements and directives of the City Council regarding the
Gorton Community Center building, grounds and programming.



   (B)   In order to facilitate the operation of the Community Center,
the City Manager may enter a contract for the services of an Executive
Director.



   (C)   The Executive Director shall:



      (1)   Report to and take direction from the City Manager
regarding the implementation of policies at, and day to day operation of, the
Gorton Community Center;



      (2)   Coordinate with the Commission in developing
recommendations regarding the operation and maintenance of the Community
Center;



      (3)   Coordinate with any not-for-profit corporation(s) that
have the mission of raising funds for the operation and maintenance of the
Community Center in order to ensure that the city receives sufficient funds
to meet the expenditures required for the operation, maintenance and
improvement of the building and facilities;



      (4)   (a)   Prepare and submit annually to the City Council:



            1.   A comprehensive operating and capital budget
in accordance with the city’s fiscal policy and consistent with guidelines
governing the other operating departments of the city; and



            2.   A statement of receipts and disbursements.



         (b)   An interim status report on the budget, receipts
and disbursements must be submitted to the City Manager periodically during
the year, but not less frequently than quarterly.



      (5)   Enter into agreements for the use of Community Center
facilities for cultural, educational or other community-oriented activities
or purposes that are compatible with the special use permit and the use of
the building as a public community cultural, educational and recreational
center and upon such terms as have been deemed appropriate by the City
Manager;



      (6)   Operate, manage and maintain the facilities of the
Gorton School at 400 East Illinois Road, Lake Forest, Illinois as a public
Community Center;



      (7)   Keep all buildings, grounds and facilities under his or
her supervision, and coordinate with appropriate city departments to ensure
that the heating, lighting, plumbing and other building improvements remain
in good repair and compliant with the codes, ordinances and building
regulations of the city;



      (8)   Coordinate with appropriate city departments to ensure
that adequate insurance coverage is maintained to protect the city,
Commission and any employees against any loss, claim or liability arising in
any manner out of the operation of the Community Center;



      (9)   Ensure that operations at the Community Center comply
with any applicable local, state or federal laws and licensing requirements;



      (10)   Supervise any full- or part-time employees, as may from
time to time be hired by the City Manager, that perform services at the
Community Center; and



      (11)   Coordinate with any individuals or entities with whom
the city contracts to perform professional services relating to the Community
Center.



(Ord. 2010-54, passed 12-6-2010; Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 97.149  TERMINATION OF AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   The City Manager is hereby directed to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to terminate any agreements to which the city is a
party that are incompatible with this subchapter, as amended by §§ 97.145
through 97.148, and are regarding the use and operation of the Gorton
Community Center.



   (B)   The agreements that shall be terminated include, but are not
limited to:



      (1)   Agreement relating to the Gorton property, and any
amendments thereto;



      (2)   Operating agreement for the property, and any amendments
thereto; and



      (3)   Agreement relating to the payment of fees between the
city and the Gorton Community Center Corporation; and any amendments thereto.



(Ord. 2010-54, passed 12-6-2010)



§ 97.150  ASSISTANCE WITH CERTAIN LIABILITIES.



   (A)   Subject to the termination of agreements as provided in §
97.149, the city hereby agrees to assist the Gorton Community Center
Corporation in its efforts to reduce or eliminate certain liabilities and
contractual obligations of the Gorton Community Center Corporation.



   (B)   The City Council hereby directs the City Manager, or his or
her designee, to take necessary and appropriate steps to assist the Gorton
Community Center in reducing and repaying any amounts due under the existing
revolving line of credit with Lake Forest Bank and Trust and any other
irrevocable ongoing contracts as provided in an appropriate agreement with
the Gorton Community Center Corporation, which agreement shall be subject to
City Council ratification.



   (C)   Any liability or contractual obligation not specifically
identified in any such agreement, remains the sole responsibility of the
Gorton Community Center Corporation.



(Ord. 2010-54, passed 12-6-2010)



§ 97.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Watercraft in violation of any registration or
documentation requirements in § 97.070 shall be cited and fined in an amount
of $50; provided that any violation that is not cured after 30 days shall
constitute a separate violation for each day that it continues after notice
from the city.



      (2)   Watercraft at least 30 days past-due on the payment of
all applicable permit or storage fees shall be subject to a fine in an amount
of $50 per day and may be denied entrance to city property including the boat
launching and storage area.



(Ord. 2011-05, passed 2-7-2011)



CHAPTER 98:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   98.001   Supervision



   98.002   Construction



   98.003   Bond



   98.004   Specifications



   98.005   Injury to new pavements



   98.006   Repairs



   98.007   Defects



   98.008   Obstruction



   98.009   Barricades



   98.010   Disturbing barricades



   98.011   Deposits



   98.012   Private use



   98.013   Injury



   98.014   Games



Streets



   98.040   Encroachments



   98.041   Deposits on streets



   98.042   Decorative boulders or stones



   98.043   Other obstructions



   98.044   Agreement



Street Opening



   98.055   Permit required



   98.056   Application and fee



   98.057   Restoring streets and parkways



   98.058   Deposit; bond



   98.059   Manner of excavating; barricades and lights



Sidewalks



   98.070   Deposits on sidewalks



Subsidewalk Space



   98.085   Permit required



   98.086   Applications



   98.087   Bond



   98.088   Conveyance of premises



   98.089   Fee



   98.090   Present uses



   98.091   Use



   98.092   Construction



   98.093   Revocation of permits



Construction of Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way



   98.105   Purpose and scope



   98.106   Definitions



   98.107   Annual registration required



   98.108   Permit required; applications and fees



   98.109   Action on permit applications



   98.110   Effect of permit



   98.111   Revised permit drawings



   98.112   Insurance



   98.113   Indemnification



   98.114   Security



   98.115   Permit suspension and revocation



   98.116   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status



   98.117   General construction standards



   98.118   Traffic control



   98.119   Location of facilities



   98.120   Construction methods and materials



   98.121   Vegetation control



   98.122   Removal, relocation or modifications of utility facilities



   98.123   Cleanup and restoration



   98.124   Maintenance and emergency maintenance



   98.125   Variances



   98.126   Enforcement



 



   98.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 98.001  SUPERVISION.



   (A)   All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in
the city shall be under the supervision of the Director of Public Works.



   (B)   He or she shall have supervision over all maintenance work
thereon, and the cleaning thereof, and shall be charged with the enforcement
of all ordinance provisions relating to such public places (except traffic
ordinances) and is hereby authorized to enforce such ordinances unless
assigned properly to some other officer of the city.



(Prior Code, § 37-1)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 98.002  CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for anyone, unless authorized by the City
Council, to construct or lay any pavement on any public street, sidewalk,
alley or other public way, or to repair the same, without first having
secured a permit therefor.



   (B)   Application for such permits shall be made to the Community
Development Department, and shall state the location of the intended pavement
or repair, the extent thereof, and the person or firm who is to do the actual
construction work.



   (C)   No such permit shall be issued, except on order of officers
designated by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 37-2)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)  Penalty, see §
98.999



§ 98.003  BOND.



   Each applicant shall file a bond, with surety to be approved by the
officers designated by the City Council, conditioned to indemnify the city
for any loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken in the public
right-of-way or the manner of doing the same.



(Prior Code, § 37-3)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 98.004  SPECIFICATIONS.



   All street and sidewalk pavements shall be made in conformity with
specifications laid down or approved from time to time by the City Council or
by the City Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 37-4)



§ 98.005  INJURY TO NEW PAVEMENTS.



   It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon,
or injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while the same is
guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft newly
laid pavement.



(Prior Code, § 37-5)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.006  REPAIRS.



   (A)   All public streets, alley and sidewalk pavements shall be kept
in good repair.



   (B)   Such repair work, whether done by the city, the abutting
owner, or any other person, firm or corporation shall be under the
supervision of the Director of Public Works.



(Prior Code, § 37-6)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)  Penalty, see §
98.999



§ 98.007  DEFECTS.



   It shall be the duty of every city officer or employee becoming
cognizant of any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk, or any obstruction
thereof, to report the same to the Director of Public Works as soon as
possible.



(Prior Code, § 37-7)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 98.008  OBSTRUCTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause,
create or maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public way, except as may be specifically authorized by ordinance, order of
Council or by permit.



(Prior Code, § 37-8)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.009  BARRICADES.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation laying or repairing any
pavement on a street, sidewalk or other public place, or making an excavation
in any such place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any
person or vehicle by reason of the work; such barricades shall be protected
and illuminated at night.



   (B)   Any defects in any such pavement shall be barricaded to
prevent any such injury; and any person, firm or corporation maintaining any
opening or excavation in any such place shall guard such opening or
excavation while the same remains open by proper barricades and lights.



(Prior Code, § 37-9)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)  Penalty, see §
98.999



§ 98.010  DISTURBING BARRICADES.



   It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or
lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation or
opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk.



(Prior Code, § 37-10)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.011  DEPOSITS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation,
other than an authorized official in the performance of his or her duties, to
undertake the construction of any street or sidewalk pavement unless such
person, firm or corporation shall first file with the Community Development
Department, a bond as set out in the fee schedule adopted annually by the
City Council to guarantee that proper barricades and lights will be
maintained at all obstructions or openings made or caused in connection with
the work and that the pavement, sidewalk or parkway will be restored to as
good a condition, in the determination of the Director of Public Works, as it
was prior to the beginning of construction.



   (B)   Such bond shall be returned after the work is finished, but,
in the event that such person, firm or corporation shall fail or neglect to
place or maintain any such light or barricade or to restore the pavement,
sidewalk or parkway as herein provided, the Director of Public Works may
proceed to have such barricade lighted, or placed at such obstruction or
opening, or to restore the pavement, sidewalk or parkway as herein provided,
and the cost of doing so shall be deducted from the deposit before it shall
be returned.



(Prior Code, § 37-11)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)  Penalty, see §
98.999



§ 98.012  PRIVATE USE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any
street, sidewalk or other public place as space for the display or sale of
goods or merchandise; or to write, mark or locate any signs or advertisements
on any such pavements without a permit authorizing said activity from the
city.



(Prior Code, § 37-12)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)  Penalty, see §
98.999



§ 98.013  INJURY.



   It shall be unlawful to injure any sidewalk, street or alley pavement
or to burn any materials, leaves or rubbish thereon.



(Prior Code, § 37-13)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.014  GAMES.



   It shall be unlawful to play any games upon any street, alley,
designated parking lot or sidewalk, where such games cause unnecessary noise,
or interfere with traffic or pedestrians.



(Prior Code, § 37-14)  Penalty, see § 98.999



STREETS



§ 98.040  ENCROACHMENTS.



   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure
which encroaches upon any public street or property.



(Prior Code, § 37-30)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.041  DEPOSITS ON STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any material which may be
harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other
articles which may do injury to any person, animal or property.



(Prior Code, § 37-31)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)  Penalty, see §
98.999



§ 98.042  DECORATIVE BOULDERS OR STONES.



   (A)   Property owners may place decorative boulders or stones on the
public parkway for the purpose of preventing damage to the parkway subject to
the issuance of a permit by the Director of Public Works.



   (B)   Such boulders, or stones shall be no less than eight inches in
diameter, and shall be placed at least 18 inches from the roadway edge.



(Prior Code, § 37-32)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 98.043  OTHER OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   Other such obstructions in the parkway whose purpose is
protecting the parkway, in existence at the time of passage of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, railroad ties and steel curbing, shall be
permitted to continue in existence.



   (B)   No additional installation of such obstructions, except as
permitted by § 98.042, shall be allowed.



   (C)   When existing obstructions, other than those described in §
98.042 above, are removed or damaged more than 50%, they shall be deemed not
in conformance with this section, and shall be permanently and completely
removed.



(Prior Code, § 37-33)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.044  AGREEMENT.



   Before installing any material permitted to be installed by§ 98.042,
the owner shall enter into an agreement, approved by the City Attorney,
holding the city harmless from all claims.



(Prior Code, § 37-34)  (Ord. 1990-20, passed 4-14-1990; Ord. 2016-56,
passed 10-3-2016)



STREET OPENING



§ 98.055  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation other than an
authorized official of the city in the performance of his or her duties, to
make any excavation in any street, alley or public place, or to tunnel under
any street, alley or public place in the city without first having obtained a
permit as herein required or without complying with the regulations herein
contained.



(Prior Code, § 37-38)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.056  APPLICATION AND FEE.



   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Director of
Community Development and shall state thereon the location of the intended
excavations or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose therefor and the person,
firm or corporation doing the actual excavating, and the name of the person,
firm or corporation from whom the work is being done.



(Prior Code, § 37-39)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 98.057  RESTORING STREETS AND PARKWAYS.



   In making of any improvement which requires the digging into, taking up
or otherwise disturbing any portion of the paved roadway of any street in the
city, the permit, plans specifications and contract for such improvement
shall provide that the contractor, person, firm or corporation making such
improvements shall restore such pavement to the same condition it was in
before work on such improvement was begun, and whenever in the making of such
improvement it is necessary to take up any drain tile used for street
drainage or for any public use, the person, firm or corporation doing such
work shall be required to submit plans, which will be subject to review and
approval by the City Engineer, for reestablishing the drainage infrastructure
in a manner that prevents any future settlement, and facilitates the flow of
stormwater in an efficient manner as determined to be necessary by the City
Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 37-40)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 98.058  DEPOSIT; BOND.



   Every contractor, person, firm or corporation making any improvement in
the city which requires the digging into, taking up or otherwise disturbing
any portion of the paved roadway or parkway of any street in the city shall
deposit with Community Development; the fee of as set out in the fee schedule
adopted on an annual basis by the City Council; and required to furnish a
good and sufficient surety bond in such sum as shall be deemed necessary for
the restoration and maintenance of the street or parkway, as the case may be,
for a period of not less than two years after which, the bond shall be fully
refundable if said improvements are determined to be in acceptable condition
by the City Engineer at the end of the two year period. Alternatively, at the
sole discretion of the city, a bond shall not be required if such contractor,
person, firm or corporation shall pay to the city the following amounts; to
pay the expense incurred by the city in the restoration and maintenance of
such street or parkway on behalf of such contractor, person, firm or
corporation:



   (A)   To fill openings in pavement with sand and stone and to haul
away dirt (per cubic yard), the amount of yards to be determined by
measurement of the proposed opening; see Chapter 41 of the city code;



   (B)   To replace street and resurface with asphalt, per square yard;
see Chapter 41 of the city code; and



   (C)   To replace and resurface with redi-mix concrete, per square
yard; see Chapter 41 of the city code. For excavations in parkways or
sidewalks:



      (1)   To backfill and flush parkway (per cubic yard);



      (2)   To haul away extra dirt (per cubic yard);



      (3)   To grade and seed in the case of rough backfilling (per
square yard); and



      (4)   To replace sidewalks (per square foot). (For above
charges, see Chapter 41 of the city code.)



(Prior Code, § 37-41)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 98.059  MANNER OF EXCAVATING; BARRICADES AND LIGHTS.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation making any excavation or
tunnel shall do so according to the terms and conditions of the application
and permit authorizing the work to be done.



   (B)   Sufficient and proper barricades and lights shall be
maintained to protect persons, vehicles and animals from injury by or because
of the excavations being made.



(Prior Code, § 37-42)



SIDEWALKS



§ 98.070  DEPOSITS ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk any
material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material,
or any glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals
or property.



   (B)   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks
preparatory to delivery, provided that the usable width of the walk is not
thereby reduced to less than five feet; and provided that no such articles
shall remain on such walk for more than one-half hour.



(Prior Code, § 37-60)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)  Penalty, see §
98.999



SUBSIDEWALK SPACE



§ 98.085  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to use any vault, space, room or
structure under any street or sidewalk in the city without having first
secured a permit therefor as is herein required.



      (2)   Such permits shall be issued by the Director of Public
Works.



   (B)   No such permit shall be transferred excepting in compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 37-67)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)  Penalty, see §
98.999



§ 98.086  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Applications for a permit to use or maintain a vault, space,
room or structure under any street or sidewalk in the city shall be made in
writing to the Director of Public Works, and shall state thereon specifically
the size of the space intended to be used or maintained and the purpose for
which it is to be used.



   (B)   Each application shall contain an agreement by the applicant
to abide by all the regulations contained in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 37-68)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 98.087  BOND.



   (A)   Each applicant shall file with the application a bond in such
a sum and with such a surety as may be approved by the City Manager, to save
the city harmless from any liability resulting from or caused by any
accidents from such vault, space, room or structure.



   (B)   The City Manager may require such additional bonds and
sureties, from time to time, as it shall deem necessary to save the city
harmless; provided, no surety shall be required on the bond of any
corporation qualified to administer trusts in the state.



(Prior Code, § 37-69)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 98.088  CONVEYANCE OF PREMISES.



   (A)   Whenever any premises abutting on any such vault, space, room
or structure for which a permit has been issued shall be conveyed, or
whenever the interest or lease or right of occupancy of the person holding
the permit shall be transferred or conveyed, the grantee or transferee must
make application for a transfer of the permit to him, her or it, and must
furnish a bond as is required in § 98.087.



   (B)   A fee as set out in the fee schedule shall be required for
such transfer, and upon the payment of the fee and the full compliance with
the contents hereof, a new permit shall be issued.



(Prior Code, § 37-70)



§ 98.089  FEE.



   The annual fee to be paid for such permits shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 37-71)



§ 98.090  PRESENT USES.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation using or maintaining any such
vault, space, room or structure or enclosure shall comply with the provisions
of this subchapter.



   (B)   The City Manager may authorize the closing of any vault,
space, room, structure or enclosure for which such a permit has not been
obtained.



(Prior Code, § 37-72)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 98.091  USE.



   No such vault, room, structure or enclosure shall be used for the
storage of explosives or of flammable liquids, nor shall a cesspool be
located therein.



(Prior Code, § 37-73)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.092  CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Such vaults, rooms, structures or enclosures shall be firmly
constructed so as to support the sidewalk or street over it or them, with the
maximum load which the sidewalk or street will carry, with a margin of safety
of 50% over this maximum load or weight.



   (B)   The proper officer of the city shall inspect all such
enclosures, rooms or structures to see to the enforcement of the provisions
of this section.



   (C)   (1)   The surface of the sidewalks over any such structure
must be kept clean of snow and ice, and free from all dirt and obstructions
of any kind, by the person holding the permit.



      (2)   Such person must keep the sidewalk over such structure
in good repair.



(Prior Code, § 37-74)



§ 98.093  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   Any permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be
revoked by order of the City Manager for a violation of any of the provisions
of this subchapter



(Prior Code, § 37-75)  (Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)



CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



§ 98.105  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish
policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within
the city’s jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with
the preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the
city rights-of-way and the city as a whole.



   (B)   Intent. In enacting this subchapter, the city intends to
exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the city and, in particular,
the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform
standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including
without limitation:



      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks,
alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;



      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions
and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;



      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations
of the city’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in
rights-of-way or public property;



      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage
to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;



      (5)   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to
structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;



      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which
facilities are installed;



      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined
parkways that characterize the city’s residential neighborhoods;



      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of
facilities in the rights-of-way; and



      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private
properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.



   (C)   Facilities subject to this subchapter.



      (1)   This subchapter applies to all facilities on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way within the
jurisdiction of the city.



      (2)   A facility lawfully established prior to the effective
date of this subchapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated
by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be
otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.



   (D)   Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements.



      (1)   The city, in its discretion and as limited by law, may
require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for
the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across or within the city rights-of-way.



      (2)   Utilities that are not required by law to enter into
such an agreement may request that the city enter into such an agreement.



      (3)   In such an agreement, the city may provide for terms and
conditions inconsistent with this subchapter.



   (E)   Effect of franchises,  licenses or similar agreements.



      (1)   Utilities  other than telecommunications providers. In
the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a
franchise, license or similar agreement with the city, such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any
conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this subchapter
and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the
city and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



   (F)   Conflicts with other subchapter. This subchapter supersedes
all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in
conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that
applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this subchapter, the utility shall comply with the
requirements of this subchapter to the maximum extent possible without
violating federal or state laws or regulations.



   (H)   Sound engineering judgment.



      (1)   The city shall use sound engineering judgment when
administering this subchapter and may vary the standards, conditions and
requirements expressed in this subchapter when the city so determines.



      (2)   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability
of the city to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare.



(Prior Code, § 37-90)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 98.106  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this subchapter and unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.



   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.



   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this subchapter.



   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.



   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in
a trench or pit.



   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.



   CABLE OPERATOR. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).



   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



   CABLE SYSTEM. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).



   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.



   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such
as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.



   CITY. The City of Lake Forest.



   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of
a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside
Design Guide.



   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.



   CODE. The City Code of Lake Forest.



   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.



   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.



   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.



   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.



   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way
lines of a right-of-way.



   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The city’s Director of Public Works or his
or her designee.



   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.



      (1)   For the purposes of this subchapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use.



      (2)   Such work may include, without limitation, the following:



         (a)   Excavating or other cutting;



         (b)   Placement (whether temporary or permanent) of
materials, equipment, devices or structures;



         (c)   Damage to vegetation;



         (d)   Compaction or loosening of the soil; and



         (e)   Any work that involves the parking of vehicles or
equipment in a manner that materially obstructs the flow of traffic on a
highway.



   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the
safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.



   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.



   ENGINEER. The City Engineer or his or her designee.



   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items
used to facilitate construction of facilities.



   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or
laying bare by digging.



   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.



   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects and materials (including,
but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable,
antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures,  cabinets,  pedestals, 
poles,  conduits,  grates,  covers, pipes,  cables and appurtenances
thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within
rights-of-way under this subchapter. For purposes of this subchapter, the
term FACILITY shall not include any facility owned or operated by the city.



   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump or meter station.



   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land
adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a
highway.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is
determined by the Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and
imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the
ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to,
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any
substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law,
statute or regulation.



   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.



   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.



   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable
and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.



   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.



   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.



   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means with or without boring.



   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.



   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two
or more utilities.



   J.U.L.I.E. The joint utility locating information for excavators
utility notification program.



   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.



   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.



   OCM. Office of the City Manager.



   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or
longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.



   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
sidewalk.



   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility
or for the construction of a facility.



   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
§§ 98.108 and 98.109.



   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.



   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a
carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).



   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane or coal-slurry.



   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the
city. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.



   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.



   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway or other
area disrupted by the construction of a facility.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or
waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the city has
the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the city. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF- WAY shall
not include any real or personal city property that is not specifically
described in the previous two sentences and shall not include city buildings,
fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are
situated in the right-of-way.



   ROADWAY. The part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SECURITY FUND. That amount of security required pursuant to § 98.114.



   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.



   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally
accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages
or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services,
cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging
service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. PRIVATE
LINE means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer
that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to
one or more other specified locations. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to
act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C.
§§ 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming
services subject to an open video system fee payable to the city through an
open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications
Commission (47 C.F.R. §§ 76.1500 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates
or controls



facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.



   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.



   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this subchapter.



   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or
vapors from an underground casing.



   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in § 21-201(v) of the Illinois
Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v).



   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.



   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to
soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.



(Prior Code, § 37-91)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2016-56, passed
10-3-2016)



§ 98.107  ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the city shall register
on January 1 of each year with the OCM, providing the utility’s name,
address, regular business telephone number, e-mail address, and the name of
one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility’s facilities in the
right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in § 98.112, in the form of a certificate
of insurance.



(Prior Code, § 37-92)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2016-56, passed
10-3-2016)



§ 98.108  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.



   (A)   Permit required.



      (1)   No person shall construct (as defined in this
subchapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within any city right-of-way which:



         (a)   Changes the location of the facility;



         (b)   Adds a new facility;



         (c)   Disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this
subchapter); or



         (d)   Materially increases the amount of area or space
occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the
right-of-way, without first filing an application with the Director of Public
Works and obtaining a permit from the city therefor, except as otherwise
provided in this subchapter.



      (2)   No permit shall be required for installation and
maintenance of service connections to customers’ premises where there will
be no disruption of the right-of-way.



   (B)   Permit application.



      (1)   All applications for permits pursuant to this subchapter
shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works and the submission shall
include three copies and a digital version of the application for a permit.



      (2)   The applicant may designate those portions of its
application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or
confidential information as “proprietary” or “confidential” by
clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.



   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application
shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   The utility’s name and address and telephone and fax
numbers;



      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than
the utility, its telephone and fax numbers, e-mail address and its interest
in the work;



      (3)   The name, address and telephone and telecopy numbers and
e-mail addresses of the person or entity responsible for performing the
proposed work; the name, address and telephone and fax numbers and e-mail
addresses of the person or entity responsible for performing the restoration
if different from the person or entity responsible for the original work; and
the names, addresses and telephone and fax numbers and e-mail addresses of
all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to
the application;



      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the
purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will
be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the
nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on
those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed. Where
the applicant intends to construct or where the application clearly requires,
additional facilities in the rights-of-way within 18 months after the date of
submission of the application, the applicant shall include a proposed
facilities plan showing the type and location of facilities intended or
required;



      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the
city:



         (a)   If requested, a written traffic control plan
demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed
consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to
prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions
to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and



         (b)   If requested, an emergency contingency plan which
shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without
limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the
intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include
notification to the city and shall promote protection of the safety and
convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency
contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the city
finds that additional information or assurances are needed;



      (6)   (a)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the
work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings,
plans and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;
and



         (b)   Such drawings, plans and specifications shall
include the following details, where applicable, of the work to be performed:



            1.   Route location;



            2.   Method of installation;



            3.   All physical features and public utilities in
the immediate area; and



            4.   Offset distance from street edge,
right-of-way lines and property lines.



      (7)   If the work is to be performed within an easement, the
recording document number assigned by the County Recorder’s office to the
easement;



      (8)   Evidence of insurance as required in § 98.112;



      (9)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in
§ 98.114;



      (10)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions
of this subchapter; see § 98.125; and



      (11)   Such additional information as may be reasonably
required by the city.



   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of
utilities. In addition to the requirements of division (C) above, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:



      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service
or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any certificate of public
convenience and necessity or other regulatory authorization that the
applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to
obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;



      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed
pipe size, design, construction class and operating pressures;



      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of
Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;



      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that
the city engineering standards, land and water pollution requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control
and the County Stormwater Management Commission, other local or state
entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or



      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the
type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and
the design standard to be followed.



   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the
entire permit application review period and the construction period
authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit
application, including any change in the actual locations of any facilities
which deviates in any material respect from the locations identified in the
plans, drawings or specification submitted with the permit application, shall
be submitted by the utility in writing to the city within 30 days after the
change necessitating the amendment.



   (F)   Application fees.



      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this subchapter
shall be accompanied by a fee as set out in the fee schedule.



      (2)   No application fee is required to be paid by any
electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
Act.



   (G)   Inspection fees.



      (1)   Any person obtaining a permit under this subchapter for
which inspections are performed by or on behalf of the city shall reimburse
the city for the actual cost of such inspections.



      (2)   The City Manager shall from time to time determine the
actual per hour costs of city employees for purposes of calculating the costs
of such inspections.



      (3)   No inspection fee is required to be paid by any
electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
Act.



(Prior Code, § 37-93)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2008-04, passed
1-7-2008; Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 98.109  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   City review of permit applications.



      (1)   Completed permit applications, containing all required
documentation, shall be examined by the Director of Public Works within a
reasonable time after filing.



      (2)   If the application does not:



         (a)   Conform to the requirements of applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations; or



         (b)   Substantially conform to any proposed facilities
plan submitted by the applicant pursuant to § 98.108(C)(4) within the
previous 18 months, the Director of Public Works shall reject such
application in writing, stating the reasons therefor.



      (3)   If the Director of Public Works is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this subchapter and applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, the Director of Public Works
shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.



      (4)   (a)   In all instances, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public
Works, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full
compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.



         (b)   No application from the same applicant for
facilities not included in any proposed facilities plan shall be approved
within six months after submission of such plan without a variance pursuant
to § 98.125.



   (B)   Additional city review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.



      (1)   (a)   Pursuant to § 4 of the Telephone Company Act,
220 ILCS 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city that it
intends to commence work governed by this subchapter for facilities for the
provision of telecommunications services.



         (b)   Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications
and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of
the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to
the city not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work requiring
no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work
requiring excavation.



         (c)   The Director of Public Works shall specify the
portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and
constructed.



      (2)   In the event that the Director of Public Works fails to
provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer
within either:



         (a)   Ten days after service of notice to the city by
the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation
for new construction; or



         (b)   Twenty-five days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this subchapter.



      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the city,
where a permit is required for work pursuant to § 98.108 the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city an application for a
permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed.



         (a)   Such application shall be subject to the
requirements of division (A) above.



   (C)   Additional city review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after
submission to the city, unless otherwise acted upon by the city, provided the
holder has complied with applicable city codes, ordinances and regulations.



(Prior Code, § 37-94)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2008-04, passed
1-7-2008; Ord. 2016-56, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 98.110  EFFECT OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Authority granted: no property right or other interest
created. A permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this subchapter on city rights-of-way,



and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the
rights-of-way.



   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this subchapter shall be
valid for a period longer than six months unless construction is actually
begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.



   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required.



      (1)   Unless waived in writing by the Director of Public
Works, no construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this
subchapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and
subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a
pre-construction meeting.



      (2)   The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date,
time and place designated by the city with such city representatives in
attendance as the city deems necessary.



      (3)   The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the
work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the
areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or
absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations,
procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by
the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property
owners.



   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by
the city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements
of the city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.



(Prior Code, § 37-95)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 98.111  REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.



   (A)   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities
deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans,
drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the
permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within
90 days after the completion of the permitted work.



   (B)   The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify
where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations
approved in the permit.



   (C)   If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the
requirements of this subchapter, it shall be treated as a request for
variance in accordance with § 98.125.



   (D)   If the city denies the request for a variance, then the
permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor.



(Prior Code, § 37-96)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 98.112  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Required coverages and limits.



      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any
facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following
liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming
the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and
employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in divisions
(A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) below.



         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including
premises-operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as “X,” “C” and “U” coverages) and products-completed
operations coverage with limits not less than:



            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or
death to each person;



            2.   Five million dollars for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and



            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of
liability.



         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and
hired vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;



         (c)   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and



         (d)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of
not less than $1,000,000 per employee and per accident.



      (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to
protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such
contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section.



   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies.



      (1)   The coverages required by this section may be in any
combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies.



      (2)   Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess
coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when
any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary
policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.



   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of
the policies required by this section to the city within ten days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the city.



   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.



      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall
contain the following endorsement:



      “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt
by the city, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested,
of a written notice addressed to the City Manager of such intent to cancel or
not to renew.”



      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the city of said
notice, and in no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the
utility shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.



   (E)   Self-insurance.



      (1)   A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) above.



      (2)   A utility that self-insures is not required, to the
extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming
of additional insureds under division (A) above, or the requirements of
divisions (B), (C) and (D) above.



      (3)   A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to
the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to
self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
division (A) above, such as evidence that the utility is a “private self
insurer” under the Workers Compensation Act.



   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility’s
liability. The legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for
any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or
self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such
insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts
thereunder.



   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this
section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by
insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state.



(Prior Code, § 37-97)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 98.113  INDEMNIFICATION.



   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility
shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting
from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or
wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this subchapter or by a
franchise, license or similar agreement; provided, however, that the
utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this subchapter by the
city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.



(Prior Code, § 37-98)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 98.114  SECURITY.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form
and in an amount as set forth in this section.



      (2)   The Security Fund shall be continuously maintained in
accordance with this section at the permittee’s sole cost and expense until
the completion of the work authorized under the permit.



      (3)   The Security Fund shall serve as security for:



         (a)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all
the requirements of this subchapter;



         (b)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the
city occasioned by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant
to this subchapter; and



         (c)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all
damages, claims, costs or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason
of any action or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this subchapter
including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration
work the permittee is required by this subchapter to perform that the city
must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the
permittee’s failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the
city from the permittee pursuant to this subchapter or any other applicable
law.



   (B)   Form.



      (1)   The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the
city in the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a
form acceptable to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the city.



      (2)   Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to
this division (B) shall, at a minimum:



         (a)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior
notice to the city and the permittee;



         (b)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to
the collection by the city of any amounts covered by it; and



         (c)   Shall provide a location convenient to the city
and within the state at which it can be drawn.



   (C)   Amount.



      (1)   The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the
right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the Director of Public Works,
and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the city
estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such
restoration.



      (2)   Where the construction of facilities proposed under the
permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the city, with
each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a
related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not
be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous
phase or phases, the Director of Public Works may, in the exercise of sound
discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which
shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit.



      (3)   The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction
shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the
provisions of this division (C) for any single phase.



   (D)   Withdrawals.



      (1)   The city, upon 14 days’ advance written notice clearly
stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under
this division (D), may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided
that the permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within the
14-day notice period.



      (2)   Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:



         (a)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by
the permittee hereunder;



         (b)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities
that are due and unpaid;



         (c)   Fails to reimburse the city for any damages,
claims, costs or expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur
by reason of any action or non-performance by the permittee; or



         (d)   Fails to comply with any provision of this
subchapter that the city determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an
amount in the Security Fund.



   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice
from the city that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the
permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in division
(C) above.



   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest
accrued on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by
the city, upon written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that
any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum
balance required in division (C) above.



   (G)   Closing and return of Security Fund.



      (1)   Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit,
the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, or such
portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account
is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the city for failure by the
permittee to comply with any provisions of this subchapter or other
applicable law.



      (2)   In the event of any revocation of the permit, the
Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.



   (H)   Rights not limited.



      (1)   The rights reserved to the city with respect to the
Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether
reserved by this subchapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall
affect any other right the city may have.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall not be
entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights
which may be infringed or otherwise violated.



(Prior Code, § 37-99)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2016-56, passed
10-3-2016)



§ 98.115  PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   City right to revoke permit. The city may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this subchapter for one or more of the following
reasons:



      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially
incomplete statements in the permit application;



      (2)   Noncompliance with this subchapter;



      (3)   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of
permittee’s facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public
health, safety, or welfare; or



      (4)   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities
substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.



   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The city shall send
written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this subchapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or
suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.



   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension.



      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or
suspension from the city, the permittee shall have the following options:



         (a)   Immediately provide the city with evidence that no
cause exists for the revocation or suspension;



         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the
city, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof
of such correction to the city within five working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or



         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way and
restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the city providing written
proof of such removal to the city within ten  days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation.



      (2)   The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown,
extend the time periods provided in this division (C).



   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division
(A) above.



   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply.



      (1)   If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of
division (C) above, the city or its designee may, at the option of the city:



         (a)   Correct the deficiencies;



         (b)   Upon not less than 20 days’ notice to the
permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or



         (c)   After not less than 30 days’ notice to the
permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the city.



      (2)   The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city
for all costs of removal.



(Prior Code, § 37-100)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 98.116  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.



   (A)   Notification of change.



      (1)   A utility shall notify the city no less than 30 days
prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or
change in identity of the utility.



      (2)   The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have
all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the
permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations,
including this subchapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the
right-of-way.



   (B)   Amended permit.



      (1)   A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership.



      (2)   If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit
issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and
agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if the new
owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city’s right-of-way.



   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or
bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.



(Prior Code, § 37-101)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 98.117  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way
shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable,
the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as
amended from time to time:



      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;



      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions;



      (3)   Highway Design Manual;



      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;



      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;



      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92
Ill. Adm. Code § 545);



      (7)   Flagger’s Handbook; and



      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance
Operations.



   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles.



      (1)   If a discrepancy exists between or among differing
principles and standards required by this subchapter, the Director of Public
Works shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which
principles apply and such decision shall be final.



      (2)   If requested, the Director of Public Works shall state
which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance or
operation of a facility in the future.



(Prior Code, § 37-102)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 98.118  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   (A)   Minimum requirements. The city’s minimum requirements for
traffic protection are contained in IDOTs Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and this code.



   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and



installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary,
meeting applicable federal, state and local requirements for protection of
the public and the utility’s workers when performing any work on the
rights-of-way.



   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that
there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of
such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs
pursuant to § 98.124, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.



   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct
any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility’s attention by the city.



(Prior Code, § 37-103)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 98.119  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements
applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities,
regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of
this division (A).



      (1)   No interference with city facilities. No utility
facilities shall be placed in any location if the Director of Public Works
determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the city’s utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the city’s utility
facilities.



      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location
shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the
right-of-way



and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with
the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said
right-of-way.



      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such
right-of-way.



      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the
right-of-way.



      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation
shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power
pedestals and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of
location, for the particular application.



   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.



      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the
right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as
reasonable pole alignment will permit;



         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as
practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of five feet (1.52 m)
behind the face of the curb, where available;



         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote
from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m)
outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear
zone;



         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway;
and



         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within
one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the
right-of-way line.



      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to
the right-of-way line;



         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved
portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and



         (c)   In the case of an underground power or
communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way
line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.



   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.



      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of
crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city
highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as
encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the
roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.



      (2)   Culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities
shall not be located in culverts or drainage facilities.



      (3)   Ninety degree crossing required. Crossing facilities
shall cross at or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as
practicable.



      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead
power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as
required by ICC’s rules entitled,



Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines (83 Ill. Adm. Code
305);



         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and



         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are
avoided.



      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An
underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will
provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and



         (b)   Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future
expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.



      (6)   Markers. The city may require the utility to provide a
marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a
power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify
the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. §
192.707 (1989)).



   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The
city may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way
that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.



   (E)   Freestanding facilities.



      (1)   The city may restrict the location and size of any
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way.



      (2)   The city may require any freestanding facility located
within a right-of-way to be screened from view.



   (F)   Below ground installation. Below ground facilities may be
installed only if they are located a minimum of five feet, measured from
outside edge to outside edge, from any city-owned utility.



   (G)   Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities may
be installed only if:



      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located
underground;



      (2)   New underground installation is not technically
feasible; and



      (3)   (a)   The proposed installation will be made at a
location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the
greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed
without adversely affecting safety.



         (b)   Suitable designs include, but are not limited to,
self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration
of conductors and cable.



         (c)   Existing utility poles and light standards shall
be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is
strongly discouraged.



   (H)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.



      (1)   (a)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to
bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that
all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable.



         (b)   Other means shall include, but are not limited to,
underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower
supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway
structure.



         (c)   Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.



      (2)   (a)   A utility shall include in its request to
accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure
supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing.



         (b)   Approval or disapproval of an application for
facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based upon the
following considerations:



            1.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the
commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to
persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;



            2.   The type, length, value and relative
importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;



            3.   The alternative routings available to the
utility and their comparative practicability;



            4.   The proposed method of attachment;



            5.   The ability of the structure to bear the
increased load of the proposed facility;



            6.   The degree of interference with bridge
maintenance and painting;



            7.   The effect on the visual quality of the
structure; and



            8.   The public benefit expected from the utility
service as compared to the risk involved.



   (I)   Appearance standards.



      (1)   The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.



      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction
does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property
owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being
traversed.



(Prior Code, § 37-104)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2016-56,
passed 10-3-2016)



§ 98.120  CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.



   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of
construction methods.



      (1)   Boring or jacking.



         (a)   Pits and shoring.



            1.   Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall
be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the
Director of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or
jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed.



            2.   While pits are open, they shall be clearly
marked and protected by barricades.



            3.   Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.



         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall
not be permitted under the roadway.



         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches.
Borings over six inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an
auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the
outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).



         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings
of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking,
guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.



         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the
drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected
shall be bored under or around the root system, as permitted by the Director
of Public Works, Director of Community Development, or the City Forester and
in conformance with the regulations set forth in the city tree preservation
ordinance.



      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair
or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of § 603 of IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.



         (a)   Length.



            1.   The length of open trench shall be kept to
the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing.



            2.   Only one-half of any intersection may have an
open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the
Director of Public Works.



         (b)   Open trench and excavated material.



            1.   Open trench and windrowed excavated material
shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices.



            2.   Where practicable, the excavated material
shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection.



            3.   Excavated material shall not be allowed to
remain on the paved portion of the roadway.



            4.   Where right-of-way width does not allow for
windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated
material shall be hauled to an off-road location.



         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench
within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.



      (3)   Backfilling.



         (a)   1.   Any pit, trench or excavation created
during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width,
depth and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.



            2.   When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.



         (b)   1.   For a period of three years from the date
construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction
of the facility.



            2.   If so ordered by the Director of Public
Works, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill
material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new
backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs and driveways to
the proper grades, as determined by the Director of Public Works.



      (4)   Pavement cuts.



         (a)   Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic.



         (b)   If a variance to the limitation set forth in this
division (A)(4) is permitted under § 98.125, the following requirements
shall apply:



            1.   Any excavation under pavements shall be
backfilled as soon as practicable with IDOT CLSM #1 (flowable fill) or
compacted granular material (mechanically compacted at 95% standard density
ASTEM D698) or as designated by the Director of Public Works; and



            2.   a.    Restoration of pavement, in kind,
shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with
bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately; and



               b.   Any subsequent failure of either the
temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
city.



            3.   All saw cuts shall be full depth; and



            4.   For all rights-of-way which have been
reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or
resurfaced in the last three years, permits shall not be issued unless such
work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered
necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a
pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.



      (5)   Encasement.



         (a)   1.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand
the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads.



            2.   The casing shall be continuous either by
one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
city.



         (b)   1.   The venting, if any, of any encasement
shall extend within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line.



            2.   No above-ground vent pipes shall be located
in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the
highway.



         (c)   1.   In the case of water main or service
crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous
pipe or city approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway.



            2.   Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the city.



            3.   Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased
regardless of installation method.



         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.



         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products
pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if:



            1.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes
future maintenance or repair; and



            2.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.



         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum
products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that
construction does not disrupt the right-of-way.



      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be
provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following
table for minimum cover for the type of facility:



 


Type of Facility

 

Minimum Cover



Communication, cable or video service lines
 
18 to 24 in. (0.6 m, as determined by city)


Electric lines
 
30 in. (0.8 m)


Gas or petroleum products
 
30 in. (0.8 m)


Sanitary sewer, storm sewer or drainage line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection


Water line
 
66 in. (1.7 m)



 



   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.



      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.



         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or communications
facilities within city rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated and
maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305
(formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled
Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines and the
National Electrical Safety Code.



         (b)   Overhead facilities.



            1.   Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used.



            2.   Utilities shall make every reasonable effort
to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed.



            3.   Variances may be allowed if there is no
feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for
maximum visibility.



         (c)   Underground facilities.



            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or
plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to
minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.



            2.   a.   If a crossing is installed by boring
or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.



               b.    Encasement may be eliminated only if:



                  i.    The crossing is installed by the
use of “moles,” “whip augers” or other approved method which compress
the earth to make the opening for cable installation; or



                  ii.    The installation is by the open
trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.



            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with
the National Electrical Safety Code.



         (d)   Burial of drops.



            1.   All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the city.



            2.   Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all
temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after
placement.



      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:



         (a)   The use of “moles,” “whip augers” or other
approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;



         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided
between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;



         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between
ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or



         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if
installation is not possible by other means.



      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas
pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained and operated
in a city approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the
Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192,
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 C.F.R. § 192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.



      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products
pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of
ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation
Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).



      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines. Storm water sewer
lines or drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines
and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the
recommendations of the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois.



      (6)   Ground mounted appurtenances.



         (a)   Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or
underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be
provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions.



         (b)   The vegetation-free area may be provided by an
extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material
approved by the Director of Public Works.



         (c)   With the approval of the Director of Public Works,
shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of
vegetation-free area.



         (d)   The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall
be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.



   (C)   Materials.



      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing
facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards
of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the
State Commerce Commission or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.



      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way.



         (a)   No material shall be stored on the right-of-way
without the prior written approval of the Director of Public Works.



         (b)   When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit,
wire, poles, cross arms or other materials shall be distributed along the
right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards
to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the
right-of-way and other property.



         (c)   If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior
approval must be obtained from the city.



      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility
to the city shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in
the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.



   (D)   Operational restrictions.



      (1)   (a)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may,
at the discretion of the city, be required to be discontinued when such
operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety and
welfare.



         (b)   Such operations may also be required to be
discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would
result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.



      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Director of
Public Works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility
services.



      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of
construction are those set forth in Chapter 150 of this city code.



   (E)   Location of existing facilities.



      (1)   Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the
city shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of
existing above-ground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to
be occupied by its proposed facilities.



      (2)   The city will make its permit records available to a
utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities.



      (3)   When notified of an excavation or when requested by the
city or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its
underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in
accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act
(220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.).



(Prior Code, § 37-105)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2016-56,
passed 10-3-2016)



§ 98.121  VEGETATION CONTROL.



   (A)   Tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming shall not be
considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application
for, and the issuance of, a permit in accordance with the city tree
preservation ordinance, in addition to any other permit required under this
subchapter.



      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit.



         (a)   Applications for tree trimming permits shall
include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers
with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices.



         (b)   Tree trimming permits shall designate an
expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be
expeditiously accomplished.



      (2)   Damage to trees.



         (a)   Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation
of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages.



         (b)   The city will require compensation for trees
extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization.



         (c)   The formula developed by the International Society
of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees.



         (d)   The city may require the removal and replacement
of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable
condition.



   (B)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance.



      (1)   The city may require that special measures be taken to
preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance.



      (2)   The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.



   (C)   Chemical use. Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals
will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control.



(Prior Code, § 37-106)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 98.122  REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.



   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city,
a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate
authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance
or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the
city in or upon, the rights-of-way.



   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities.



      (1)   Within 30 days following written notice from the city,
any utility that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized facility or
related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense,
remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the
rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way accordingly.



      (2)   A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the
following circumstances:



         (a)   Upon expiration or termination of the
permittee’s license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable
law;



         (b)   If the facility was constructed or installed
without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;



         (c)   If the facility was constructed or installed
without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this subchapter;
or



         (d)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.



   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities.



      (1)   The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move
any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the city, as the city may
determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public
health or safety emergency.



      (2)   If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt
to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and
shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.



      (3)   All costs associated with reconnection or relocation of
the cut or moved utility will be borne by the utility and not the city.



   (D)   Abandonment of facilities.



      (1)   Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way
of the city, the utility shall notify the city within 90 days.



      (2)   Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility and restore the area
accordingly if the Director of Public Works determines that such removal will
be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare.



      (3)   In the event that the city does not direct the utility
that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to
the city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration
or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.



   (E)   Closing or vacation of a public right-of-way.



      (1)   In the event that all or part of a public right-of-way
is:



         (a)   Closed to utilities; or



         (b)   Vacated, or if ownership of the land under the
affected public right-of-way is otherwise transferred to a party other than
the city, a utility must remove its facilities from the public right-of-way
at its own cost and expense.



      (2)   If a closing, vacation or transfer of a public
right-of-way is undertaken for the benefit of any private person, the city
may condition its consent to such closing, vacation or transfer of the public
right-of-way on the agreement of the private person to:



         (a)   Grant all utilities having facilities in the
public right-of-way the right to continue to occupy and use such public
right-of-way; or



         (b)   Reimburse the utilities for their reasonable costs
to relocate their facilities.



      (3)   The city shall provide not less than 90 days prior
notice to a utility of any such closing, vacation or transfer to allow the
utility to remove its facilities and restore where the right to continue to
occupy and use such public right-of-way is not reserved for the utility.



(Prior Code, § 37-107)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 08-29, passed
10-20-2008)



§ 98.123  CLEANUP AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all
turf and terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the
rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or
maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the city.



   (B)   This includes restoration of entrances and side roads.



   (C)   Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials
and methods approved by the Director of Public Works.



   (D)   Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of
backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding or any other requirement to
restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that
which existed prior to the commencement of the project.



   (E)   The time period provided in this section may be extended by
the Director of Public Works for good cause shown.



(Prior Code, § 37-108)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 98.124  MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in
a manner satisfactory to the city and at the utility’s expense.



   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:



      (1)   (a)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the
traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps
to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public
on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or
flaggers;



         (b)   If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way,
but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the
shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and
lights shall be provided; and



         (c)   Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will
only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available.



      (2)   (a)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as
possible, notify the Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized
agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken
for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs; and



         (b)   If the nature of the emergency is such as to
interfere with the free movement of traffic, the city police shall be
notified immediately.



      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand
to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.



   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the
city a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48
hours after an emergency repair.



(Prior Code, § 37-109)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 98.125  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Request for variance.



      (1)   A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the
provisions of this subchapter must do so in writing to the Director of Public
Works as a part of the permit application.



      (2)   The request shall identify each provision of this
subchapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance
should be granted.



   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Director of Public Works
shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this
subchapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.



   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Director of Public
Works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance
has demonstrated that:



      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the
utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and



      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or
facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach,



   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a
condition for authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may
require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and
conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this subchapter
but which carry out the purposes of this subchapter.



   (E)   Right to appeal.



      (1)   Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the
Director of Public Works under the provisions of this subchapter may seek a
review of such order, requirement, decision or determination by filing a
request for review thereof with the City Manager, within 30 days after the
notification of the order, requirement, decision or determination.



      (2)   The request for review shall set forth in detail the
basis for the request.



      (3)   The City Manager shall thereafter consider the request
for review, determine whether the order, requirement, decision or
determination should be affirmed, modified, modified with conditions or
reversed, and provide a written determination thereof.



      (4)   If such utility seeks further review of the order,
requirement, decision or determination, such utility shall file a request to
appeal the determination of the City Manager with the City Clerk within 30
days after mailing of the determination by the City Manager; such appeal
shall be considered by the Public Works Committee of the City Council based
on the relevant facts available regarding the order, requirement, decision or
determination in question and the materials presented in connection with the
request for appeal, as well as materials presented in connection with the
Manager’s review provided under this section.



      (5)   The determination of the Public Works Committee shall be
final.



(Prior Code, § 37-110)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 98.126  ENFORCEMENT.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any
additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 37-112)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 98.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of §§ 98.105 through 98.126
shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this
city code.



      (2)   There may be times when the city will incur delay or
other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or
cannot perform its duties under its permit and this subchapter.



      (3)   Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the
cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall
bear the city’s costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining,
modifying, relocating or removing the facility that is the subject of the
permit.



      (4)   No other administrative agency or commission may review
or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the city.



      (5)   Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not
pay the costs apportioned to it.



(Prior Code, § 37-111)  (Ord. 07-37, passed 10-15-2007)



CHAPTER 99:  TREE PRESERVATION AND LANDSCAPING



Section



Purposes and Definitions



   99.001   Purposes



   99.002   Definitions



General Provisions



   99.015   Planting



   99.016   Removal



   99.017   Permits authorizing removal



   99.018   Application of requirements regarding diseased and infested
trees



   99.019   Removal, partial; non-emergency tree trimming, pruning



   99.020   Injury



   99.021   Dangerous trees



   99.022   Wires



   99.023   Excavations



Subdivisions and Planned Developments



   99.035   Approval



   99.036   Required materials; tentative approval



   99.037   Required materials; final



   99.038   Acceptance of plant materials and maintenance guarantee



Special Use Permits and Variances



   99.050   Approval



   99.051   Required materials



Property That Is the Subject of a Development Petition



   99.065   Approval



   99.066   Issuance of a permit



   99.067   Applications



   99.068   Building activity area



Construction Activity



   99.080   Tree protection



   99.081   Location of utilities



   99.082   Site inspections and approvals; tree fencing and utility
locations



   99.083   Site clearing



   99.084   Excavation



   99.085   Finished grade



Landscape Plans



   99.100   Required



   99.101   Application



   99.102   Landscape standards; residential



   99.103   Landscape standards; nonresidential



   99.104   Landscape standards; parking lots



   99.105   Landscape standards; right-of-way



   99.106   Landscape standards; fences



   99.107   Certificate of occupancy; required landscape plan



Street Trees



   99.120   Street tree plans; general



Contagious or Threatening Diseases and Infestations



   99.135   Trees affected with contagious or threatening diseases or
infestation declared to be public nuisances



   99.136   Breeding places of elm bark beetles declared to be public
nuisances



   99.137   Unlawful to maintain public nuisances



   99.138   Enforcement of subchapter



   99.139   Duty of owner to remove diseased tree or breeding place
after notice



   99.140   Notice to owner



   99.141   City may abate nuisance and assess the cost to the owner



   99.142   Nuisance on city property



Enforcement



   99.155   Appeals



 



   99.999   Penalty



PURPOSES AND DEFINITIONS



§ 99.001  PURPOSES.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to preserve trees on both
public and private property and, in the event that tree removal is necessary,
to ensure that appropriate replacement trees are planted.



   (B)   This chapter is also intended to minimize erosion and
stormwater runoff, provide buffers between neighboring properties, preserve
historic streetscapes, minimize the visual and environmental impacts of paved
surfaces and buildings and ensure landscaping in conjunction with new
development and redevelopment in a manner that preserves native vegetation.



   (C)   This chapter is intended to balance the property rights of
individual property owners with those of the overall health, safety and
welfare interests of the community.



(Prior Code, § 42-1)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT. An owner, occupant or a representative of an owner or
occupant of a lot, parcel or tract of land for which an application has been
filed for a subdivision, special use permit or any activity requiring the
issuance of grading, building, utility or demolition permits.



   BLUFF. All property on the lake side of the table land beginning at a
point where the slope of the land first exceeds 10% and continuing to the
lake or bottom of ravine.



   BUILDING ACTIVITY AREA. The portion of a property within which
development activity, including grading, excavating, storage of materials,
construction access and construction of both main buildings and accessory
structures, including pools and tennis courts, may occur.



   CONSERVATION AREA (EASEMENT).



      (1)   An area within which all existing vegetation shall be
preserved for the purpose of retaining the natural character of the area and
providing screening from adjacent uses or a public or private street.



      (2)   No plant material shall be removed from or planted in a
CONSERVATION AREA without a permit from the city authorizing removal or
planting.



      (3)   CONSERVATION AREAS may be established as part of the
subdivision process or through the issuance of a special use permit.



      (4)   No solid fences may be located in a CONSERVATION AREA.
(Also referred to as PRESERVATION AREAS on some subdivision plats.)



   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE. An area on the ground extending out from the trunk
of the tree in all directions a distance of one foot for every inch DBH.



   CUTTING.



      (1)   Felling or removal of a tree, or any procedure that
results in the death or substantial destruction of a tree.



      (2)   CUTTING does not include normal pruning or trimming of
trees consistent with this chapter.



   DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The diameter of a tree measured at 54
inches above the ground.



   DIRECTOR.



      (1)   The Directors of the Community Development Department,
Public Works Department and Parks and Recreation Department, together or
individually.



      (2)   In cases where authority rests with only one or two of
the Directors, said Director is specified.



      (3)   In all cases, the Director may authorize one or more
designees to act on the Director’s behalf.



   HERITAGE TREE. Any tree having a 18-inch or larger DBH.



   INCH FOR INCH REPLACEMENT.



      (1)   The planting of one or more trees in place of trees that
have been removed.



      (2)   The new tree, or trees, shall equal, in total DBH
inches, the DBH of the tree or trees removed.



   NO DISTURBANCE AREA.



      (1)   An area, identified on a plat of subdivision or approved
development plan around one or more trees within which all construction,
grading, installation of utilities and all other land altering activity is
prohibited.



      (2)   NO DISTURBANCE AREAS may be established as part of the
subdivision process or through the issuance of a special use permit.



   PROPERTY THAT IS THE SUBJECT OF A DEVELOPMENT PETITION. Any property
for which an application has been filed for subdivision, special use permit
or any activity requiring the issuance of any grading, building, utility or
demolition permit.



   PROTECTED AREA. Any areas in which tree protection measures are
required pursuant to this chapter, including without limitation any bluff,
conservation area, heritage tree, no disturbance area, ravine, streetscape
preservation area or tree preservation area.



   RAVINE. All property beginning at a point where the slope of the land
first exceeds 10% and continuing to the bottom of the RAVINE.



   REMOVE or REMOVAL. The act of causing a tree to be cut down or to die
through damaging, poisoning or other direct or indirect action.



   STREET TREE. Tree located in the public right-of-way and maintained by
the city.



   STREETSCAPE PRESERVATION AREAS. The portion of a property located in
the front and corner side yards, as defined by the Zoning Code.



   TREE PRESERVATION AREAS.



      (1)   Areas identified on a plat of subdivision, or on a site
plan attached to the ordinance granting a special use permit, within which
trees are to be preserved.



      (2)   This differs from a conservation easement in that
removal of undergrowth is permitted.



(Prior Code, § 42-2)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 99.015  PLANTING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or bush in the public
right-of-way, or on other city owned property without prior written approval
of the Director of Public Works or the Director of Parks and Recreation, or
in the case of a conservation area, the Director of Community Development.



   (B)   Any plantings authorized within the public right-of-way or on
other public property shall be documented by an approved landscape plan and a
hold harmless agreement, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, both of
which shall be on file with the city prior to planting.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree under utility wires
that is anticipated to grow to a height that will interfere with the wires.



(Prior Code, § 42-3)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 99.999



§ 99.016  REMOVAL.



   (A)   A permit authorizing removal must be obtained from the
Director of Community Development prior to the following activities, except
for divisions (A)(6) and (A)(7) below, in which case, a permit for removal
must be obtained from the Director of Public Works or the Director of Parks
and Recreation:



      (1)   Removal of trees or vegetation from a conservation
easement. In addition, removal of dead, diseased or noxious materials from
these areas shall only occur with prior written approval;



      (2)   Removal of trees from a tree preservation or no
disturbance area;



      (3)   Removal of a heritage tree;



      (4)   Removal of trees or vegetation on any property that is
the subject of a development petition prior to issuance of a permit;



      (5)   Removal of trees ten-inch DBH or larger within the
streetscape preservation area;



      (6)   Removal of trees or shrubs from any ravine or bluff or
the topping of trees in any ravine or bluff; and



      (7)   Removal of trees or shrubs from a public right-of-way or
other public property.



   (B)   (1)   Any tree removal on private property shall not
encroach upon, or damage any trees located in protected areas, on neighboring
properties or in the city right-of-way.



      (2)   Any permit authorizing removal may be subject to such
conditions that the Director may deem necessary or appropriate to minimize
damage to other trees or vegetation on a site, including, but not limited to,
the installation of protective fencing or protective ground covering such as
mulch, wood chips or plywood, to mitigate impacts on tree roots.



   (C)   Applications for a tree removal permit shall be made on forms
authorized by the Directors, and no permit shall be issued except pursuant to
an application containing all required information including, where
applicable, a tree protection, landscaping or tree replacement plan.



(Prior Code, § 42-4)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)



§ 99.017  PERMITS AUTHORIZING REMOVAL.



   (A)   Permits authorizing removal pursuant to § 99.016 may be
issued by the Director of Community Development or Director of Parks and
Recreation under the following conditions:



      (1)   The tree is dead or dying;



      (2)   The tree is diseased;



      (3)   The removal of the tree is consistent with established
good forestry practices; and/or



      (4)   Refusal to allow removal of the tree would deny the
applicant all reasonable and economically viable uses of the property.



   (B)   (1)   If none of the above criteria are satisfied, the
Director may authorize removal if it is mitigated by “replacement trees in
lieu of preservation” consisting of a double inch for inch replacement of
the tree to be removed, unless good forestry practices or an approved
landscaping plan warrant a lesser replacement, which in no case shall be less
than an inch for inch replacement of the tree to be removed.



      (2)   The replacement trees may be required on the property
from which the tree was removed, or on adjacent properties or rights-of-way
as determined to be necessary by the Director to mitigate the loss of the
tree of trees in a protected area.



(Prior Code, § 42-5)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)



§ 99.018  APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENTS REGARDING DISEASED AND INFESTED TREES.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the
removal of trees or parts thereof which have been identified as being
infected with contagious, threatening diseases or infested with pests either
of which threaten the health and vitality of the city’s urban forest.



   (B)   Such trees and infected or infested materials shall be removed
and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of §§ 99.135 through
99.142.



(Prior Code, § 42-6)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)



§ 99.019  REMOVAL, PARTIAL; NON-EMERGENCY TREE TRIMMING, PRUNING.



   (A)   General. All tree pruning conducted by for profit tree
services within the corporate boundaries of the city shall be done in a
manner that is consistent with the guidelines set forth by the International
Society of Arboriculture, in their publication entitled Tree Pruning
Guidelines, 2008, or as hereafter amended for the purpose of protecting the
health of trees and property values.



   (B)   Non-emergency pruning. Non-emergency pruning of all tree
species shall be permitted year round except as follows: all species of elms
and oaks shall not be pruned from April 1 through November 1.



   (C)   Utility companies.



      (1)   Prior to conducting any non-emergency tree pruning, all
utility companies shall notify the Director of Public Works and the Director
of Parks and Recreation, and adjacent property owners, in writing, no less
than seven days prior to the start of any work.



      (2)   In protected areas and areas not within the utility
franchise authority, the utility company must obtain written approval from
the Director of Parks and Recreation prior to the start of any pruning, to
ensure that the pruning plan is consistent with applicable city regulations.



(Prior Code, § 42-7)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 06-45, passed
8-7-2006; Ord. 2010-16, passed 5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)



§ 99.020  INJURY.



   It shall be unlawful to intentionally injure any tree on public
right-of-way or on other public property or trees on private property in a
protected area as defined by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 42-8)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 99.999



§ 99.021  DANGEROUS TREES.



   (A)   Any tree on private property which overhangs any sidewalk,
street or other public property in such a way as to impede or interfere with
traffic, and any tree or limb which has become likely to fall on or across
any public right-of-way or public property, shall be trimmed or removed by
the owner of the property on which the tree grows so that the obstruction or
danger is removed.



   (B)   If a determination is made by the Director of Public Works or
the Director of Parks and Recreation that a tree poses an immediate threat to
life or limb, the Director of Public Works or the Director of Parks and
Recreation may order the removal of the portion of the tree posing the
immediate threat.



(Prior Code, § 42-9)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)



§ 99.022  WIRES.



   (A)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or rope
to any tree in any public right-of-way, parkway or on other public property
without the prior written approval of the Director of Public Works and
Director of Parks and Recreation.



   (B)   Clearance from trees.



      (1)   Any person or company given the right to maintain poles
and wires in the public rights-of-way and on publicly owned property, shall,
in the absence of a provision in the franchise agreement concerning the
subject, keep such wires and poles free from, and away from, all trees.



      (2)   In addition, all such trees shall be kept properly
trimmed in a manner that is consistent with city regulations, subject to the
approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation, so that no injury shall be
done to either the poles and wires, or the trees, by their contact.



(Prior Code, § 42-10)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)



§ 99.023  EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   Excavations in streets or on other publicly owned property
shall occur in a manner that minimizes injury to any tree.



   (B)   In cases where the excavation may impact the roots or any
other part of a tree, prior written approval from the Director of Parks and
Recreation is required before excavation may begin to ensure that appropriate
steps are taken to minimize or mitigate the effect of such impact.



(Prior Code, § 42-11)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)



SUBDIVISIONS AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS



§ 99.035  APPROVAL.



   (A)   In recommending final approval of a subdivision or planned
development, the Plan Commission shall forward conditions of approval to the
City Council that further the stated purpose of this chapter.



   (B)   The conditions may include, but are not limited to, the
establishment of conservation areas, no disturbance areas and tree
preservation areas, and requirements for street tree and landscape plans.



(Prior Code, § 42-21)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.036  REQUIRED MATERIALS; TENTATIVE APPROVAL.



   All subdivision applications shall include the following materials in a
form acceptable to the city and as further detailed in the subdivision
application materials available from the Community Development Department.



   (A)   Tree survey.



      (1)   The survey shall include information on all existing
trees eight-inch DBH or larger and clusters of six or more trees of at least
four-inch DBH.



      (2)   Information shall include the location, size, species
and condition of each tree.



      (3)   Each tree shown on the survey shall be tagged on the
site.



   (B)   Site plan of proposed improvements.



      (1)   One or more site plans shall be submitted overlaying the
locations of existing trees with proposed road rights-of-way, utility
easements, utility stubs, building pads, retention ponds, drainage swales and
proposed grading and fill areas.



      (2)   The amount of grading or filling proposed in each area
shall be specified on the plans.



(Prior Code, § 42-22)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.037  REQUIRED MATERIALS; FINAL.



   (A)   The following materials shall be submitted prior to final
consideration of the plan by the Plan Commission.



   (B)   Any of the requirements may be waived by the Director of
Community Development if it is determined that they are not applicable based
on the materials submitted for tentative approval.



      (1)   Plan of conservation areas, tree preservation protection
areas and no disturbance areas. The final plan or plat of subdivision shall
reflect all conservation, tree preservation, no disturbance and landscape
areas as approved by the Plan Commission and City Council.



      (2)   Building envelope. The final plan or plat of subdivision
shall reflect building envelopes that minimize impacts on trees identified
for protection on the subdivision plat and by this chapter.



      (3)   Street tree plan. A plan for the planting of trees along
both private and public streets shall be submitted consistent with the street
tree regulations in § 99.120.



      (4)   Landscape plan.



         (a)   A landscape plan for the entrance to the
subdivision, streetscapes, ponds, drainage swales, berms, common areas or
other areas as required by tentative approval.



         (b)   The landscape plan shall be consistent with the
provisions in §§ 99.100 through 99.107 and shall be designed based on the
City of Lake Forest Landscape Guidelines and Approved Planting List as they
may be established by the City Manager or the Manager’s designees from time
to time.



(Prior Code, § 42-23)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.038  ACCEPTANCE OF PLANT MATERIALS AND MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE.



   City acceptance of plant materials and the posting of a five year
financial guarantee shall occur in a manner consistent with the provisions of
the subdivision chapter, Chapter 156 of the city code.



(Prior Code, § 42-24)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



SPECIAL USE PERMITS AND VARIANCES



§ 99.050  APPROVAL.



   (A)   In recommending approval of a special use permit or a
variance, the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals shall include
conditions of approval that further the stated purpose of this chapter.



   (B)   The conditions may include, but are not limited to, the
establishment of conservation areas, no disturbance areas and tree
preservation areas, and requirements for street tree and landscape plans.



(Prior Code, § 42-28)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.051  REQUIRED MATERIALS.



   (A)   All applications for special use permits and variances shall
include the following materials in a form acceptable to the city and as
further detailed in the special use permit and variance application materials
available from the Community Development Department.



   (B)   Any of the requirements may be waived if it is determined by
the Director of Community Development that the proposed development does not
impact trees or create a need for additional landscape screening.



      (1)   Tree survey.



         (a)   The survey shall include information on all
existing trees eight-inch DBH or larger and clusters of six or more trees or
at least four-inch DBH.



         (b)   Information shall include the location, size,
species and condition of each tree.



         (c)   Each tree shown on the survey shall be tagged on
the site.



      (2)   Site plan of proposed improvements.



         (a)   One or more site plans shall be submitted
overlaying the locations of existing trees with proposed road rights-of-way,
utility easements, utility stubs, building pads, retention ponds, drainage
swales and proposed grading and fill areas.



         (b)   The amount of grading or filling proposed in each
area shall be specified on the plans.



      (3)   Plan of conservation areas, tree preservation areas and
no disturbance areas. The site plan shall reflect all conservation, tree
preservation, no disturbance and landscape areas.



      (4)   Street tree plan. A plan for the planting of trees along
both private and public streets shall be submitted when deemed necessary due
to the magnitude of planting, consistent with the street tree regulations in
§ 99.120.



      (5)   Landscape plan.



         (1)   A landscape plan shall be submitted to provide for
screening of the development from the streetscape and from adjacent
development and uses.



         (2)   In addition, the plan shall provide for screening
of buildings, mechanical equipment and parking areas.



         (3)   The landscape plan shall also provide for
landscaping of the entrance to the development, the streetscape, ponds,
drainage swales, berms or common areas.



         (4)   The landscape plan shall be consistent with the
provisions in §§ 99.100 through 99.107 and designed based on the City of
Lake Forest Landscape Guidelines and Approved Planting List as they may be
established by the City Manager or the Manager’s designees from time to
time.



(Prior Code, § 42-29)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



PROPERTY THAT IS THE SUBJECT OF A DEVELOPMENT PETITION



§ 99.065  APPROVAL.



   In approving a development petition, the Building Review Board, the
Historic Preservation Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals may establish
conditions of approval that further the stated purpose of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 42-32)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.066  ISSUANCE OF A PERMIT.



   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any grading, building,
utility or demolition activity, plans shall be submitted to the city for
approval to ensure preservation of trees and vegetation in accordance with
this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 42-33)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.067  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   All applications for development shall include the following
information in a form acceptable to the city and as further detailed in the
permit application materials available from the city.



   (B)   Any of the requirements may be waived by the Director of
Community Development if the existing trees and vegetation on the site are
not subject to the provisions of the city’s tree preservation ordinance due
to size, species or condition.



      (1)   Site plan of proposed improvements.



         (a)   A plan shall be submitted showing the property
lines, zoning setbacks, utility and access easements, conservation easements,
utility stubs, preservation and no disturbance areas established by the plat
of subdivision or a previously approved development plan, the location of all
proposed buildings including any roof overhangs, all patios, terraces, tennis
courts, swimming pools and other accessory structures.



         (b)   All existing trees eight-inch DBH or larger and
all clusters of six or more trees of at least four-inch DBH shall be
reflected on the plan.



      (2)   Grading plan.



         (a)   A plan shall be submitted showing the existing
elevation of the site and the location and amount of all proposed grading and
fill.



         (b)   All existing trees eight-inch DBH or larger and
all clusters of six or more trees of at least four-inch DBH shall be
reflected on the plan.



      (3)   Location of utilities.



         (a)   A plan shall be submitted showing the proposed
location of all utilities.



         (b)   All existing trees eight-inch DBH or larger and
all clusters of six or more trees of at least four-inch DBH shall be
reflected on the plan.



         (c)   Utilities shall be located in the driveway areas
to minimize the impact on the trees on the site.



         (d)   Alternative locations for utilities may be
approved by the Director of Community Development if found to be consistent
with the purpose of this chapter.



      (4)   Tree survey.



         (a)   The survey shall include information on all
existing trees eight-inch DBH or larger and clusters of six or more trees at
least four-inch DBH.



         (b)   Information shall include the location, size,
species and condition of each tree.



         (c)   Each tree shown on the survey shall be tagged on
the site.



(Prior Code, § 42-34)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.068  BUILDING ACTIVITY AREA.



   (A)   The building activity area shall be determined based on review
of the materials submitted by the applicant and a site visit by city staff.
The building activity area shall minimize impact on trees.



   (B)   It is the intent that the building activity area will conform
to the setbacks applicable in the zoning district.



   (C)   However, due to the presence of one or more trees deemed by
size or condition to be worthy of preservation, a variance from a required
setback may be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals.



   (D)   The fees for a variance request may be waived by the Director
of Community Development.



(Prior Code, § 42-35)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY



§ 99.080  TREE PROTECTION.



   (A)   Location.



      (1)   Prior to the issuance of any grading, utility, building
or demolition permits, tree protection fencing shall be erected on the site
consistent with the approved site plan and generally at a point not to exceed
20 feet beyond the foundation walls of all buildings and five feet from the
edge of hardscape surfaces.



      (2)   The fence, once erected, on the site, shall remain in
place, in a full upright position, until all construction activity on the
site is completed, the site is ready for the final landscape grading, and
removal of the fence has been approved by the Director of Community
Development.



   (B)   Type.



      (1)   Tree protection fencing shall be wood, plastic or chain
link fencing.



      (2)   The fence shall be four feet in height with steel
supporting posts eight to ten feet on center.



      (3)   The posts shall be driven into the ground to hold the
fence in an upright position throughout construction on the site.



      (4)   Based on the review of the site plan, a chain link fence
may be required by the Director of Community Development in situations where
construction activity must occur in areas that close to trees or areas to be
preserved.



   (C)   Other protection. In cases where it is determined, at the sole
discretion of the city, that protection, other than, or in addition to
fencing is necessary to afford reasonable protection to existing trees, other
protective measures may be required by the Director of Community Development
including, but not limited to, protective ground covering such as mulch, wood
chips or plywood, to mitigate impacts on tree roots.



(Prior Code, § 42-40)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-32, passed
6-7-2010)



§ 99.081  LOCATION OF UTILITIES.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   A series of wood stakes, extending no less than three
feet above the ground, shall be used to identify the path of each utility.



      (2)   A ribbon will be attached to the top of the stake using
colors consistent with J.U.L.I.E. guidelines.



   (B)   Augering. The auguring of utilities shall be required and
specified on the approved fencing plan where utility locations have the
potential to materially damage trees eight-inch DBH or larger or clusters of
six or more trees at least four-inch DBH.



(Prior Code, § 42-41)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.082  SITE INSPECTIONS AND APPROVALS; TREE FENCING AND UTILITY
LOCATIONS.



   At any time that an inspection occurs and tree protection fencing is
not properly installed or utilities are not properly located and staked, a
re-inspection fee as set out in the fee schedule will be assessed for each
follow-up inspection until the site is adequately fenced and the utilities
are properly located and staked.



(Prior Code, § 42-42)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.083  SITE CLEARING.



   (A)   Following review and approval of the site plan and fencing,
and the issuance of a demolition or building permit, the lot may be cleared
of trees within the approved construction and driveway areas.



   (B)   The removal shall occur by use of manual saws, chain saws and
stump grinders only.



   (C)   No other equipment shall be used for removal of trees without
the prior written approval of the Director of Community Development.



(Prior Code, § 42-43)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.084  EXCAVATION.



   If there is insufficient cleared area on the site, as determined by the
Director of Community Development, to store the soil from excavation until it
is needed for back filling without impacting trees identified for protection,
the soil shall be temporarily removed from the construction site until the
backfilling is to occur.



(Prior Code, § 42-44)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.085  FINISHED GRADE.



   (A)   Fill materials used to establish finished grade in accordance
with the approved grading plan shall be top quality black soil.



   (B)   Fill materials shall not be permitted around the trunk of a
tree.



   (C)   To this end, a tree well equal to or larger than greater than
the critical root zone of the tree to protect the tree from fill materials.



   (D)   Adequate drainage shall be provided in each tree well to
prevent the collection of water.



(Prior Code, § 42-45)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



LANDSCAPE PLANS



§ 99.100  REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   A landscape plan shall be required for all
development activity as specified in this subchapter including, but not
limited to, subdivisions, commercial buildings, multi-family residential
developments, new and replacement single-family residences and duplex
residences.



      (2)   Replacement residences are those that are constructed
after approval of demolition or partial demolition by the Building Review
Board or Historic Preservation Commission.



   (B)   Landscaping in addition to the minimum requirements specified
herein may apply when required by a Board or Commission, for property that is
the subject of a development petition.



   (C)   The requirement for a landscape plan may be waived by the
Director of Community Development if a landscape plan is:



      (1)   Not required as a condition of approval by a board or
commission; and



      (2)   If it is demonstrated by the applicant that the existing
vegetation on site shall provide adequate screening for the development in a
manner consistent with the purposes of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 42-50)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 04-10, passed
1-15-2004)



§ 99.101  APPLICATION.



   (A)   General. Landscape plans shall be consistent with the
following standards, shall be submitted in a form acceptable to the city, and
shall be in conformance with the City of Lake Forest Landscape Guidelines and
Approved Planting List, as may be established by the City Manager or the
Manager’s designees from time to time.



   (B)   Plan. The plan shall be drawn at a scale one inch equals 50
foot scale or larger and shall accurately show property lines and zoning
setback lines.



   (C)   Public right-of-way. Private landscaping shall not encroach on
to the city right-of-way.



   (D)   Elements of plan.



      (1)   The landscape plan shall show all existing trees of at
least eight inches at diameter breast height and clusters of six or more
trees of at least four inches at diameter breast height, proposed grading and
filling, existing natural features on the site including, but not limited to,
ravines, bluffs and wetlands.



      (2)   In addition, the plan shall show all proposed building
foot prints and all hardscape surfaces.



      (3)   The plan shall identify the species, varieties, size at
time of planting and quantity of plant materials.



      (4)   The plan shall identify any existing trees or vegetation
proposed for removal.



(Prior Code, § 42-51)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 04-10, passed
1-15-2004)



§ 99.102  LANDSCAPE STANDARDS; RESIDENTIAL.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   Landscape plans for new or replacement residential
buildings shall be reviewed by the Director of Community Development based on
the minimum criteria in this section and where applicable, conditions of
approval established by the Board or Commission through the development
approval.



      (2)   The plans shall be consistent with the City of Lake
Forest Landscape Guidelines and Plant List, as may be established by the City
Manager or the Manager’s designees from time to time and must satisfy the
following minimum criteria.



   (B)   Minimum criteria.



      (1)   (a)   In the front yard, two shrubs, with a minimum
height of 36 inches at the time of planting, must be planted for every ten
linear feet of foundation along the portion of the building facing a public
or private street.



         (b)   The linear foot measurement shall be determined by
rounding up or down to the nearest ten.



      (2)   (a)   In the corner side yard, two shrubs, with a
minimum height of 36 inches at the time of planting, must be planted for
every ten linear feet of foundation along the portion of the building facing
a public or private street.



         (b)   The linear foot measurement shall be determined by
rounding up or down to the nearest ten.



      (3)   In addition to divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above, two of
the following must also be satisfied:



         (a)   Two three-inch shade trees must be planted on the
site for each 100 linear feet of foundation, or portion thereof, along the
front and corner side yards;



         (b)   Three three-inch under story or ornamental trees
must be planted on the site for each 100 linear feet of foundation, or
portion thereof along the front and corner side yards; and/or



         (c)   Three six to eight-foot evergreens must be planted
on the site for each 100 linear feet of foundation, or portion thereof along
the front and side yards.



      (4)   Planting beds around the perimeter of the building must
be covered with ground cover or mulch.



   (C)   Ability to waive requirement for landscape plan. The Director
of Community Development may waive the minimum landscape requirement and the
requirement for a landscape plan if the petitioner demonstrates that one or
more of the following conditions are satisfied:



      (1)   Sufficient mature trees and vegetation exist on the site
in a manner that meets the intent of the regulations;



      (2)   Installing plant material would compromise the health,
vitality or ecology of the existing vegetation on the site, or on neighboring
sites; and/or



      (3)   Significant open space or vistas would be negatively
impacted by the installation of the required plants.



(Prior Code, § 42-52)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 04-10, passed
1-15-2004)



§ 99.103  LANDSCAPE STANDARDS; NONRESIDENTIAL.



   (A)   Landscape plans for nonresidential buildings shall be subject
to review and approval by the Building Review Board or Historic Preservation
Commission in conjunction with review of the building.



   (B)   The following minimum standards shall be met, unless expressly
waived by the Building Review Board or the Historic Preservation Commission.



      (1)   (a)   At least 50% of the open space on the site
shall be landscaped.



         (b)   The required open space ratios and setback
requirements for various zoning districts consistent with the provisions of
the zoning regulations, Chapter 159 of this city code.



      (2)   (a)   At least one tree shall be planted for every
500 square feet of the area required to be landscaped.



         (b)   One-third of the trees shall be evergreens of a
minimum of six feet in height, one-third of the trees shall be ornamental a
minimum of three-inch caliper or six feet in height, and one-third of the
trees shall be shade trees, a minimum of three-inch DBH.



      (3)   (a)   One shrub shall be planted for every 50 square
feet of the area required to be landscaped.



         (b)   For shrubs that mature at less than five feet in
height, minimum installation size shall be two feet tall.



         (c)   For shrubs that mature taller than five feet in
height, minimum installation size shall be three feet tall.



      (4)   (a)   Foundation plantings of a minimum width of six
feet shall be provided on all sides of the main residence except where
sidewalks, driveways or other hardscape abuts the structure.



         (b)   Foundation plantings shall be comprised of a
combination of shade trees, ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubs, ground
cover and flowers.



      (5)   The landscape plan shall be consistent with the City of
Lake Forest Landscape Guidelines and Approved Planting List, as may be
established by the City Manager or the Manager’s designees from time to
time.



(Prior Code, § 42-53)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.104  LANDSCAPE STANDARDS; PARKING LOTS.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   All parking lots of five or more spaces shall provide
landscaping in accordance with the provisions of this section.



      (2)   In addition, all parking lots of more than three spaces
and adjoining property in a residence, general residence or office districts
shall also satisfy the requirements in the zoning regulations, Chapter 159 of
this city code, unless expressly waived by an authorized board or commission
of the city in conjunction with the approval of a development petition for
the site.



   (B)   Interior landscaping. Parking lots of five or more spaces
shall be landscaped consistent with the following standards.



      (1)   A planting island of at least 120 square feet in area,
and at least seven feet in width, shall be provided for every ten parking
spaces or a continuous landscape strip at least seven feet in width between
parking rows shall be provided and a landscape island of at least 120 square
feet shall be provided at the end of each row of parking stalls.



      (2)   All landscaped islands shall be crowned to allow for
positive drainage.



      (3)   One shade tree shall be provided for every 120 square
feet of landscape island or one shade tree shall be provided for every 40
linear feet of a continuous landscape strip.



      (4)   (a)   Shade trees shall comprise at least 60% of the
landscape material.



         (b)   Ornamental trees, shrubbery, hedges and other
plant materials may be used to supplement trees.



   (C)   Perimeter landscaping. Parking lots adjacent to public or
private streets shall meet the following standards.



      (1)   (a)   A solid screen of plantings, a minimum of three
feet in height, shall be provided.



         (b)   If shrubs are used, at least 50% shall be
evergreens.



      (2)   All landscaped islands shall be crowned to allow for
positive drainage.



      (3)   (a)   At least one tree shall be provided for every
40 linear feet of parking lot adjacent to a public or private street.



         (b)   The trees shall be planted between the parking lot
and the street.



         (c)   One-third of these trees shall be shade trees at
least three inches in diameter; one-third ornamental at least three inches in
diameter; and, one-third evergreen at least eight feet tall.



         (d)   These trees are in addition to parkway trees
required by § 99.120.



(Prior Code, § 42-54)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.105  LANDSCAPE STANDARDS; RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   In conjunction with a subdivision, development or re-development of a
property, the publicly owned right-of-way shall be restored consistent with
the following standard.



   (A)   Graded and sodded. The unpaved portion public right-of-way
abutting a parcel shall be fine graded and sodded as set forth in the
city’s subdivision control ordinance, as codified in Chapter 156.



   (B)   Street trees. Street trees shall be replaced or planted
consistent with § 99.120.



(Prior Code, § 42-55)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.106  LANDSCAPE STANDARDS; FENCES.



   Fences shall be screened from adjacent rights-of-way consistent with
the requirements in § 159.010(E)(3) of the zoning code.



(Prior Code, § 42-56)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.107  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; REQUIRED LANDSCAPE PLAN.



   (A)   General. A final certificate of occupancy shall be issued only
upon the completion of plantings in accordance with the approved landscape
plan as determined by the Director of Community Development.



   (B)   Conditional occupancy permit.



      (1)   A conditional occupancy permit may be issued in the
reasonable discretion of the Director of Community Development in the event
that due to the time of year, planting cannot occur; provided, however, that
a cash bond equal to 100% of the cost of the landscaping is posted to ensure
installation of the approved landscaping during the next available planting
season.



      (2)   A conditional occupancy permit may also be issued when
city inspection of the landscaping does not occur within five business days
of a request for a final landscape inspection.



(Prior Code, § 42-57)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



STREET TREES



§ 99.120  STREET TREE PLANS; GENERAL.



   (A)   Requirement. A street tree plan and street tree plantings are
required as part of a subdivision, special use permit or nonresidential and
multi-family development.



   (B)   Minimum standards. The following minimum standards shall be
met, unless expressly waived as part of the development approval process.



   (C)   Size and spacing. Trees and shrubs shall be planted according
to the following spacing requirements.



      (1)   Trees.



         (a)   Small trees which have an ultimate height of 20 to
30 feet or a 15- to 25-foot spread shall be planted 15 feet to 20 feet on
center;



         (b)   Medium trees which have an ultimate height of 30
to 50 feet or a 30- to 40-foot spread shall be planted 25 to 30 feet on
center; and



         (c)   Large trees which have an ultimate height greater
than 50 feet or over a 40 foot spread shall be planted 35 feet to 40 feet on
center.



      (2)   Bushes.



         (a)   Small shrubs minimum 24 inches high, three feet on
center; and



         (b)   Large shrubs minimum 36 inches high, three feet on
center.



(Prior Code, § 42-61)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



CONTAGIOUS OR THREATENING DISEASES AND INFESTATIONS



§ 99.135  TREES AFFECTED WITH CONTAGIOUS OR THREATENING DISEASES OR
INFESTATION DECLARED TO BE PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   All species and varieties of elm trees infected with the fungus known
as the Dutch elm disease and trees infected with oak wilt as determined by
laboratory analysis conducted by or under the direction of the City Forester
and trees infested with Asian longhorn beetle, emerald ash borer or other
diseases or infestations that threaten the urban forest, are hereby declared
to be a public nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 42-65)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 99.999



§ 99.136  BREEDING PLACES OF ELM BARK BEETLES DECLARED TO BE PUBLIC
NUISANCES.



   All species and varieties of elm trees that are dead or substantially
dead, and all dead elmwood to which the bark is still attached are hereby
declared to be public nuisances.



(Prior Code, § 42-66)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 99.999



§ 99.137  UNLAWFUL TO MAINTAIN PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any lot or
parcel of land in the city to permit or maintain on any such lot or parcel of
land, a public nuisance as set out in §§ 99.135 and 99.136 and it shall be
the duty of any such owner or occupant to promptly remove any such tree so
identified by the city and dispose of it either by chipping, burning or
burying it.



   (B)   Trees less than 5% infected may be treated in an effort to
save the tree with the permission from the Director of Public Works.



(Prior Code, § 42-67)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 99.999



§ 99.138  ENFORCEMENT OF SUBCHAPTER.



   (A)   In order to carry out the purpose of this subchapter and to
implement the enforcement thereof, the Director of Parks and Recreation is
hereby authorized and empowered to enter upon any lot or parcel of land in
the city at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting any trees or
stored wood situated thereon and the Director of Parks and Recreation, may
remove such specimens from any such tree as are required for the purposes of
the laboratory analysis referred to in § 99.135.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
take any action to prevent the Director of Parks and Recreation from entering
onto any lot or parcel of land in the city for the purpose of such
inspection, or to interfere with the Director of Parks and Recreation in the
performance of any duties provided under the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 42-68)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 99.999



§ 99.139  DUTY OF OWNER TO REMOVE DISEASED TREE OR BREEDING PLACE AFTER
NOTICE.



   (A)   If it is determined that any tree is a public nuisance as
provided in §§ 99.135 and 99.136, the Director of Parks and Recreation
shall serve or cause to be served upon the owner and occupant of the lot or
parcel of land on which such tree or stored wood is located, a written notice
requiring such owner to comply with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   If the owner or occupant upon whom such notice is served,
fails, neglects or refuses to remove and destroy the public nuisance within
30 days after service of such notice, the Director of Parks and Recreation,
may proceed to remove and dispose of such tree or stored wood and assess the
cost thereof against the owner or occupant of such lot or parcel of land, and
the amount of such cost shall be paid by such owner to the city.



(Prior Code, § 42-69)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 99.999



§ 99.140  NOTICE TO OWNER.



   (A)   Service of notice to an owner or occupant shall be served by
personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested.



   (B)   For purposes of this subchapter, an OWNER shall be the person
to whom the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year on the
lot or parcel on which the diseased or infected tree is located was sent.



(Prior Code, § 42-70)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)



§ 99.141  CITY MAY ABATE NUISANCE AND ASSESS THE COST TO THE OWNER.



   Provided that notice to an owner is sent in accordance with § 99.140,
any costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant
to this subchapter may be assessed against the record owner of the subject
property, and the city may place a lien upon such property for those costs in
the manner provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 42-71)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)



§ 99.142  NUISANCE ON CITY PROPERTY.



   Any tree or stored wood, on property owned by the city which is a
public nuisance as provided by §§ 99.135 or 99.136 shall promptly be
removed and disposed of under the supervision of the Director of Parks and
Recreation, at the expense of the city.



(Prior Code, § 42-72)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed
5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32, passed 6-7-2010)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 99.155  APPEALS.



   Appeals from any administrative decision made under this chapter may be
taken by the applicant or by any other person adversely affected by the
decision, to the Zoning Board of Appeals consistent with the procedures in §
159.042(E) of the city zoning code.



(Prior Code, § 42-13)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001)



§ 99.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   General. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Required corrections.



      (1)   Tree removal.



         (a)   Removal of any tree in violation of this chapter
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $750 per violation, with every
inch of the tree measured at DBH being a separate violation.



         (b)   The diameter of any trees that are removed prior
to the issuance of a permit shall be determined by the diameter of the stump
where cut at six inches from surrounding ground level.



         (c)   In the case where a stump has been removed, the
diameter of the tree shall be determined by the Director based on a prior
tree survey or an aerial photo.



         (d)   In addition to the applicable fine, each tree
removed, or determined by the Director to be irreparably damaged, shall be
replaced consistent with division (B)(2) below.



      (2)   Replacement.



         (a)   In issuing a permit authorizing the removal of a
tree pursuant to § 99.016 or in establishing the replacement requirement for
a tree as required by division (B)(1) above, the size of each replacement
tree shall be no less than three inches DBH at the time of planting.



         (b)   The location and the species of the replacement
tree shall be approved by the Director.



         (c)   The Director may waive or reduce the requirement
for planting a replacement tree, or trees, if such action is consistent with
the purposes of this chapter.



      (3)   Removal of vegetation in protected areas.



         (a)   Removal of vegetation in conservation areas, on
bluffs or ravines, in the public right-of-way and in other areas protected by
this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $750 per
violation, with every 100 square feet of land area cleared or fraction
thereof being a separate violation.



         (b)   A replacement landscape plan shall be submitted
for approval within 30 days of the violation.



         (c)   The landscape plan shall be designed to restore
the area to its previous planting density with native vegetation.



         (d)   In addition to the fine, a cash bond shall be
posted with the city to ensure replanting of the area in a manner consistent
with the vegetation removed subject to the approval of the Director as
specified in § 99.016.



         (e)   The amount of the cash bond shall be 100% of the
cost of replanting.



         (f)   Replanting shall occur within a time frame as
established by the Director and interim measures shall be required by the
Director to prevent stormwater run off and erosion.



      (4)   Tree trimming and pruning.



         (a)   Trimming or pruning of any tree by for profit tree
services or utility companies in violation of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 per violation with each tree
trimmed or pruned being a separate violation.



         (b)   In the event that the trimming or pruning is
determined by the Director to likely cause the death of the tree or shrub,
the provisions of division (B)(1) above shall be applicable in lieu of this
division (B)(4).



      (5)   Tree or vegetation removal; stop work order.



         (a)   The Director shall have the authority to stop work
at a site if unauthorized tree or vegetation removal is occurring.



         (b)   Once a stop work order is issued, work shall not
commence until:



            1.   The necessary permits have been issued;



            2.   Any applicable fine has been paid; and



            3.   The requirements of divisions (B)(1) through
(B)(3) above have been satisfied.



         (c)   Violations of a stop work order shall result in a
fine of $500 for every activity in violation of the stop work order, and any
violation of a stop work order shall subject the offending person to arrest.



(Prior Code, § 42-12)



   (C)   Penalty for noncompliance.



      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision
of §§ 99.135 through 99.142 by failing, neglecting or refusing to comply
with the provisions of any notice herein provided for, within 30 days after
the service thereof, or, who shall resist or obstruct the Director of Parks
and Recreation, in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $750 for each offense.



      (2)   Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 42-73)



(Ord. 01-38, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2010-16, passed 5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-32,
passed 6-7-2010)



CHAPTER 100:  WEEDS AND BRUSH



Section



   100.01   Certain weeds declared a nuisance



   100.02   Barberry bushes prohibited



   100.03   Removal



   100.04   Abatement of nuisance



 



   100.99   Penalty



§ 100.01  CERTAIN WEEDS DECLARED A NUISANCE.



   Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweeds, thistles cocklebur or
other weeds of like kind found growing on any lot, block, tract or parcel of
land situated along any street or avenue in the city, or in the space between
the curb line and the sidewalk line of any street, alley or avenue in front
of any such lot, block, tract or parcel of land in the city, are hereby
declared to be a nuisance, and any owner, occupant or agent of any such lot,
block, tract or parcel of land who shall allow said nuisance to exist shall
be subject to a fine.



(Prior Code, § 45-1)  (Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.02  BARBERRY BUSHES PROHIBITED.



   It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person, firm or corporation to
plant or permit the growth upon any premises of the bush of the species of
tall, common or European barberry, further known as berberis vulgaris, and
its horticultural varieties within the city.



(Prior Code, § 45-2)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.03  REMOVAL.



   It is hereby made the duty of the Director of Parks and Forestry to
serve through the Chief of Police or other persons designated by them to do
so, a notice in writing upon the owner, agent or occupant, or person in
possession, charge or control of any lot, building or premises in or upon
which this said bush may be found, requiring them or either of them to
remove, destroy and carry the same away and off such premises within two days.



(Prior Code, § 45-3)



§ 100.04  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.



   If the person so notified shall refuse or neglect to comply with such
order, within the time and in the manner specified the Chief of Police shall
cause the abatement of such nuisance at the expense of the party or parties
responsible for or permitting the same.



(Prior Code, § 45-4)



§ 100.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person violating § 100.01 shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $3 nor more than $750 and to a further fine of not less
than $1 nor more than $750 for each and every day after the first conviction
that he or she does not abate such nuisance.



      (2)   In all cases arising under § 100.01 where the owners,
occupant or agent of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall neglect or refuse
to abate such nuisance it shall be lawful for the Police Department to abate
the same and the owner, occupant or agent shall be charged with any expenses
which may be incurred by the city in the removal or abatement thereof, which
expenses shall be collected by the said city by suit or otherwise in addition
to the fine or penalty.



      (3)   In addition, any cost of collection of fines or other
amounts due to the city under this division (B) may be assessed in accordance
with § 10.99(B) of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 45-1)  (Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)


Lake Forest, IL Code of Ordinances


TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   LICENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESSES



      111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      112.   AMUSEMENTS



      113.   FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS



      114.   JUNK



      115.   MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS



      116.   PAWNBROKERS



      117.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSING



      118.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE



      119.   CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS



CHAPTER 110:  LICENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESSES



Section




General Provisions




   110.001   Applications for licenses and permits



   110.002   Forms



   110.003   Signatures



   110.004   Investigations



   110.005   Fees



   110.006   Termination of licenses



   110.007   Building and premises



   110.008   Transfer; change of location



   110.009   Reserved



   110.010   Revocation



   110.011   Inspections




Auctioneers




   110.025   License required



   110.026   Fee



   110.027   Application



   110.028   Reserved



   110.029   Employees



   110.030   Auctions in streets



   110.031   Exemptions




Factories and Slaughterhouses




   110.045   License required



   110.046   Applications



   110.047   Fee



   110.048   Location; frontage consents



   110.049   Zoning



   110.050   Unwholesome businesses




Fire Insurance Companies




   110.065   Reserved



   110.066   Reserved



   110.067   Reports



   110.068   Recovery; effect on policies



   110.069   Brokers




Music Vending Machines




   110.080   Definitions



   110.081   License required



   110.082   License application



   110.083   License fee



   110.084   Posting license



   110.085   Hours of operation




Coin-Operated Amusement Devices




   110.100   Definition



   110.101   Prohibited



   110.102   License required



   110.103   License application



   110.104   License fee



   110.105   Posting licenses



   110.106   Limit on number



   110.107   Prohibited locations




Burglar Alarms and Fire Alarm Holders




   110.120   Definitions



   110.121   Automatic dialers



   110.122   Local alarm



   110.123   Connection to city facilities



   110.124   Another central answering point



   110.125   False alarms



   110.126   Misuses of alarm



   110.127   Reservation of rights



   110.128   Enforcement




Raffles




   110.140   Adoption; purpose



   110.141   Definitions



   110.142   License required



   110.143   Application



   110.144   Information required on application



   110.145   Number of raffles limited



   110.146   Eligibility requirements



   110.147   Organization eligible for license



   110.148   Location limitations



   110.149   Rules governing raffles



   110.150   License fee



   110.151   Gambling prohibition




Designer Showcase Homes




   110.165   License required



   110.166   Applications



   110.167   Review of applications



   110.168   Time period of operation



   110.169   Hours of operation



   110.170   Working hours



   110.171   Parking



   110.172   Buses provided



   110.173   Storage of vehicles and construction equipment



   110.174   Prohibition of boutiques, luncheons and the like



   110.175   Signs



   110.176   Fees



   110.177   Definition



   110.178   Application of other city ordinances




Mobile Auto Service




   110.190   Definition



   110.191   Prohibited



   110.192   Applications



   110.193   Application approval



   110.194   Location



   110.195   Written permission required



   110.196   Hours of operation



   110.197   Place of business



   110.198   Appropriate state authorization



   110.199   Satellite



   110.200   Fee



   110.201   Application of §§ 110.001 through 110.011 to this
subchapter



   110.202   Violation of zoning code




Landscape and Lawn Care Professionals




   110.215   Definitions



   110.216   Licenses required



   110.217   Landscaper license



   110.218   Applications



   110.219   Landscaper regulations



   110.220   Enforcement



 



   110.999   Penalty



Charter reference:



   Authority to license, see Art. IV, § 4



   Where obtained, see Art. XI, § 7




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 110.001  APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   (A)   Applications for all licenses and permits required by
ordinance shall be made in writing to the City Clerk, in the absence of
provisions to the contrary.



   (B)   (1)   Each application shall state the name of the
applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any,
the time covered and the fee to be paid.



      (2)   Each application shall contain such additional
information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the city officials in
the issuing of the permit or license applied for.



(Prior Code, § 23-1)



§ 110.002  FORMS.



   Forms for all licenses and permits and applications therefor shall be
kept on file by the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 23-2)



§ 110.003  SIGNATURES.



   Each license or permit shall bear the signature of the City Clerk, in
the absence of any provisions to the contrary.



(Prior Code, § 23-3)



§ 110.004  INVESTIGATIONS.



   Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where the
ordinances of the city necessitate an inspection or investigation before the
issuance of such permit or license, the City Clerk may refer such application
to the proper officer for making such investigation within 48 hours of the
time of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the
investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or
otherwise, within five days after receiving the application or a copy thereof.



(Prior Code, § 23-4)



§ 110.005  FEES.



   In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor
is made to the City Clerk. When application for an annual license is made,
after the expiration of six months of the current license year, the license
for the remainder of the year shall be issued upon payment of one-half the
annual fee.



(Prior Code, § 23-5)



§ 110.006  TERMINATION OF LICENSES.



   All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the fiscal year
of the city in which they are issued, where no provision to the contrary is
made.



(Prior Code, § 23-6)



§ 110.007  BUILDING AND PREMISES.



   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no
permit for any thing or act, if the premises and building to be used for the
purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the ordinances of the
city. No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any
business or performance of any act which would involve a violation of Chapter
159 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 23-7)



§ 110.008  TRANSFER; CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   Licenses issued are not transferable to any person, firm or corporation
by the original licensee. The location of any permitted act, may be changed;
provided, ten days’ notice thereof is given to the City Clerk, in the
absence of any provision to the contrary; provided that, the building, zoning
or frontage consent requirements of the ordinances are complied with.



(Prior Code, § 23-8)  (Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 110.009  RESERVED.



§ 110.010  REVOCATION.



   Any license or permit for a limited time may be revoked by the Mayor at
any time during the life of such license or permit for any violation by the
licensee or permittee of the ordinance provisions relating to the license or
permit, or to the subject matter of the license or permit, or to the premises
occupied; such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed.



(Prior Code, § 23-10)



§ 110.011  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection
with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or
required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with
any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty
of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to
admit thereto for the purpose of making such inspection any officer or
employee of the city who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at
any reasonable time that admission is requested.



   (B)   Whenever any analysis of any commodity or material is
reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to
detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of any licensee of the city
whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized
officer or employee of the city requesting the same, sufficient samples of
such material or commodity for such analysis upon request.



   (C)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the
Mayor may revoke the license of any licensee in the city who refused to
permit any such officer or employee, who is authorized to make such
inspection or take such sample, to make the inspection or take an adequate
sample of the desired commodity, or who interferes with such officer or
employee while in the performance of his or her duty in making such
inspection; provided that, no license shall be revoked for such cause unless
written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises,
in the name of the city, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at
the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample.



(Prior Code, § 23-11)  (Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)




AUCTIONEERS




§ 110.025  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct in
the city or to do business as an auctioneer without first having obtained a
license as is herein provided, and paying the fee herein set forth.



(Prior Code, § 23-37)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.026  FEE.



   The fee, payable in advance, shall be as set out in the fee schedule,
for a daily license.



(Prior Code, § 23-38)



§ 110.027  APPLICATION.



   Applications for auctioneer’s licenses shall be made in writing to
the City Clerk, and shall state thereon the place of business, if any,
intended to be occupied; and the names of any employees, not to exceed two,
who are to be authorized to conduct auctions under the authority of the
license.



(Prior Code, § 23-39)



§ 110.028  RESERVED.



§ 110.029  EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   Every person licensed as an auctioneer may designate not to
exceed two employees who may be authorized by him or her to conduct auctions.



   (B)   Notice containing the names of the employees so designated
must be given to the City Clerk, and employee’s license shall be issued on
the payment of the fee as set out in the fee schedule.



   (C)   This license shall be good for one year and it shall be
unlawful for any employee not licensed under this section to conduct an
auction, or for any auctioneer to permit an auction to be conducted by an
unlicensed employee.



(Prior Code, § 23-41)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.030  AUCTIONS IN STREETS.



   No person shall sell or attempt to sell or offer for sale at public
auction any goods, chattels or personal or real property of any kind upon the
public streets or sidewalks of the city.



(Prior Code, § 23-42)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.031  EXEMPTIONS.



   Nothing is this subchapter shall apply to any public auction or sale
made or conducted by a public officer by virtue of any judicial order or
process, or by virtue of any power or authority contained in a mortgage or
trust deed.



(Prior Code, § 23-43)




FACTORIES AND SLAUGHTERHOUSES




§ 110.045  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any forge, foundry or
machine shop when operated as a factory, or rendery, tallow, chandelery, soap
factory, glue factory, tannery, packing plant or slaughterhouse within the
city or within one mile of the city limits without having first secured a
license therefor as is herein required.



(Prior Code, § 23-50)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.046  APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the City
Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 23-51)



§ 110.047  FEE.



   The annual fee for such license shall be as set out in the fee schedule.



(Prior Code, § 23-52)



§ 110.048  LOCATION; FRONTAGE CONSENTS.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall locate, build, construct,
operate or maintain any factory or other establishment mentioned in §
110.045 of this chapter in any block in the city where a majority of the
houses abutting on both sides of the street in the block are used exclusively
for residence purposes, without having first secured the written consent of
the owners of a majority of the frontage abutting on such street on both
sides within such block.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      BLOCK. The portion of the street between the two intersections
with other public streets nearest the specified location on each side;
provided that, if, on either or both sides of such location, there is no such
intersection within 300 feet of the center of the specified location, the
block shall be considered as terminating at a point 300 feet from such center.



      STREET.



         (a)   Such highways as have been dedicated by either
common law or statutory dedication as public streets and are actually in use
as such; and



         (b)   The term STREET shall not be construed to include
or mean merely service highways which are commonly known as alleys.



(Prior Code, § 23-53)



§ 110.049  ZONING.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed to permit the
establishment of any factory or place of business in any location where such
factory or place of business is prohibited by Chapter 159 of this code of
ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 23-54)



§ 110.050  UNWHOLESOME BUSINESSES.



   It shall be unlawful to establish any unwholesome business, or any
business or factory causing noxious odors, within the city or within one mile
of the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 23-55)  Penalty, see § 110.999




FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES




§ 110.065  RESERVED.



§ 110.066  RESERVED.



§ 110.067  REPORTS.



   Every person acting in the city as agent, for or on behalf of any such
corporation, company or association, shall, on or before July 15 of each and
every year, render to the Treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board a
full, true and just account, verified by his or her oath, of all premiums
which, during the year ending July 1 preceding such report, shall have been
received by him or her or by any other person for him or her, in his or her
behalf of such corporation, company or association. Such agent shall also at
the time of rendering the aforesaid report pay to the Treasurer of the
Foreign Fire Insurance Board the sum of money for which such company,
corporation or association, represented by him or her is chargeable, by
virtue of the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 23-64)  (Ord. 2010-03, passed 1-4-2010)



§ 110.068  RECOVERY; EFFECT ON POLICIES.



   (A)   The sum of money for which such company, corporation or
association is so chargeable, may be recovered of it, or its agent or agents,
by an action in the name of and for the use of the city, as for money had and
received.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be held to exempt any person,
corporation, company or association, from indictment and conviction under the
provisions of an act entitled “An Act To Enable Cities, Towns And Villages,
Organized Under Any General Or Special Law, To Levy And Collect A Tax Or
License Fee From Foreign Insurance Companies For The Benefit Of Organized
Fire Departments”, in force July 1, 1895; nor under the provisions of an
Act entitled “An Act To Provide For The Licensing Of Insurance Agents,
Brokers, Solicitors And Company Service Representatives, And To Repeal
Certain Acts Therein Named”, in force January 31, 1936.



(Prior Code, § 23-65)



§ 110.069  BROKERS.



   No insurance broker in the city shall place any insurance with any
company, association or corporation not incorporated under the laws of the
state, which shall be in default for not reporting or making payments as
hereinbefore provided, until it shall have complied with all the requirements
of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 23-66)




MUSIC VENDING MACHINES




§ 110.080  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   JUKE BOX. Any music vending machine.



   MUSIC VENDING MACHINE. Any automatic coin-operated phonograph or other
musical device, for the use of playing of which a fee is charged, for the
purpose of amusement.



(Prior Code, § 23-101)



§ 110.081  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain a music
vending machine in the city without first having obtained a license.



(Prior Code, § 23-102)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.082  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Application for a music vending machine license shall provide the
following information:



   (A)   Full name and address of the applicant;



   (B)   Name of music vending machine owner;



   (C)   Where the machine is to be used;



   (D)   Number of machines to be installed; and



   (E)   Description of machine, manufacturer’s name, the make and
factory number.



(Prior Code, § 23-103)



§ 110.083  LICENSE FEE.



   There shall be an annual fee, as set out in the fee schedule, for each
machine.



(Prior Code, § 23-104)



§ 110.084  POSTING LICENSE.



   Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the music
vending machine so licensed.



(Prior Code, § 23-105)



§ 110.085  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No licensee or any other person shall operate a juke box between 12:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily.



(Prior Code, § 23-106)  Penalty, see § 110.999




COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES




§ 110.100  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any mechanical/electrical apparatus
governed or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token or by the payment of
a fee or charge which provides the user with a physical or mental amusement,
diversion or competition in accordance with prescribed rules or conditions.



(Prior Code, § 23-115)



§ 110.101  PROHIBITED.



   Coin-operated amusement devices which return to the user thereof money
or property, or the right to receive money or property, are prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 23-116)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.102  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain for public use
a coin-operated amusement device in the city without having first obtained a
license.



(Prior Code, § 23-117)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.103  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Application for a coin-operated amusement device must be submitted to
the Director of Building and Zoning and shall contain the following
information:



   (A)   Full name and address of the applicant;



   (B)   Name of coin-operated amusement device;



   (C)   Address of premises where machine is to be located;



   (D)   Where the machine is to be located in the building;



   (E)   Number of machines to be installed; and



   (F)   Description of machine, manufacturer’s number, the make and
factory number.



(Prior Code, § 23-118)



§ 110.104  LICENSE FEE.



   There shall be an annual fee for each machine, renewable May 1
annually, as set out in the fee schedule.



(Prior Code, § 23-119)  (Ord. 1160, passed 3-3-1980; Ord. 1301, passed
4-5-1982)



§ 110.105  POSTING LICENSES.



   Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
coin-operated amusement device.



(Prior Code, § 23-120)



§ 110.106  LIMIT ON NUMBER.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to have or maintain upon
or within a single premises in excess of three coin-operated amusement
devices, and only one such licensee may operate at any given time on a single
premises.



   (B)   However, nothing contained herein shall be construed to
regulate the number of coin-operated amusement devices when located on the
premises of City Recreation Center; or a bona fide private educational
institution if such device is for the sole use and enjoyment of the students,
staff or authorized visitors.



(Prior Code, § 23-121)  (Ord. 1301, passed 4-5-1982)  Penalty, see §
110.999



§ 110.107  PROHIBITED LOCATIONS.



   No license shall be issued for a coin-operated amusement device, nor
shall any person operate such a device upon any premises within 500 feet of
the property line of any elementary school, junior high school or high
school, except when located on the premises of City Recreation Center.



(Prior Code, § 23-122)  Penalty, see § 110.999




BURGLAR ALARMS AND FIRE ALARM HOLDERS




§ 110.120  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM HOLDER. The owner, lessee or person responsible for the existence
of an alarm system within or on a premises.



   ALARM SYSTEM. An assembly of equipment device(s) designed to signal the
presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police and fire
personnel are expected to respond. Such an alarm system may include BURGLAR,
HOLDUP OR FIRE ALARMS and any system designed to monitor water flow, smoke
temperature, humidity or any other like conditions. Included are internal
premises systems where an audible signal emits sounds or flashing light or
beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises.



   AUTOMATIC DIALER. An alarm system which automatically sends over
regular telephone lines (as distinguished from dedicated telephone lines) a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the
emergency situation.



   BURGLAR ALARM. An alarm system activated automatically signaling an
entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the alarm system.



   CENTRAL ANSWERING POINT. An office or place to which alarms are
connected and where operators supervise or monitor such alarms.



   DEDICATED TELEPHONE LINE. A telephone line which has as its sole use
the transmission of an alarm signal.



   DIRECT CONNECTION. The method of using a telephone line which has as
its sole use the transmission of an alarm signal (see DEDICATED TELEPHONE
LINES) for the transmission of an alarm signal to a central answering
point’s monitor equipment.



   FALSE ALARM. An alarm signal resulting from a malfunction, improper
installation or human error.



   FEES. The moneys paid by an alarm holder to connect his or her alarm
system to the central answering point at city facilities.



   FIRE ALARM. An alarm system designed to detect heat or smoke.



   HOLDUP ALARM. An alarm system which is activated manually to signal a
robbery or attempted robbery.



   LOCAL ALARM. An alarm system which when activated causes an
audible/visual signal in or on the premises the system is designed to
protect. Such type of alarm may or may not be part of a system to notify an
answering point.



   SERVICE CHARGE. An assessment by the city against an alarm holder for
false alarms emitted from this alarm system as provided in this subchapter.



   TROUBLE INDICATION. A transmitted signal different from the alarm
system which indicates a mechanical/electrical problem in the system.



(Prior Code, § 23-150)



§ 110.121  AUTOMATIC DIALERS.



   The installation hereafter of any automatic dialer alarm system to any
city facility is prohibited. All alarm holders having such a device shall be
notified in writing as soon as the city becomes aware of such system and be
given 90 days to convert their system to the city’s direct connection
system or to obtain a central answering point other than the city; provided,
however, that, alarm holders who, at the time of the enactment of this
subchapter, have been granted permission to have an automatic dialer whose
central answering point is the city’s unlisted telephone number shall be
allowed to retain such connection if the alarm holder, at his or her expense,
converts such automatic dialer to a digital read-out so as to be compatible
with the city’s direct connection monitoring equipment. Such conversion
shall be made within 90 days of notice from the city to do so. No person may
hereafter authorize or cause an automatic dialer alarm to be connected to the
city.



(Prior Code, § 23-151)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.122  LOCAL ALARM.



   (A)   Local alarms shall not transmit an audible sound which is
similar to or imitate the city’s tornado alerting system.



   (B)   Local alarms shall have an automatic shut-off which will
de-activate the sound after one-half hour. The Police and Fire Departments
may enter the premises to de-activate a sound signal which has not shut off
within one-half hour of activation and which disturbs surrounding residents.
Such action shall be taken only after reasonable efforts to contact the
responsible party. Neither the city, nor its employees, shall be liable for
any damages resulting from such action.



(Prior Code, § 23-152)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.123  CONNECTION TO CITY FACILITIES.



   (A)   Permit. No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter be
authorized to have a direct connection to the city facilities for a fire or
burglar alarm system within the corporate limits of the city or from any
adjoining city, village or county which has entered into a communications
service agreement with the city without first obtaining a permit.



      (1)   The permit application shall be on a form prescribed by
the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief. In addition, all applicants shall
agree as follows.



         (a)   The city and the company, if any, under contract
or agreement to maintain the receiving alarm equipment within city facilities
shall not be held liable for any claimed failure of service or any damage
that may result from the installation, maintenance or operation of the alarm
system which is and shall remain entirely the alarm holder’s responsibility.



         (b)   To indemnify, defend and save harmless the city
and the company, if any, under contract or agreement to maintain the
receiving alarm equipment in the city facilities from all claims, demands,
judgments, liability, costs and expenses that may arise, in any way, as a
result of the alarm connection to city facilities.



         (c)   Neither the city nor the company, if any, under
contract or agreement to maintain the receiving alarm equipment within city
facilities are liable for any costs or expense of installation, lease,
maintenance, service or any other charges or fees for any alarm equipment
leased or owned by the applicant.



      (2)   All applicants must certify that they have alarm system
maintenance provided on a 24-hour basis.



   (B)   Equipment. All burglar alarms hereafter connected to the city
facilities shall be compatible with the city’s monitoring equipment and
conform to the most recent specifications of the American National Standards
Institute or equivalent specifications of an approved rating bureau. Fire
alarms hereafter connected shall be compatible with the city’s monitoring
equipment and conform to the latest National Fire Protection Association
Edition of Standard 72C or equivalent specifications of an approved rating
bureau.



      (1)   Diagrams, plans/schematics of any fire alarm system
installation shall be submitted to the Fire Department for its review and
approval prior to the beginning of installation of such alarm and the fire
alarm system shall be inspected and approved by the Fire Department prior to
the system being activated.



      (2)   Any violation of this section shall be cause for the
denial of a permit or result in the disconnection of an alarm system.



   (C)   Connection and maintenance fees.



      (1)   An initial one time fee as specified in the contract
negotiated with the city’s alarm company for each direct connection permit
shall be paid at the time of application for a direct connection permit to
city facilities. A residence, business or institution having both a fire and
burglar alarm system requires two direct connections. Such fee is not
refundable even if the alarm system is disconnected or discontinued for any
reason. A residence, business or institution which at the time of enactment
of the ordinance has a direct connection to the city or an authorized
automatic dialer system connected to the city’s unlisted telephone number
shall not be subject to the connection fee.



      (2)   There shall be an annual maintenance fee for each direct
connection and each authorized automatic dialer system connected to the
city’s unlisted telephone number as specified in the contract negotiated
with the city’s alarm company.



   (D)   Issuance. Upon compliance with all requirements of divisions
(A) through (C) above, the Chief of Police/Fire Chief shall issue a permit.



   (E)   Testing of equipment. No alarm designed to transmit emergency
signals directly to city facilities shall be tested or demonstrated without
first having obtained permission from the officer in charge of the Police or
Fire Department. Permission is not required to test or demonstrate alarm
devices not transmitting emergency signals directly to the Police or Fire
Departments unless the messages are to be relayed to the Police and Fire
Departments.



   (F)   Disconnection and reconnection to city facilities.



      (1)   Causes for disconnection from city facilities.



         (a)   Failure to pay any fees, maintenance charges or
service charges required by this subchapter shall be cause for the Police or
Fire Chief to disconnect an alarm system after 30 days’ written notice.



         (b)   Twelve false alarms from any one alarm system
within any 12-month period shall be cause for the Police or Fire Chief to
disconnect an alarm system after 30 days’ written notice.



         (c)   Three or more trouble indications within any
12-month period shall be cause for the Police or Fire Chief to disconnect an
alarm system after 30 days’ written notice.



         (d)   Any alarm system which continues to transmit a
trouble indication for any period for more than 48 hours shall be cause for
the Police or Fire Chief to disconnect an alarm system, but only after making
reasonable efforts to contact the responsible party.



         (e)   The alarm holder shall be responsible for any cost
or charge arising from the disconnection.



      (2)   Reconnection to city facilities.



         (a)   If an alarm system has been disconnected because
of non-payment of any fees or charges, upon payment in full of all
outstanding fees and charges, the alarm system may be reconnected to city
facilities.



         (b)   If an alarm system has been disconnected because
of trouble indications, the alarm holder must submit a written statement
indicating that repairs have been made to correct the mechanical/ electrical
problem in the system. After verification that the system is properly
functioning, the alarm system may be reconnected to city facilities.



         (c)   If an alarm system has been disconnected because
of false alarms, the alarm holder must submit a written statement indicating
the reason(s) for the false alarms and stating what measures have been taken
to prevent or minimize future false alarms. Upon review of status, the alarm
system may be reconnected at the discretion of the Police or Fire Chief.



         (d)   The alarm holder shall be responsible for any cost
or charge arising from the reconnection.



(Prior Code, § 23-153)  (Ord. 1513, passed 6-3-1985; Ord. 1760, passed
5-2-1988)



§ 110.124  ANOTHER CENTRAL ANSWERING POINT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the connection of any alarm
system to a central answering point other than a city facility which shall
first attempt to determine the validity of any alarm signal, then to notify
the Police or Fire Department when unable to do so or when the signal is
believed to be a valid alarm. Notwithstanding any other provision or the city
code, the response by the city to alarms called in by a private answering
facility is completely voluntary, is not pursuant to any duty or contract and
can be terminated at any time upon 30 days’ notice for failure to pay any
service charge.



(Prior Code, § 23-154)  (Ord. 1513, passed 6-3-1985)



§ 110.125  FALSE ALARMS.



   Service charge for false alarms received by the city shall be as
follows.



   (A)   (1)   Three false alarms shall be allowed in any 12-month
period. A service charge, as set out in the fee schedule, shall be billed to
the alarm holder for each additional false alarm thereafter in any 12-month
period.



      (2)   Service charges shall be set by the City Council, by
motion, and may be changed from time to time, by motion, as the Council deems
necessary.



   (B)   (1)   The service charges, as set forth in the fee
schedule, are applicable to all false alarms received regardless of whether
the central answering point is the city or a private facility.



      (2)   The same charges shall apply to false alarms received
from outside the city, except where that city, village or area has its own
service charges for false alarms.



(Prior Code, § 23-155)  (Ord. 1760, passed 5-2-1988)



§ 110.126  MISUSES OF ALARM.



   It is unlawful for any person to activate an alarm system for any
purpose other than what the alarm system was originally designed to detect.



(Prior Code, § 23-156)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.127  RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.



   The city reserves the right at any time, to discontinue the service of
providing monitoring of any and all alarm systems after written notice. The
city is under no obligation to supply this special type of service to any
person, firm or corporation and may deny this privilege of cause.



(Prior Code, § 23-157)



§ 110.128  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Chief of Police/Fire Chief as appropriate shall have the
responsibility for enforcement of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 23-158)




RAFFLES




§ 110.140  ADOPTION; PURPOSE.



   (A)   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Ill.
Rev. Stat. Ch. 85, §§ 2301 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 23-175)



   (B)   The purpose of this subchapter is to license and regulate
raffles conducted within the city and it shall be strictly construed for all
purposes to relate only to raffles for persons, firms, corporations and
organizations located within the city.



(Prior Code, § 23-176)



§ 110.141  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE. An organization or institution organized and operated to
benefit an indefinite number of people within the city. The service rendered
to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public of
the city.



   EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and operated
within the city to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of
learning by methods common to schools and institutions of learning which
compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study
presented in tax supported schools.



   FRATERNAL. An organization of persons located within the city having a
common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare
of its members and to provide assistance to the general public is such a way
as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise
would be cared for by the government.



   LABOR. An organization located within the city composed of workers
organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged
in such pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their
respective occupations.



   NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expected for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.



   NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized, conducted and
located within the city on a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit
inuring to anyone as a result of its operation.



   RAFFLE. A form of lottery defined in Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, §
28-2(b), in which the player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a
chance represented and differentiated by a number or a combination of numbers
or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the
winning chance and in which the winning chance is to be determined through a
drawing or some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set
of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery;
except that, the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a
sporting contest.



   RELIGIOUS. Any church, congregation, society or organization founded
for the purpose of religious worship and located within the city.



   VETERANS. An organization or association located within the city
comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are
veterans or spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of
which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to
the general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit.



(Prior Code, § 23-177)



§ 110.142  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm, organization or corporation shall conduct a raffle
within the city without first having obtained a license therefor pursuant to
the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 23-178)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.143  APPLICATION.



   Applications for a license to conduct a raffle shall be made to the
City Clerk upon forms provided by him or her.



(Prior Code, § 23-179)



§ 110.144  INFORMATION REQUIRED ON APPLICATION.



   All applications for a license to conduct a raffle under the terms of
this subchapter shall contain at least the following information together
with such additional information as may be determined by the Clerk for the
purpose of complying with this subchapter:



   (A)   The area within the city in which raffle chances will be sold
or issued;



   (B)   The length of time during which raffle chances will be sold or
issued;



   (C)   The time of determination of winning chances and the location
at which winning chances will be determined, which location must be within
the city; and



   (D)   The application must contain a sworn statement attesting to
the not-for-profit character of the prospective licensed organization signed
by the presiding officer and the secretary of that organization.



(Prior Code, § 23-180)



§ 110.145  NUMBER OF RAFFLES LIMITED.



   Any license issued under this subchapter authorizes the licensee to
conduct only one raffle.



(Prior Code, § 23-181)



§ 110.146  ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS.



   The following are ineligible for any license under this subchapter:



   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;



   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or
gambling promoter;



   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character;



   (D)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in divisions
(A), (B) or (C) above has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest or in
which such a person is active or employed;



   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A),
(B) or (C) above is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or
not;



   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A),
(B) or (C) above is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle
as defined in this subchapter; and/or



   (G)   Any person, firm, corporation or organization who is not a
resident of or located within the city.



(Prior Code, § 23-182)



§ 110.147  ORGANIZATION ELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   Licenses under this subchapter shall be issued only to bona fide
religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans
organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have
been in existence continually within the city for a period of five years
immediately before making application for a license and which have had,
during that entire five-year period, a bona fide membership engaged in
carrying out their objects.



(Prior Code, § 23-183)



§ 110.148  LOCATION LIMITATIONS.



   No raffle licensed under this subchapter shall be conducted outside of
the city.



(Prior Code, § 23-184)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.149  RULES GOVERNING RAFFLES.



   All raffles licensed under the provisions of this subchapter shall
comply with the following.



   (A)   If all or a portion of the prize is cash, the maximum amount
of cash award in a single raffle shall not exceed $20,000.



   (B)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance
issued or sold shall not exceed $150.



   (C)   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued
or sold shall not exceed 180 days.



   (D)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct the
raffle.



   (E)   No person, except the bona fide member of the sponsoring
organization, may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.



   (F)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle.



   (G)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the
winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also
licensed under this subchapter and such premises must be within the city.



   (H)   Winning chances must be determined only at a location within
the city specified on the license.



   (I)   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be
within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.



   (J)   The operation and conduct of all raffles shall be under the
supervision of one raffles manager designated by his or her organization. The
manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of not less than an amount
equal to a 200% of the aggregate retail value of all prizes in favor of the
organization conditioned upon his or her honesty in the performance of his or
her duties. The bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to
the city not less than 30 prior to its cancellation.



   (K)   Each organization licensed hereunder shall keep records of its
gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or
occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross
receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with
receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount and date of payment. Gross receipts from the operation of
raffles shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization of every
kind and nature and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall
have separate records of its raffles and the person who accounts for gross
receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the person who accounts for gross
receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not
be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.



   (L)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles under the terms
of this subchapter shall report promptly after the conclusion of each raffle
to its membership and to the city its gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from raffles and the distribution of net proceeds, itemized as
required in this subchapter.



   (M)   All records required by the subchapter shall be preserved for
three years and shall be open for public inspection at reasonable times and
places.



(Prior Code, § 23-185)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.150  LICENSE FEE.



   Licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for one
raffle only and may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this
subchapter. The license fee shall be as set out in the fee schedule.



(Prior Code, § 23-186)  (Ord. 03-07, passed 2-3-2003)



§ 110.151  GAMBLING PROHIBITION.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to authorize the conduct
or operation of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other
than raffles as provided for in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 23-187)




DESIGNER SHOWCASE HOMES




§ 110.165  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to own or operate a designer showcase home/similar
events in the city without first having obtained a license therefor.



(Prior Code, § 23-196)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.166  APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for licenses shall be made to the City Clerk upon forms
supplied in accordance with the ordinances of the city regulating licenses
generally.



(Prior Code, § 23-197)



§ 110.167  REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS.



   All applications for a designer showcase home/similar events shall be
reviewed and approved by the City Manager in accordance with the standards
set forth in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 23-198)  (Ord. 2016-16, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 110.168  TIME PERIOD OF OPERATION.



   No designer showcase home/similar event shall be operated for a period
longer than 60 days.



(Prior Code, § 23-199)



§ 110.169  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   The hours of operation of designer showcase homes/similar events shall
be as approved by the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 23-200)



§ 110.170  WORKING HOURS.



   All work, remodeling and repairs done in connection with a designer
showcase home/similar event shall be pursuant to a permit which shall be
issued in accordance with the Building Code and other applicable ordinances.
Working hours shall be limited from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday.



(Prior Code, § 23-201)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.171  PARKING.



   (A)   All applicants for licenses to operate a designer showcase
home/similar event shall provide special parking arrangements as approved by
the City Manager.



   (B)   Persons viewing said home shall not park on the property for
which the license is issued or in the immediate neighborhood, unless
specifically approved.



(Prior Code, § 23-202)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.172  BUSES PROVIDED.



   Applicants for licenses for a designer showcase home/similar event
shall, unless otherwise authorized, provide buses to bring all guests to the
home from public parking areas.



(Prior Code, § 23-203)



§ 110.173  STORAGE OF VEHICLES AND CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT.



   All contractors’ and subcontractors’ vehicles and construction
equipment shall be stored on the site of the designer showcase home/similar
event in spaces provided by the applicant for license.



(Prior Code, § 23-204)



§ 110.174  PROHIBITION OF BOUTIQUES, LUNCHEONS AND THE LIKE.



   Boutiques, luncheons and activities of a similar nature in connection
with a designer showcase home are prohibited unless specifically permitted by
the City Manager subject to the conditions established in the license.



(Prior Code, § 23-205)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.175  SIGNS.



   All signs erected in connection with a designer showcase home/similar
event shall be subject to review and approval by the Building Review Board.



(Prior Code, § 23-206)



§ 110.176  FEES.



   In addition to the conditions specifically noted herein, the City
Manager may require all necessary fees to the city to be paid in advance and
any other conditions necessary to properly regulate the designer showcase
event/similar events.



(Prior Code, § 23-207)



§ 110.177  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DESIGNER SHOWCASE HOME/OTHER SIMILAR EVENTS. Those events where the
contents or rooms of a house/grounds are shown to the public for a period of
time exceeding three days in any two-week period and where the public pays an
admission fee for such event.



(Prior Code, § 23-208)



§ 110.178  APPLICATION OF OTHER CITY ORDINANCES.



   Except as herein modified all other ordinances of the city shall apply.



(Prior Code, § 23-209)




MOBILE AUTO SERVICE




§ 110.190  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOBILE AUTO SERVICE. The operation of a unit consisting of an enclosed
trailer which is capable of containing within the confines of the unit a
service garage for the limited purpose of providing basic vehicle service at
a mobile site.



(Ord. 99-18, passed 3-18-1999)



§ 110.191  PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to own or operate a mobile auto service in the
city without first having obtained a license therefor.



(Ord. 99-18, passed 3-18-1999)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.192  APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for licenses shall be made to the City Clerk upon forms
supplied in accordance with the ordinances of the city regulating licenses
generally.



(Ord. 99-18, passed 3-18-1999)



§ 110.193  APPLICATION APPROVAL.



   All applications for a mobile auto service shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Manager in accordance with the standards set forth in
this subchapter.



(Ord. 99-18, passed 3-18-1999)



§ 110.194  LOCATION.



   Mobile auto service operations shall be conducted in the OR-2 (Office
Research) and OR (Office) Zoning Districts, on private property, only.



(Ord. 99-18, passed 3-18-1999)



§ 110.195  WRITTEN PERMISSION REQUIRED.



   (A)   The mobile auto service operator shall obtain written
permission from the owner of record authorizing use of the property.



   (B)   This authorization shall be available for inspection upon a
request from the city.



(Ord. 99-18, passed 3-18-1999)



§ 110.196  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Mobile auto service operations shall be conducted between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. only.



(Ord. 99-18, passed 3-18-1999)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.197  PLACE OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   All operations shall be conducted completely within the
interior confines of the mobile service unit.



   (B)   Such operations shall be limited to basic vehicle service,
such as oil changes, lube jobs and headlight and wiper blade changes.



   (C)   Under no circumstances shall any vehicle repairs of a major
nature be conducted in the mobile service unit.



(Ord. 99-18, passed 3-18-1999)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.198  APPROPRIATE STATE AUTHORIZATION.



   The licensee shall obtain appropriate authorization from the state for
such vehicle repair, if necessary, which shall be provided to the city at the
time of initial license application.



(Ord. 99-18, passed 3-18-1999)



§ 110.199  SATELLITE.



   The mobile service unit shall be operated only as a satellite of a
previously existing auto repair or service station business located and
operating within the city limits.



(Ord. 99-18, passed 3-18-1999)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.200  FEE.



   The annual license fee for each mobile service unit shall be as set out
in the fee schedule, which shall be paid at the time of issuance of the
license.



(Ord. 99-18, passed 3-18-1999)



§ 110.201  APPLICATION OF §§ 110.001 THROUGH 110.011 TO THIS SUBCHAPTER.



   The provisions of §§ 110.001 through 110.011 of this chapter shall
apply to this subchapter in full.



(Ord. 99-18, passed 3-18-1999)



§ 110.202  VIOLATION OF ZONING CODE.



   Operation of a licensed mobile service unit in full accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter shall not be considered a violation of Chapter
159 of this code of ordinances.



(Ord. 99-18, passed 3-18-1999)




LANDSCAPE AND LAWN CARE PROFESSIONALS




§ 110.215  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE SERVICES. The improvement and/or maintenance of
the appearance of an area of land by planting and/or maintaining trees,
shrubs, grass or other plants and lawn ornaments, or by altering the contour
of the ground. In addition, LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE SERVICES shall include the
providing of services in the nature of cultivation or beautification of
gardens; the trimming, cutting or pruning of hedges, plants and/or grass; the
application of restricted yard chemicals or other yard chemicals; the raking,
sweeping or gathering for removal of landscape waste and other yard debris;
or other activities similar in nature to the foregoing.



   LANDSCAPER. Any person who is engaged in the business of providing
landscape maintenance services within the city. This definition shall not
apply to persons while and to the extent that they are acting as landscaping
contractors or to individuals who are acting while in the employ of a
licensed landscaper.



   LANDSCAPING CONTRACTOR. Any person while engaged in the business of
installing landscaping materials and constructing yard improvements such as
grade changes, walkways, patios and the like; provided that, such person is
conducting such activities pursuant to an express permit issued by the
city’s Community Development Director or the City Engineer and pursuant to
a landscaping and/or grading plan duly approved by the city.



   LICENSE YEAR. The one-year period in which a license issued pursuant to
this subchapter is valid, beginning January 1 in any calendar year and
expiring on the last day of December of the same calendar year.



   PERSON. Any individual over the age of 17 (other than individuals under
23 years of age who are enrolled as full-time students), or any partnership,
firm, corporations or other business entity authorized to do business in the
state.



   RESTRICTED YARD CHEMICALS. Any fertilizer, fungicide, herbicide,
insecticide or similar substance whose handling or application is subject to
licensing, permit or similar authorization of the State Environmental
Protection Agency or other responsible government agency.



   VEHICLE. Any motor-driven vehicle, or any vehicle customarily attached
to a motor-driven vehicle, used by a landscaper to transport a work crew,
equipment and/or debris, including trucks, trailers and vans, but excluding
sedans or similar passenger vehicles.



   YARD CHEMICALS. Any fertilizer, fungicide, herbicide, insecticide or
similar substance that is not a restricted yard chemical.



(Ord. 2006-81, passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 2015-41, passed 7-20-2015)



§ 110.216  LICENSES REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any landscaper to provide landscape
maintenance services within the city without first obtaining a license as
required pursuant to this subchapter. In addition, no landscaper may park its
vehicles on the streets of the city unless:



      (1)   Such vehicle is parked in compliance with otherwise
applicable parking regulations of the city; or



      (2)   The landscaper shall have obtained a license and
identified such vehicle in its application pursuant to this subchapter.



   (B)   Licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid
only during the license year for which it was issued. No license issued
pursuant to this subchapter shall be transferable, and any attempt to
transfer a license shall result in the automatic and immediate expiration of
the license.



(Ord. 2006-81, passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 07-43, passed 10-15-2007)  Penalty,
see § 110.999



§ 110.217  LANDSCAPER LICENSE.



   Each landscaper shall be required to obtain and maintain a license
during the license year for so long as the landscaper is providing landscape
maintenance services in the city. Landscaper licenses shall be
non-transferable, and each vehicle of a licensed landscaper shall display the
identifying information required pursuant to § 110.218(D) of this chapter in
order to be entitled to be parked on a city street in conformity with this
subchapter; provided, however, that, any such licensed vehicle must still
comply with the otherwise applicable general parking requirements of the
city. The fee for the license shall be as set out in the fee schedule,
non-refundable, per license year or fraction thereof, and shall accompany the
application. Upon issuance of a license pursuant to this section, the City
Manager or the Manager’s designee shall also provide the landscaper a
certified license.



(Ord. 2006-81, passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 07-43, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 110.218  APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for a landscaper license shall be made to the City Manager
on forms provided by the city and shall contain the following information:



   (A)   Name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is a
partnership, the application shall show for each partner his or her name and
address and interest. If the applicant is a corporation or other business
entity, the application shall show the name and address of the registered
agent, and each manager or director; and with respect to each shareholder or
person owning at least a 5% interest in the entity or any class of its
corporate shares, the person’s name and address;



   (B)   The number, kind and license plate number of vehicles owned
and controlled by the applicant’s landscaping business;



   (C)   The location of the applicant’s principal business office
and garage;



   (D)   The color scheme, insignia, trade name and telephone number
located upon and used to designate the vehicles of the applicant;



   (E)   A statement that the applicant has received copies of,
reviewed and understands the applicable ordinances of the city and will
notify the applicant’s employees thereof;



   (F)   A statement that the applicant has received copies of,
reviewed and understands the guide to ravines and bluffs;



   (G)   Delivery of proof of insurance with the coverage types and
amounts as established from time-to-time by the City Manager, which insurance
shall name the city as an additional insured;



   (H)   Delivery of a surety bond or other security in the amount of
$5,000 for the benefit of the city in the form prescribed from time to time
by the City Manager; and



   (I)   Such other information as the City Manager may require from
time to time.



(Ord. 2006-81, passed 12-4-2006)



§ 110.219  LANDSCAPER REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All landscapers shall be required to comply with the
regulations set forth or otherwise referenced in this section. Any violation
under this section shall subject the landscaper to fines. In addition, any
violations under this section, or convictions of any felony or crimes of
moral turpitude, may affect the landscaper’s eligibility to obtain or
continue to hold a license issued pursuant to this subchapter. In the event
of a refusal to renew, a suspension or a revocation of a landscaper license
by the City Manager, any landscaper may request to appeal such refusal to
renew, suspension or revocation of the license by the City Manager by filing
with the City Clerk a request for appeal within 15 calendar days after the
City Manager mails or personally delivers a decision to revoke, suspend or
refuse to renew a license. Following the filing of an appeal, the City Clerk
shall notify the appealing landscaper of the date on which such appeal will
be considered by the City Council, which date shall not be less than ten
calendar days after the Clerk mails or personally delivers such notice to the
landscaper. The landscaper appealing the revocation, suspension or refusal
shall then be permitted to appear before the City Council on the designated
date to plead the reasoning for the revocation, which appeal shall be subject
to the procedural rules established by the City Council from time to time.
The City Council may affirm, affirm with conditions, remand or overturn the
refused renewal, suspension or revocation of a landscaper license.



   (B)   All landscapers doing business in the city shall abide by the
following regulations.



      (1)   Licensing.



         (a)   Every landscaper shall be required to obtain and
maintain a landscaper license pursuant to § 110.217 of this chapter. The
City Manager may refuse to issue or renew, may suspend or revoke a landscaper
license or fine a licensee for any one or more of the following reasons,
including, but not limited to:



            1.   Engaging in the business of landscape
maintenance service without first securing a landscape and lawn care
contractor’s license from the city; and



            2.   Violation of any city ordinances by the
licensee (including this subchapter), including without limitation:



               a.   Unauthorized dumping of debris;



               b.   To cause or make loud noise through the
operation of maintenance equipment, including but not limited to, lawn
mowers, tractors and gasoline-powered leaf blower equipment in violation of
§ 135.108 of this code of ordinances;



               c.   Make inaccurate, false or misleading
statements in any application for any such license;



               d.   Make substantial misrepresentation or
false promise of character likely to influence or induce another in
connection with the business of landscape maintenance service;



               e.   Pursue a continued course of
misrepresentations or making false promises through advertising, salesperson,
agents or otherwise in connection with the business of landscaping; and/or



               f.   Failure to obtain a permit for work
requiring city review and issuance of a permit.



         (b)   Provided, however, that, unless expressly stated
in a ticket or violation notice issued by the city, a landscaper can avoid
the refusal of the renewal, suspension or revocation of a landscaper license
paying any fines applicable to the violation(s) in question.



      (2)   Insurance. Each landscaper shall obtain and maintain a
policy of comprehensive general liability insurance, including bodily injury
and property damage. The applicant shall also carry adequate workers’
compensation and vehicle insurance. Proof of insurance will be reviewed by
the City Manager from time to time. A landscaper shall deliver to the city
evidence of compliance with this requirement within five business days after
a request from the City Manager.



      (3)   Surety bond. Each landscaper shall deliver to and
maintain with the city a surety bond or other acceptable security as required
pursuant to § 110.218(H) of this chapter. The City Manager may, in the
Manager’s discretion, waive this requirement.



      (4)   Vehicle identification. Each vehicle operated by the
licensee shall at all times display at least the trade name and telephone
information required by § 110.218(D) of this chapter and shall have been
identified in the landscaper’s application pursuant to this subchapter. In
addition, a copy of the landscaper license shall be maintained within each
such vehicle.



      (5)   Accuracy of license information. Each landscape shall
fully and accurately complete any license application required pursuant to
this subchapter. In the event that there is a material change regarding any
information required in any such license application, the landscaper shall
promptly deliver corrected or updated information to the city. Any false,
inaccurate or misleading information relating to a license application shall
be a violation of this subchapter.



      (6)   Vehicle parking. No landscaper shall permit any of its
vehicles to be parked on a city street unless such vehicle shall comply with
all applicable parking and other regulations in the city code.



      (7)   Yard chemical application. No landscaper shall apply
restricted yard chemicals in the city unless the individual performing such
application is properly authorized by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency or other responsible government agency, and such application is
performed in accordance with all regulatory requirements and manufacturer’s
instructions.



      (8)   Compliance with laws. Each landscaper and the
landscaper’s employees shall comply with all applicable laws, statutes,
codes, ordinances, rules, regulations and orders of any federal, state or
local government affecting the landscaper while performing landscape
maintenance services in the city, including provisions of the city code, any
stop orders imposed by the city and any regulations that the City Manager may
promulgate in furtherance of the purposes and effective administration of
this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-81, passed 12-4-2006)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.220  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The City Manager and the Manager’s designees shall be
authorized to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, including the
issuance of citations for any violations of this subchapter.



   (B)   Citations shall be issued to the landscaper or one of the
landscaper’s employees after the violation has been discovered, and the
City Manager shall have the option to issue the citation with or without a
specific date for a court appearance. If the citation does not provide for a
specific court date, the landscaper receiving the citation may request a
court date in writing within five calendar days after the issuance of the
citation, whereupon the City Manager will establish such court date and
notify the affected landscaper. Failure of a landscaper to request a court
date shall be deemed an admission to the violation identified in the
citation. In addition to the issuance of citations, the City Manager or the
Manager’s designees may issue stop orders to any landscaper violating any
provisions or requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-81, passed 12-4-2006)



§ 110.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of the chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code of
ordinances.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of §§ 110.100 through 110.107 of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day of which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, any cost
of collection or fines or other amounts due to the city under this division
(B) may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 23-123)



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of §§ 110.080 through 110.085 of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed on each
day on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, any cost of
collection or fines or other amounts due to the city under this division (C)
may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 23-107)



   (D)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 110.120 through
110.128 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $750,
for each and every offense and each day that such offense continues shall be
considered a separate and distinct offense. In addition, any cost of
collection or fines or other amounts due to the city under this division (D)
may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 23-159)



   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
§§ 110.140 through 110.151 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $5,
nor more than $750, and each day upon which a violation occurs or continues
shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition, any cost of collection or
fines or other amounts due to the city under this division (E) may be
assessed in accordance with § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 23-188)



   (F)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of
§§ 110.165 through 110.178 of this chapter shall be fined not more than
$750 and a separate offense shall be deemed to have occurred each day upon
which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, any cost of collection or
fines or other amounts due to the city under this division (F) may be
assessed in accordance with § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 23-210)



   (G)   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 110.190 through
110.202 of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not less than $100, nor
more than $750, for each offense, a term of imprisonment not to exceed six
months, or both.



   (H)   Any violation by a landscaper under §§ 110.215 through
110.220 of this chapter or other provisions of the city code shall subject
the landscaper to a fine. Except as herein set forth, any violations under
§§ 110.215 through 110.220 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $150, and not more than $750. Any violation of any other
provision of the city code or ordinance of the city shall be subject to the
fine applicable to such violation.



(Ord. 814, passed 4-17-1971; Ord. 1044, passed 4-6-1976; Ord. 1123, passed 
9-22-1979; Ord. 1282, passed 1-23-1982; Ord. 1395, passed 11-19-1983; Ord.
99-18, passed 3-18-1999; Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003; Ord. 2006-81, passed
12-4-2006)



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section




General Provisions




   111.001   Definitions



   111.002   Sale of alcoholic liquor



   111.003   Manufacture prohibited



   111.004   Drinking in public place



   111.005   Give away prohibited



   111.006   Applicability of other laws




Local Liquor Control Commissioner




   111.020   Liquor Control Commissioner




Licenses




   111.035   Required



   111.036   Local liquor licenses and fees



   111.037   Number of licenses



   111.038   List



   111.039   Transfer of licenses



   111.040   Change of location



   111.041   Location restrictions



   111.042   Revocation; suspension



   111.043   Application for local liquor license



   111.044   Ineligibility for local liquor license



   111.045   Conditions for issuance, maintenance and renewal of local
liquor license




Establishments




   111.060   Consumption on premises



   111.061   Sanitary conditions




Sales




   111.075   Sales of alcoholic liquor



   111.076   Prohibitions regarding minors



   111.077   Hours of operation



   111.078   Alcoholic liquor in public places and motor vehicles




Fees




   111.090   Fees




Hearings




   111.105   Violations, complaints, hearings and disciplinary actions
before Commissioner



 



   111.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 111.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood
alcohol.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of
this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured
alcohol produced in accordance with acts of Congress and regulations
promulgated thereunder, or to any liquid or solid containing 0.5%, or less,
of alcohol by volume.



   BEACH AREA.  That portion of the beach and shore area of Lake Michigan
in Forest Park that has been approved by the Commissioner for the sale of
wine and beer pursuant to the terms of a Class K license.



   BEER. A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion
or concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes
among other things beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.



   BRING-YOUR-OWN-BEVERAGE. Alcoholic beverages that patrons or guests of
a licensed premises bring to such licensed premises for their own consumption
on the licensed premises.



   CATERING ESTABLISHMENT. A business conducted by a person, firm or
corporation for the purpose of providing food and service for a banquet or a
dinner which may occur in a location other than premises leased, owned and/or
operated by the CATERING ESTABLISHMENT, the recipients of such food and/or
service being persons specially invited to such banquet or dinner rather than
members of the general public.



   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of the state, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than
the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by
its members through the payment of regular dues, and owning, hiring or
leasing a building or space in a building, of such extent and character as
may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and
accommodation of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and
adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a
sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and
serving food and meals for its members and their guests; provided that, such
CLUB files with the Mayor at the time of its application for a license under
this chapter two copies of a list of names and residences of its members, and
similarly files within ten days of election of any additional member his or
her name and address; and, provided further that, its affairs and management
are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body
chosen by the members at their annual meeting and that no member or any
officer, agent or employee of the CLUB is paid, or directly or indirectly
receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the
distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the CLUB or the members of the
CLUB or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as
may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board
of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the CLUB.



   COMMISSIONER. The City Liquor Control Commissioner designated in §
111.020 of this chapter as well as any committee or other agency appointed by
the Commissioner.



   CONVEYANCE. Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft or container operated for
the transportation of person or property.



   GATHERING. Any group of three or more persons who have assembled or
gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.



   GROCERY STORE.  A retail store that is (a) over 15,000 square feet in
size, (b) has at least 60 off-street parking spaces devoted to such use, and
(c) devotes at least 60% of its gross floor area to the sale of household
foodstuffs for offsite consumption, including the sale of fresh produce,
meats, poultry, fish, deli products, dairy products, canned foods, dry foods,
beverages, baked foods and/or prepared foods. Other household supplies or
other products shall be secondary to the primary purpose of food sales. The
definition of GROCERY STORE shall not include any establishment that sells
gasoline or other fuel for dispensing into motor vehicles.



   HOST. To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control
or permit a gathering.



   HOTEL. Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually
served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay
to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in
which 25 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such
guests and having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to
such guest, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in
the same buildings in connection therewith and such building or buildings
structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and
dining room equipment and capacity.



   ILLICIT DRUGS. Any drug, substance or compound prohibited by law,
including drugs prescribed by a physician which are in the possession of or
used by someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.



   LICENSED PREMISES or PREMISES.



      (1)   The actual physical location described in a local liquor
license at which liquor will be served under the retail liquor license once
issued, and may include either indoor or outdoor dining areas; except that,
no outdoor area shall be deemed part of the premises unless expressly
identified in the local liquor license.



      (2)   For purposes of this chapter, the terms “public dining
room” and “public and private dining rooms” shall be included in this
definition of PREMISES.



   LICENSEE. A person holding a local liquor license.



   LICENSEE, AGENT OF. Any owner, partner, director, officer, manager,
employee or authorized agent of a licensee but only while engaged in the
business of such licensee or present on the licensed premises of such
licensee.



   LIQUOR CONTROL ACT. The State Liquor Control Act of 1934, 235 ILCS
5/1-1 et seq., as amended from time to time.



   LIQUOR LAWS. This chapter and all other city ordinances, resolutions,
regulations and rules relating to alcoholic liquor; the Liquor Control Act
and all regulations issued thereunder; all federal, state and local laws
imposing or pertaining to fees and taxes relating to alcoholic liquor; and
all other federal and state legislation, regulations and rules applicable to
the sale or use of alcoholic liquor within the city.



   LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSE. A license issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.



   MINOR. A person under the age of 21 years.



   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogs
head or other receptacle or container, whatsoever used, corked or capped,
sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to
convey any alcoholic liquor.



   PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a juvenile as a natural,
adoptive parent or stepparent; as a legal guardian; or as a person to whom
legal custody has been given by order of the court.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation or
entity.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities, parks, businesses or parking lots.



   REASONABLE STEPS. Actions that, if taken, would be expected to avoid or
prevent a prohibited gathering (as provided in § 111.076(F) of this
chapter), which may include, but are not limited to, controlling access to
alcoholic liquor at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic
liquor present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the
gathering by inspecting drivers licenses or other government issued
identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic liquor
while at the gathering; supervising the activities of minors at the
gathering; and calling for police assistance in the event people under 21 are
in possession of alcoholic liquor at the gathering.



   RELIGIOUS CEREMONY. Any bona fide rite, ceremony, service or event
sponsored or sanctioned in connection with the exercise of a person’s
religious belief that involves the possession, consumption and dispensation
of alcohol or alcoholic liquor.



   RESIDENCE or SITE. Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, other dwelling unit, hall, meeting room,
park or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a
temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically
for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented or
used with or without permission or compensation.



   RESPONSE COSTS. The costs associated with responses by law enforcement,
fire and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but
not limited to:



      (1)   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel for the amount of
time spent responding to, remaining at or otherwise dealing with a gathering,
and the administrative costs attributable to such response(s);



      (2)   The cost of any medical treatment for any law
enforcement, code enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel
injured while responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a
gathering; and



      (3)   The cost of repairing any city equipment or property
damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment in responding to,
remaining at or leaving the scene of a gathering.



   RESTAURANT. A public place primarily kept, used, maintained, advertised
and held out to the public for the serving of meals to patrons seated at
tables or booths, and where complete meals are actually and regularly served,
such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and
kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.



   RETAIL SALE, SELL AT RETAIL and SALE AT RETAIL. Sales for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.



   SALE. Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, with or without consideration, and includes all sales made by any
person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.



   SPIRITS. Any beverage, which contains alcohol obtained by distillation,
mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum,
whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified,
blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.



   STATE LIQUOR LICENSE. A license issued by the State Liquor Control
Commission pursuant to the provisions of the Liquor Control Act.



   TO SELL. Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to
sell.



   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the
natural contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such
beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol liquor, as defined above.



(Prior Code, § 4-1)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 2017-14, passed
2-21-2017; Ord. 2017-39, passed 6-19-2017)



§ 111.002  SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.



   It shall be unlawful to peddle or otherwise sell alcoholic liquor at
locations not specified in a duly authorized local liquor license in the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-2)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.003  MANUFACTURE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
manufacturing alcoholic liquor in the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-3)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.004  DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic
beverages of any type either:



      (1)   In any place of public accommodation or public place
(other than licensed premises); or



      (2)   Upon any public street, alley or thoroughfare.



   (B)   Section 111.004(A) shall not apply to beer and wine sold in an
approved container provided by an authorized licensee pursuant to a valid
Class K liquor license and consumed in the beach area, as defined by §
111.001.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any person to
consume any alcoholic beverages



of any type at any licensed premises unless such alcoholic beverages are
either:



      (1)   Sold by such licensee pursuant to a license allowing
sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on such licensed premises; or



      (2)   Bring-your-own-beverages and the licensed premises has a
Class I-1 license.



(Prior Code, § 4-4)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 2017-39, passed
6-19-2017)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.005  GIVE AWAY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to give away or otherwise
dispense free of charge, by the drink or in any other manner, within the
city, an alcoholic beverage; except that, the giving away by a Class A-3
licensee, without charge, of beer and wine, or a Class B-1, C-2 or D-1
licensee, without charge, of alcoholic liquor in small and limited amounts
for tasting purposes only, immediately prior and incidental to, the sale of
such alcoholic liquor in the original package for consumption off the
premises shall not be considered a violation of this section.



   (B)   Such give away, however, shall be subject to the following
conditions and limitations:



      (1)   The tastings shall be attended by and supervised by a
full-time employee and only in a designated area on the licensed premises as
approved by the Commissioner and designated in the license;



      (2)   The actual amount of wine tasted may not exceed an
ounce; and



      (3)   The sample shall be served in a container which shall be
disposed of following sample.



   (C)   Furthermore, it is hereby declared unlawful to advertise the
availability of “tasting” through any public media or other means of
communication other than:



      (1)   On the premises where the “tasting” will occur; or



      (2)   By a direct mailing that provides the date and location
of the “tasting.”



   (D)   (1)   Notification of the date and location of a particular
“tasting” shall not be sent to more than 200 individual residences.



      (2)   Further, the provisions of this section prohibiting give
away or other dispensing of alcoholic beverages shall not apply to Class F-2,
Class F-3 or Class F-4 licenses.



(Prior Code, § 4-5)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 2013-49, passed
8-5-2013)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.006  APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS.



   (A)   State law adopted. All of the provisions, including all words
and phrases, of the Liquor Control Act and the rules and regulations issued
by the State Liquor Control Commission pertaining to local control of
alcoholic liquor, as the same may be amended from time to time, are hereby
incorporated into and declared to be a part of this chapter as if expressly
set forth herein.



   (B)   Compliance with all regulations required. Nothing in this
chapter shall excuse or release any person from compliance with the
requirements of any other applicable federal, state or local code, ordinance,
regulation or rule.



(Prior Code, § 4-6)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)




LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER




§ 111.020  LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.



   (A)   Mayor designated Commissioner. The Mayor is hereby designated
as the City Liquor Control Commissioner.



   (B)   Powers, functions and duties of Commissioner. The Commissioner
shall have the following powers, functions and duties:



      (1)   To administer within the city all liquor laws;



      (2)   To appoint a person or persons to assist him or her in
the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties herein provided;



      (3)   To conduct hearings as provided in this chapter for the
purpose of fulfilling any of the enumerated powers, functions and duties of
the Commissioner; to hear testimony and take proof of information in the
performance of his or her duties; and for such purposes to issue subpoenas
effective in any part of the state;



      (4)   To examine or cause to be examined, under oath, any
licensee and any applicant for a local liquor license or for a renewal
thereof and to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of any
such licensee or applicant;



      (5)   To receive fees for local liquor licenses and deliver
the same forthwith to the City Director of Finance;



      (6)   (a)   To require two sets of fingerprints of any
applicant for a local liquor license or for a renewal thereof, one for the
city files and one to deliver to the Illinois Department of State Police and,
for purposes of obtaining such fingerprints and resulting background check,
to require the applicant to pay such fee as may be required by the Illinois
Department of State Police. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner
shall submit fingerprints annually. If the applicant is a corporation, each
officer thereof and every person owning or controlling more than 5% of the
voting shares or the ownership interest of such corporation shall submit
fingerprints annually. If the applicant is a limited liability company, each
member and manager shall submit fingerprints annually. If the business for
which a local liquor license is sought will be managed by a manager or agent,
every such manager or agent shall submit fingerprints annually.



         (b)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have
the right, at the Commissioner’s sole discretion, to waive this requirement
for:



            1.   Any individual that is not involved in the
daily management or operation of the premises; and



            2.   For any individual associated with a
not-for-profit organization seeking a Class F-1, F-5 or F-6 license under
this chapter.



      (7)   To grant or renew local liquor licenses in accordance
with the provisions of the liquor laws;



      (8)   To deny any application for the issuance or renewal of a
local liquor license to any applicant or premises that the Commissioner has
determined to be ineligible therefor in accordance with the provisions of the
liquor laws;



      (9)   To keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all
local liquor licenses and to furnish the City Clerk with a copy thereof; and,
on the issuance or renewal of any local liquor license, or the revocation or
suspension of any existing local liquor license, to give notice of such
action to the City Clerk within three days after such action;



      (10)   To lawfully enter, or to authorize any law enforcement
officer to lawfully enter, at any time, any licensed premises to determine
whether any of the provisions of the liquor laws have been or are being
violated and at the time of such entry to examine such licensed premises in
connection with such determination;



      (11)   To receive complaints from citizens that any of the
provisions of the liquor laws have been or are being violated and to act on
such complaints in the manner provided in this chapter and the other liquor
laws;



      (12)   To examine any licensee on whom notice of revocation or
suspension has been served;



      (13)   To suspend for cause for not more than 30 days any
local liquor license, to revoke for cause any local liquor license, and to
levy fines against any licensee, all in accordance with the liquor laws;



      (14)   To report whenever requested by the City Council all of
his or her acts taken to enforce the liquor laws and all acts taken in regard
to the collection of local liquor license fees;



      (15)   To notify the Secretary of State when a club
incorporated under the State General Not-for-Profit Corporation Act or a
foreign corporation functioning as a club in the state under a certificate of
authority issued under that act has violated the Liquor Control Act by
selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquor without a
retailer’s license;



      (16)   To extend the term of any local liquor license or group
of local liquor licenses, to a date specific, when such an extension is
necessary for staff convenience, to accommodate change in law or policy, or
to conduct further inquiry into any renewal application;



      (17)   For any applicant for an F-1, F-5 or F-6 license, to
waive the requirements under § 111.043(B)(1) to provide Social Security
numbers or any individual to be identified as part of the license application
process; and



      (18)   For any applicant for an F-1, F-5 or F-6 license, to
waive the requirements under § 111.043(H)(1) of the license application
process.



   (C)   Compensation. The Commissioner shall serve without
compensation.



(Prior Code, § 4-7)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 2013-65, passed
10-7-2013; Ord. 2016-09, passed 2-16-2016)




LICENSES




§ 111.035  REQUIRED.



   (A)   Local and state liquor licenses required. It shall be unlawful
for any person not having a current, valid local liquor license and a
current, valid state liquor license to sell or offer for sale in the city any
alcoholic liquor.



   (B)   Sale in violation of license prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any licensee to sell, offer for sale, or dispense in the city any
alcoholic liquor except in the manner authorized by, and in compliance with,
the terms and restrictions of the liquor laws and such licensee’s local
liquor license.



   (C)   Display of license. Every licensee shall cause his or her
current local liquor license to be framed and hung in plain view in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises.



   (D)   Exception to license requirement. Notwithstanding any
provisions in this chapter to the contrary, the occupant of any dwelling unit
does not require a license under this chapter to sell, otherwise transfer, or
provide liquor to others without consideration.



(Prior Code, § 4-8)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.036  LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSES AND FEES.



   (A)   General. Every person engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor in the city shall pay an annual license fee. Such license fees shall
be established by the City Council by separate ordinance, which may be
amended from time to time, and are hereby incorporated into this section as
if fully set forth herein. Such licenses shall be divided into classes, which
classes shall be as follows:



      (1)   Class A-1 licenses, which shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor in original package not for consumption on the
premises where sold;



      (2)   Class A-2 licenses, which shall authorize the retail
sale of beer and wine in original package not for consumption on the premises
where sold;



      (3)   Class A-3 licenses, which shall authorize the holder of
a Class A-1 license to give away wine or beer for tasting purposes only on
the licensed premises subject to all of the terms and conditions set out in
§ 111.005 of this chapter;



      (4)   Class B-1 licenses, which shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption either on or off the premises.
Tastings of alcoholic liquor may also take place on premises pursuant to this
Class B-1 license;



      (5)   Class C-1 licenses, which shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of a restaurant only
and served indoors, with or without a meal;



      (6)   Class C-2 licenses, which shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of a restaurant only
and served indoors, with or without a meal, or for consumption off-premises
when sold sealed in its original package;



      (7)   Class C-3 licenses, which shall permit the holder of any
C-1, C-2, or C-4 licensee to provide alcoholic liquor service outdoors, but
only upon such terms and conditions as the Local Liquor Commissioner may
establish for the licensed premises and only to the extent of such liquor
service authorized by the underlying liquor license;



      (7A)   Class C-4 license, Class C-1 licenses, which shall
authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only for consumption on the
premises of a restaurant only and served indoors, with or without a meal, but
only during such hours as prescribed in the liquor license issued by the
Local Liquor Commissioner;



      (8)   Class D-1 licenses, which shall authorize:



         (a)   The retail sale of alcoholic liquor by a club, to
its members and their guests for consumption on the club premises; and



         (b)   For not more than four events in any calendar
year, the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in original package to its members
and their guests for consumption off the premises where sold.



      (9)   Class E-1 licenses, which shall authorize the retail
sale by restaurants, hotels or residential care facilities having seating
accommodations at tables or booths for 100 or more persons, of alcoholic
liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises by customers of the
restaurant or hotel, such sales shall be exclusively with and incidental to
the ordering and serving of a complete meal to such customer, seated at a
table or booth, in the public dining room of the restaurant or hotel, but
only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight; and which shall also
authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption in the public
and private rooms of the restaurant or hotel for privately sponsored parties,
lunches, dinners, receptions and similar gatherings where attendance is
limited to invited guests, but only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00
midnight;



      (10)   Class F-1 licenses, which shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor by the drink to its members by a religious,
charitable, fraternal or other not-for-profit organization, other than clubs
as defined herein, which holds periodic meetings of its members. All
applications for a Class F-1 license shall state the names and addresses of
all officers of the organization, and the address of the premises upon which
the sale of alcoholic liquor will be made;



      (11)   (a)   Class F-2 licenses, which shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor in any of the following circumstances:



            1.   By the drink by religious, charitable,
fraternal or other not-for-profit organizations, for periods not in excess of
48 hours;



            2.   On city-owned property or on school grounds,
by members and guests of religious, charitable, fraternal or other
not-for-profit organizations and groups, for a period not in excess of 48
hours;



            3.   By the drink by a person whose premises are
located in either the B-1, B-2, B-3 or B-4 zoning districts in the city, for
periods not in excess of 48 hours, and on no more than two occasions per
licensee in any calendar year;



            4.   At events sponsored by religious, charitable,
fraternal or other not-for-profit organizations and groups, for a period not
in excess of 48 hours at which beer and wine may be consumed (but not given
away or sold at retail) on public property not owned by the city; or



            5.   On city-owned property or on school grounds,
by holders of any Class A-1, A-2, B-1, C-1, C-2 or E-1 liquor license for
outdoor events open to the public for a period not in excess of 72 hours.



         (b)   All applications for a Class F-2 license shall
state the names and addresses of the individual or, if the person is a
business entity or organization, all officers of such entity, the address of
the premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor will be made, the
estimated attendance upon the premises during the period of the license and
whether such sales will be made to the public or only to bona fide members of
the organization for which the license is requested. Satisfactory evidence
from the owner of the premises shall be furnished showing the authorization
to the applicant for the use of said premises, including the sale of
alcoholic liquor for the period for which the license is requested.



         (c)   For all events taking place on city-owned
property, the applicant must also submit a proposal for the special event
identifying the type of event, proposed hours, proposed security plan,
evidence that the licensed premises is covered by insurance as provided by §
111.045(B) of this chapter so as to hold harmless the city, its elected or
appointed officials, officers, employees, agents, representatives and
attorneys from all financial loss, damage or harm, and any other information
regarding the event or applicant requested by city staff. The event must be
approved by the city in writing pursuant to its applicable policies for such
events prior to the issuance of any Class F-2 license.



      (12)   (a)   Class F-3 licenses, which shall authorize the
retail sale of beer and wine in any of the circumstances set forth in
divisions (A)(11)(a)1. through (A)(11)(a)5. above.



         (b)   All applications for a Class F-3 license shall
state the names and addresses of the individual or, if the person is a
business entity or organization, all officers of such entity, the address of
the premises upon which the sale of beer and wine will be made, the estimated
attendance upon the premises during the period of the license and whether
such sales will be made to the public or only to bona fide members of the
organization for which the license is requested. Satisfactory evidence from
the owner of the premises shall be furnished showing the authorization to the
applicant for the use of said premises, including the sale of alcoholic
liquor for the period for which the license is requested.



         (c)   For all events taking place on city-owned
property, the applicant must also submit a proposal for the special event
identifying the type of event, proposed hours, proposed security plan,
evidence that the licensed premises is covered by insurance as provided by §
111.045(B) of this chapter so as to hold harmless the city, its elected or
appointed officials, officers, employees, agents, representatives and
attorneys from all financial loss, damage or harm, and any other information
regarding the event or applicant requested by city staff. The event must be
approved by the city in writing pursuant to its applicable policies for such
events prior to the issuance of any Class F-3 license.



      (13)   Class F-4 license, which shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor on private property, by for-profit organizations and
individuals in connection with sporting events for which the public is able
to purchase tickets to attend. A separate Class F-4 license shall be required
for each vendor of alcoholic liquor associated with the event. All
applications for a Class F-4 license shall state the names and addresses of
the individual applicant or all officers of the organization, the address of
the premises upon which the sale or give-away of alcoholic liquor will be
made, the estimated attendance upon the premises. The applicant must also
submit a proposal for the special event identifying the type of event,
proposed hours, proposed security plan and any other information regarding
the event or applicant requested by city staff.



      (14)   Class F-5 licenses, which shall authorize the retail
sale, give away or other dispensing free of charge, of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises of any city-owned property that is operated and
occupied by a not-for-profit organization when such retail sale, give away or
other dispensing free of charge is incidental and complementary to a special
event sponsored by such not-for-profit organization from time to time;
provided, however, that, no more than 25 such special events shall be
permitted during any license year. In addition to the requirements set forth
in this division (A)(14), the applicant shall submit to all other
requirements of this chapter, as amended, as well as the State Liquor Control
Act of 1934, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq. Any such retail sale, give away or other
dispensing free of charge that is incidental and complementary to a special
event shall also be subject to the following conditions and limitations.



         (a)   The applicant shall provide written notice to the
Commissioner, or the Commissioner’s designee, no less than five business
days prior to any special event at which alcoholic liquor will be served.
Such notice shall include the date, time, location within the licensed
premises, and number of invitees or anticipated attendees for such special
event;



         (b)   The applicant shall supervise, or cause to be
supervised, the retail sale, give away or other dispensing free of charge of
alcoholic liquor, to ensure that such retail sale, give away or other
dispensing free of charge of alcoholic liquor is confined to area within the
licensed premises identified in the notice to the Commissioner and is
properly monitored to ensure that no underage consumption of alcoholic
beverages is permitted. The Liquor Control Commissioner or the
Commissioner’s designee may require the applicant to develop appropriate
protocols to ensure compliance with this division (A)(14)(b);



         (c)   The applicant shall not advertise, or otherwise
publish the availability of alcoholic liquor through any media or other means
of communication, with the sole exception that a mailed invitation for a
special event may advertise the availability of alcoholic liquor at such
special event;



         (d)   The applicant shall provide evidence to the Local
Liquor Control Commission, at the time of its application for a F-5 liquor
license, that the licensed premises is covered by dram shop liability
insurance in maximum limits so as to hold harmless the city, its elected or
appointed officials, officers, employees, agents, representatives and
attorneys from all financial loss, damage or harm; and



         (e)   In connection with any special event on the
licensed premises, the Commissioner may impose such conditions and
requirements that may be reasonable or appropriate to ensure that the public
health, safety, welfare and convenience are protected and preserved.



      (15)   Class F-6 licenses, which shall authorize the retail
sale, give away or other dispensing free of charge, of beer or wine for
consumption on the premises of any city-owned property that is operated,
used, or occupied by a not-for-profit organization when such retail sale,
give away or other dispensing free of charge is incidental and complementary
to a special event sponsored by such not-for-profit organization from time to
time; provided, however, that, no more than 12 such special events shall be
permitted during any license year. In addition to the requirements set forth
in this division (A)(15), the applicant shall submit to all other
requirements of this chapter, as amended, as well as the State Liquor Control
Act of 1934, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq. Any such retail sale, give away or other
dispensing free of charge that is incidental and complementary to a special
event shall also be subject to the following conditions and limitations.



         (a)   The applicant shall provide written notice to the
Commissioner, or the Commissioner’s designee, no less than five business
days prior to any special event at which alcoholic liquor will be served.
Such notice shall include the date, time, location within the licensed
premises, and number of invitees or anticipated attendees for such special
event.



         (b)   The applicant shall supervise, or cause to be
supervised, the retail sale, give away or other dispensing free of charge of
alcoholic liquor, to ensure that such retail sale, give away or other
dispensing free of charge of alcoholic liquor is confined to the area(s)
within the licensed premises identified in the notice to the Commissioner and
is properly monitored to ensure that no underage consumption of alcoholic
beverages is permitted. The Liquor Control Commissioner or the
Commissioner’s designee may require the applicant to develop appropriate
protocols to ensure compliance with this division (A)(15)(b).



         (c)   Unless a specific event is otherwise authorized by
resolution of the City Council, the applicant shall not advertise, or
otherwise publish the availability of alcoholic liquor through any media or
other means of communication; provided, however, that, a mailed invitation
for a special event may advertise the availability of beer or wine at such
special event.



         (d)   The applicant shall provide evidence to the Local
Liquor Control Commission, at the time of its application for a F-6 liquor
license, that the licensed premises is covered by dram shop liability
insurance in maximum limits so as to hold harmless the city, its elected or
appointed officials, officers, employees, agents, representatives and
attorneys from all financial loss, damage or harm.



         (e)   In connection with any special event on the
licensed premises, the Commissioner may impose such conditions and
requirements that may be reasonable or appropriate to ensure that the public
health, safety, welfare and convenience are protected and preserved.



      (16)   Class G-1 license, which shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor by the drink by institutions of higher learning.
Such sales shall be limited to periods of time when groups are assembled on
the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor;



      (17)   Class G-2 license, which shall authorize the retail
sale of beer and wine in single servings by institutions of higher learning
at designated locations upon the grounds of such institutions and accessible
only to the faculty, staff, alumni and students, and pre-registered visitors
of such institution of higher learning, and their families and guests, all of
whom must be at least 21 years of age for consumption on the licensed
premises; limiting the consumption of beer and wine to indoors on the
premises provided that:



         (a)   Retail sales of alcoholic liquor at a Class G-2
licensed establishment shall only be authorized to operate between the hours
of 5:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. daily, 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and
from 5:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays; and



         (b)   The license application shall include a detailed
plan of the monitoring and security measures, for ensuring that the licensed
premises shall be limited to the persons to whom access is limited.



      (18)   Class H license, available only to holders of a valid
existing liquor license of any of the foregoing classes. Class H license,
which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors by catering
establishments solely between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m., Sunday
through Saturday, in connection with, and as an incidental part of, the
catering of food for private events at a premises not otherwise licensed for
the retail sales of alcoholic beverages. A PRIVATE EVENT shall be defined as
an event not available to the general public except by appointment or special
invitation. Such Class H licenses shall be of two classifications:



         (a)   Class H-1 licenses, which shall authorize the
retail sale of beer and wine at a catered event; and



         (b)   Class H-2 licenses, which shall authorize the
retail sale of any alcoholic liquor at a catered event.



      (19)   Class I-1 licenses, which shall authorize any B-1, C-1,
C-2, C-3, D-1, E-1 or F-1 licensee to permit bring-your-own-beverages to be
consumed on the licensed premises of the type permitted by the licensee’s
license and to impose a corkage fee relating to each container of
bring-your-own-beverage of not to exceed $10 per bring-your-own-beverage
container.



      (20)   Class I-2 licenses, which shall authorize the service
and consumption of bring-your-own-beverages on the licensed premises and
shall impose a corkage fee relating to each container of
bring-your-own-beverage not to exceed $10 per bring-your-own-beverage
container. I-2 licenses shall only authorize the service and consumption of
beer and wine. Additionally, the service and consumption of
bring-your-own-beverages for purposes of a Class I-2 license shall be deemed
the sale of alcoholic liquor for purposes of § 111.043, and I-2 licenses
shall only be available to those licensees who are otherwise compliant with
the law.



      (21)   Class I-3 licenses, which shall authorize the service
and consumption of bring-your-own-beverages on city-owned property that has
been rented or reserved by the licensee for fundraising events, festivals,
outings, or other similar special events with fewer than 200 people in
attendance. In no event Shall an I-3 license be valid for longer than 48
hours. Class I-3 licenses do not permit patrons of a licensed premises to
depart the licensed premises with a bring-your-own-beverage unless that
beverage is in its original container and with the seal unbroken. I-3
licenses shall only authorize the service and consumption of beer and wine.
Additionally, the service and consumption of bring-your-own-beverages for
purposes of a Class I-3 license shall be deemed the sale of alcoholic liquor
for purposes of § 111.043, but the Commissioner is authorized to waive
portions of the required background information and statements found in §
111.043 for I-3 license applicants. I-3 licenses shall only be available to
those licensees who are otherwise compliant with the law.



      (22)   Class J license, which shall be an adjunct to the
operation of a grocery store that already holds a valid existing liquor
license and is operated on the terms and conditions herein specified. A
licensee holding a Class J license may sell and serve individual servings of
beer and wine for consumption on the premises and not in the original
container. Such a license may be issued to and/or retained for use only at an
establishment that the Commissioner determines (in the Commissioner’s
reasonable discretion) qualifies fully as a grocery store as defined in this
chapter.



      (23)   Class K licenses, which shall authorize the service and
consumption of wine and beer from 4:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. during the period
from July 1st through October 1st of each calendar year in the beach area,
which shall be approved by the Commissioner. Such wine and beer shall only be
served in and consumed from a container approved by the Commissioner. The
licensee shall post sufficient signage to identify the borders of the beach
area, which signage shall be subject to approval of the Liquor Commissioner.
Class K licenses shall expire seven days after the date of issuance, but
shall automatically renew for successive seven day periods until the earliest
of the following events: (a) the licensee notifies the Commissioner that it
does not wish to renew its license, (b) the Commissioner, in the
Commissioner’s absolute discretion. elects not to renew the license (in
which case the city shall notify the licensee at least 48 hours before the
end of the then-current license period), and (c) the license expires by
operation of law on October 1. Additionally, any entity that accepts a Class
K license accepts that such license is provisional in nature and may be
suspended or revoked at any time by the Commissioner for any reason or no
reason. By accepting a Class K license, licensees disclaim any property
interest in such Class K license, waive all rights to the continued
possession and use of the Class K license, and waive any due process rights
related to the suspension or revocation of their Class K license. The
Commissioner is authorized to waive portions of the required background
information and statements found in § 111.043 for Class K license
applicants. Class K licenses shall only be available to those licensees who
are otherwise compliant with the law.



   (B)   Term; prorating fee. Each such license shall terminate April
30 next following its issuance. The fee to be paid shall be reduced in
proportion to the full calendar months which have expired in the year prior
to the issuance of the license.



   (C)   Conditions on licenses. All licenses classifications
identified in this section may be subject to additional conditions required
by the Commissioner or City Council. The conditions shall be listed on the
license and may relate to, security procedures, placement or location of
alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, food service requirements, hours
of sale or service, or other matters that affect the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the city.



   (D)   Fee waivers. The Commissioner shall have the authority to
waive any fee prescribed herein for any license on city property or any
license for an event sponsored by the city or other governmental agency.



(Prior Code, § 4-9)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 2016-20, passed
4-18-2016; Ord. 2017-14, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 2017-39, passed 6-19-2017)



§ 111.037  NUMBER OF LICENSES.



   (A)   The number of liquor licenses issued by the city shall be
limited as follows:



 

Class
 

Maximum Number of Licenses Authorized





A-1
 

7



A-2
 

4



A-3
 

No more than the total number of Class A-1 licenses issued by the city



B-1
 

1



C-1
 

4



C-2
 

9



C-3
 

9



C-4
 

1



D-1
 

5



E-1
 

2



F-1
 

1



F-2
 

As many as determined reasonable by the Commissioner



F-3
 

As many as determined reasonable by the Commissioner



F-4
 

As many as determined reasonable by the Commissioner



F-5
 

1



F-6
 

3



G-1
 

1



G-2
 

2



H-1
 

0



H-2
 

1



I-1
 

No more than the total number of Class B-1, C-1, C-2, C-3, D-1, E-1 and F-1
licenses issued by the city



I-2
 

1



I-3
 

As many as determined reasonable by the Commissioner



J
 

1



K
 

1





 



   (B)   Without further action of the City Council, the maximum number
of licenses in any class shall be automatically reduced by one upon the
expiration, revocation or non-renewal of an existing license in any such
license class.



(Prior Code, § 4-10)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 2013-49, passed
8-5-2013; Ord. 2013-55, passed 9-3-2013; Ord. 54, passed 12-1-2014; Ord.
2015-40, passed 7-20-2015; Ord. 2016-20, passed 4-18-2016; Ord. 2016-38,
passed 7-5-2016; Ord. 2017-14, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 2017-39, passed
6-19-2017)



§ 111.038  LIST.



   The Commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of
all such licenses issued by him or her and shall furnish the City Clerk,
Treasurer and Chief of Police each with a copy thereof. Upon the issuance of
any new licenses or the revocation of any old license, the Commissioner shall
give written notice of such action to each of these officers within 48 hours
of such action.



(Prior Code, § 4-11)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)



§ 111.039  TRANSFER OF LICENSES.



   (A)   (1)   A license shall be purely a personal privilege good
for not to exceed one year after issuance, unless sooner revoked as provided
in this chapter, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject
to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be available or
transferable, voluntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated.



      (2)   Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee;
provided that, executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased
licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such
estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the
sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee
after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the
expiration of such license, but not longer than six months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.



      (3)   A refund shall be made of that portion of the license
fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from
operating under such license, in accordance with the provisions of this
division (A).



   (B)   Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration
thereof; provided, he or she is then qualified to receive a license and the
premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such
purposes; and provided, further, that, the renewal privilege herein provided
for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent
the City Council from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within
his or her jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 4-12)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)



§ 111.040  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   A retail liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor on
the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be
changed only upon the written permit to make such change issued by the
Commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed
new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under
the law of the state and for the ordinances of the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-13)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)



§ 111.041  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church building used for worship or
educational purposes, school (other than an institution of higher learning),
hospital, senior citizen housing, daycare center, nursing or personal care
facility, or any military or naval station. Notwithstanding the foregoing
sentence, this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant
service, regularly organized clubs or other places where sale of alcoholic
liquor is not the principal business carried on, if such place of business so
exempted shall have been established for such purposes prior to the time such
other use was established within 100 feet of the licensed premises; nor to
the renewal of a license for the sale of alcoholic liquor on premises within
100 feet of any church where such church has been established within such 100
feet since the issuance of the original license. Nothing contained in this
division (A) shall restrict the issuance of a license for the sale of beer
and wine for consumption on the premises of such college or university, at a
location upon the main premises of such college or university approved by the
City Liquor Commission, to those persons among the students, faculty and
staff of such college or university and their families or guests to whom such
sales are authorized by law.



   (B)   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at
retail of any alcoholic liquor other than beer or wine at any store or other
place of business where the majority of customers are minors or where the
principal business transacted consists of school books, school supplies,
food, lunches or drinks for such minor.



(Prior Code, § 4-14)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)



§ 111.042  REVOCATION; SUSPENSION.



   The Commissioner may suspend, for not more than 30 days or revoke for
cause, any liquor license for any violation of any provisions contained in
this chapter or the statutes of the state pertaining to the sale of alcoholic
liquor.



(Prior Code, § 4-15)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)



§ 111.043  APPLICATION FOR LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Application generally. Applications for local liquor licenses
shall be made to the Commissioner on a form prescribed by the Commissioner;
shall be in writing; shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, or by
one of the partners on behalf of all partners if a partnership, by a member
or manager of a limited liability company, or by a duly authorized agent if a
corporation; and shall be verified by an oath or affidavit. Each application
shall specifically identify the applicant and the licensed premises to which
a local liquor license would be issued, and the filing of an application
shall authorize the Local Liquor Commissioner or the Commissioner’s agents
to conduct all necessary or appropriate background checks of the applicant
and its agents, owners and representatives.



   (B)   Background information. Each application shall include the
following background information:



      (1)   The name, age, address and Social Security number of the
applicant; in the case of a partnership, all partners and also of the persons
entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation or
club, the names and addresses of the officers and directors and every person
owning or controlling more than 5% of the voting shares of stock or the
ownership interest; in the case of a limited liability company, all members
and managers;



      (2)   In the case of an individual, the citizenship and place
of birth of the applicant and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place
of his or her naturalization. In the case of a corporation, the date and
place of incorporation and the objects for which it was formed and proof that
it is a corporation in good standing and authorized to conduct business in
the state;



      (3)   The character of business of the applicant;



      (4)   The length of time that the applicant has been in the
business of the character specified in response to division (B)(3) above;



      (5)   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at
the time application is made;



      (6)   The location and description of the premises for which a
local liquor license is sought and the specific name of the business that is
to be operated under such local liquor license;



      (7)   The names of each governmental body from which the
applicant (and all other persons identified in division (B)(1) above) has
received a liquor license within ten years immediately prior to the date of
the present application; and



      (8)   A telephone number or numbers at which the licensee or
the manager can be contacted 24 hours per day.



   (C)   Statements required.



      (1)   For any license or renewal of a license, the applicant
shall be required to make statements regarding such applicant and all persons
to be identified pursuant to division (B)(1) above. If the applicant is an
individual, that individual shall subscribe to all of the statements set out
below. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall subscribe to all
of the statements set out below; provided, however, that if the applicant is
organized as a limited partnership, then the statement concerning active
involvement provided in division (C)(2)(q) below shall be required only of
all general partners. If the applicant is a corporation, each director and
officer thereof and every person owning or controlling more than 5% of the
voting shares or the ownership interest of such corporation shall subscribe
to all of the statements set out below. If the applicant is a limited
liability company, each member and manager shall subscribe to all of the
statements set out below.



      (2)   If the business for which a local liquor license is
sought will be managed by a manager or agent, every such manager or agent
shall subscribe to all of the statements set out below. The submission of
false information in regarding the following statements shall be grounds for
denial, revocation or non-renewal of a liquor license:



         (a)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has
a current, valid state liquor license for the premises covered by the
application;



         (b)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has
ever been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law;



         (c)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has
ever been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law or local
ordinance concerning the manufacture, possession, sale or dispensation of
alcoholic liquor or has ever forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to
answer charges for any such violation;



         (d)   A statement as to whether the applicant has ever
been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any state or federal
law or regulation or has ever forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to
answer charges for any such violation;



         (e)   A statement whether the applicant has made similar
application for a similar license for a premises other than described in the
application, and the disposition of such application;



         (f)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has
had revoked any liquor license issued under state or federal law or under the
ordinances of any municipality within ten years immediately prior to the date
of the present application;



         (g)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has
had suspended more than once any liquor license issued under state or federal
law or under the ordinances of any municipality within one year immediately
prior to the present application;



         (h)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant is
a city employee or a law enforcing official of the city or any other
government or government agency;



         (i)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has
been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the
current tax period;



         (j)   A statement as to whether or not a federal gaming
device stamp has been issued for the current taxable year with respect to the
premises for which the local liquor license is sought;



         (k)   A statement as to whether or not the premises for
which a local liquor license is sought comprises a store or other place of
business where the majority of customers are under the age of 21 years or
where the principal business transacted consists of the sale of school books,
school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such customers;



         (l)   A statement as to whether or not the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor on the premises for which a license is sought will
violate any provision of this code, including this chapter;



         (m)   A statement as to whether or not the premises for
which a license is sought is within 100 feet of any church building used for
worship or educational purposes, school (other than an institution of higher
learning), hospital, senior citizen housing, daycare center, nursing or
personal care facility or any military or naval station;



         (n)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant is
a permanent resident of the city; or for any applicant that is partnership,
all of the general partners of the partnership are residents of the city;



         (o)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant
beneficially owns the premises for which a license is sought or has a lease
thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued;



         (p)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant is
the beneficial owner of the business to be licensed;



         (q)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant
will be personally and actively involved in the operation of the business to
be licensed;



         (r)   A statement as to whether or not the business is
or will be managed by a manager or agent;



         (s)   A statement as to the nature of the business and
the amount of anticipated alcoholic liquor sales as a percentage of gross
annual sales of the business;



         (t)   A statement that the applicant is not disqualified
from receiving a license by reason of any matter or item contained in the
laws of the state, this chapter or any other code or ordinance of the city;



         (u)   A statement that the applicant will not violate
any federal or state laws, this chapter or any other code or ordinance of the
city in the conduct of the applicant’s business;



         (v)   If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a
statement as to whether or not it is qualified under the State Business
Corporations Act of 1983, 215 ILCS 125/3-1 et seq., to transact business in
the state;



         (w)   If the business to be operated pursuant to the
local liquor license is operating under an assumed name, a statement that the
applicant has complied with the state assumed business name act and other
applicable laws; and



         (x)   Such other statements or information as may be
necessary to demonstrate that the applicant, the applicant’s business and
the premises from which such business will be conducted satisfy all
conditions and requirements applicable to the local liquor license being
sought.



   (D)   Examination of applicant. At any time during the pendency of
an application, the Commissioner shall have the right to compel the applicant
to submit to any examination and to produce any books and records which, in
the judgment of the Commissioner, are material to the determination of
whether the applicant and the applicant’s business are qualified to receive
a local liquor license or whether the premises sought to be licensed is
suitable for such purposes. The Commissioner shall also have the right to
require the applicant to answer any charges made in any objection to the
issuance of the license. The failure of any applicant to appear at the time
and place fixed by the Commissioner for his or her examination or to produce
books and records requested, unless for good cause shown, shall be deemed to
be admission that the applicant is not qualified to receive a local liquor
license and a request to withdraw the application.



   (E)   Investigation and disclosure of information contained in
application; waiver of claims. By applying for, or providing information in
support of an application for, a local liquor license, every person so
applying or providing information thereby:



      (1)   Authorizes any person to disclose, and the city to
investigate, all information pertaining to such application;



      (2)   Waives any and all claims against the city; and



      (3)   Agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city and its
elected and appointed officials, officers, boards, commissioners, attorneys,
employees, agents and representatives from any and all claims resulting from,
or arising out of, or alleged to result from or arise out of the processing
of such application and any investigation related thereto. Each such person
shall consent to and sign any written authorization, waiver and
indemnification agreement as the city may require in connection with the
processing of such application and any investigation related thereto, but no
such separate authorization, waiver, or indemnification shall be required to
make effective the terms of this division (E)(3).



   (F)   Denial or issuance of license. If after review of an
application and all relevant facts, the Commissioner determines that the
application should be denied, the Commissioner shall notify the applicant
within a reasonable time, in writing, stating the reasons for the denial, but
otherwise shall issue the local liquor license as soon as all fees required
by this chapter have been paid and all other requirements of this chapter
have been satisfied.



   (G)   Supplemental information following issuance. Any change in
information provided on, or in connection with, any application for a local
liquor license that does or might affect the right of any licensee to
continue to hold a local liquor license shall be reported in writing to the
Commissioner within ten days after the change. All such changes shall be
subject to review and approval by the Commissioner in the same manner as the
original application. When any such change affects the ownership of any
partnership licensee or any director, officer, manager or person owning or
controlling more than 5% of the shares of any corporate licensee, all such
persons that have not previously submitted information pursuant to the
application process shall, within ten days after such change, submit all
information required of a new applicant.



   (H)   Mandatory alcohol awareness training.



      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of each licensed
establishment which sells alcoholic liquor to provide certified training from
the state licensed beverage alcohol seller server education training (BASSET)
program or training for intervention procedures (TIPS) program to its liquor
managers, bartenders, servers and any other employee involved in the
furnishing of alcoholic beverages to its customers.



      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of each licensed
establishment which sells alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises to
have present on the premises at all times when alcoholic liquor may legally
be sold, a manager or other employee in charge of such establishment who
shall have successfully completed a training program for servers and sellers
licensed by the State Department of Alcohol and Substance Abuse and approved
by the Commissioner.



      (3)   The initial application and all subsequent renewal
applications for all classes of alcoholic liquor dealer’s licenses shall be
accompanied by proof of completion (copy of certificate) of such program
licensed by the state by all liquor managers and such other current employees
as are necessary to comply with the provisions of division (H)(1) above.



   (I)   Application fee. Any application shall be accompanied by a
non-refundable administrative processing fee as set out in the fee schedule
for new licenses, or a fee as set out in the fee schedule for renewal
licenses. Applications for change in owners or officers shall be subject to a
fee of $100 or such greater amount as set out in the fee schedule.



(Prior Code, § 4-16)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 2016-09, passed
2-16-2016)



§ 111.044  INELIGIBILITY FOR LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSE.



   No local liquor license shall be issued or renewed to:



   (A)   A person who is not a permanent resident of the city;
provided, however, that, this division (A) shall not prohibit the issuance of
a local liquor license to a corporation; and, provided further, however,
that, this division (A) shall not prohibit the issuance of a local liquor
license to a partnership where at least one general partner is a permanent
resident of the city or an area within ten miles of the corporate limits of
the city;



   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community;



   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;



   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal
or state law;



   (E)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper, or is
keeping, a house of ill fame;



   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or any other
crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;



   (G)   A person whose local liquor license has been suspended more
than once for cause within one year immediately prior to the present
application if the Commissioner determines that the applicant is no longer
worthy of the public trust;



   (H)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been
revoked for cause;



   (I)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of a local
liquor license would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;



   (J)   A person whose place of business is managed by a manager or
agent unless said manager or agent possesses the qualifications required of
an individual licensee other than residency in the city;



   (K)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal
or state law or local ordinance concerning the manufacture, possession or
sale of alcoholic liquor, or who has forfeited his or her bond to appear in
court to answer charges for any such alleged violation;



   (L)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which
a local liquor license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the
full period for which such local liquor license is to be issued;



   (M)   A person who is not the beneficial owner of the business to be
licensed;



   (N)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as
proscribed by any state or federal law or regulation or who has forfeited his
or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such alleged
violation;



   (O)   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period;



   (P)   A person applying for a license with respect to premises for
which a federal gaming device stamp has been issued for the current taxable
year;



   (Q)   A person applying for a license with respect to premises on
which the retail sale of alcoholic liquor would violate any provision of this
code;



   (R)   A person who will not be personally and actively involved in
the operation of the business to be licensed, either directly or through a
manager identified in the license application;



   (S)   A co-partnership, unless all members thereof shall be
qualified to obtain a license; provided, however, that the requirement of
active involvement in division (R) above shall apply to only one such partner;



   (T)   A corporation, if any director, officer or manager thereof, or
any person owning or controlling more than 5% of the stock thereof, or a
limited liability company, if any member or manager thereof, would not be
eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship
and residence or the requirement of active involvement in division (R) above;



   (U)   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the state or is a
foreign corporation that is qualified under the State Business Corporations
Act of 1983, 215 ILCS 125/3-1 et seq., to transact business in the state;



   (V)   Any law enforcing public official (including where applicable
any alderman, or member of the City Council), any Mayor, any chairperson or
member of a county board, and no such official shall be interested in any
way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution
of alcoholic liquor;



   (W)   Any person, association, partnership, limited liability
company or corporation not eligible for a state liquor license; and



   (X)   A person who has made any omission or false statement in the
application required under this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-17)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)



§ 111.045  CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE, MAINTENANCE AND RENEWAL OF LOCAL LIQUOR
LICENSE.



   (A)   State license required. All local liquor licenses shall be
conditioned on the acquisition and maintenance in good standing by the
applicant and licensee of a state liquor license. No local liquor license
shall authorize the retail sale of any alcoholic liquor until proof of
acquisition of such state liquor license is furnished to the Commissioner. If
any state liquor license sought or held by a licensee is refused, suspended
or revoked, then such licensee shall be deemed in violation of this chapter
and such licensee’s local liquor license shall be subject to revocation.



   (B)   Insurance required. All local liquor licenses shall be
conditioned on the acquisition and maintenance in good standing by the
applicant and licensee of general liability insurance in the amounts of at
least $2,000,000 for injury or death to any person and $2,000,000 for damage
to property and dram shop liability insurance at least to the maximum amount
recoverable under applicable state statutes. Before any local liquor license
may be issued, the applicant shall furnish the Commissioner with a
certificate from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state
certifying that the applicant has such insurance policies in force for the
full period for which the local liquor license is to be issued. With respect
to F-2, F-3, F-5 and F-6 licenses, such licenses shall be conditioned on the
acquisition and maintenance in good standing by the applicant and licensee of
general liability insurance in the amounts of at least $1,000,000 for injury
or death to any person and $1,000,000 for damage to property; provided that
nothing in this division (B) shall excuse a F-2, F-3, F-5 and F-6 licensee
from complying with state dram shop insurance requirements.



   (C)   Bond required. All local liquor licenses shall be conditioned
on the acquisition and maintenance in good standing by the applicant and
licensee of a surety bond in favor of the city in the amount of $2,000 to the
city. Before any local liquor license may be issued, the applicant shall
furnish such bond. Such bond shall be forfeited automatically on revocation
of the local liquor license for which the bond was furnished if revocation
was for cause.



   (D)   Termination due to individual change. When a local liquor
license has been issued to an individual who is discovered to be, or who
becomes, ineligible for such local liquor license, the licensee shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter and such licensee’s local liquor
license shall be subject to revocation.



   (E)   Termination due to partnership change. When a local liquor
license has been issued to a partnership, and a change of ownership occurs
resulting in any person that is ineligible to hold a local liquor license
acquiring a partnership interest, the licensee shall be deemed in violation
of this chapter, and such licensee’s local liquor license shall be subject
to revocation.



   (F)   Termination due to corporate change. When a local liquor
license has been issued to a corporation or limited liability company, and a
change occurs in any of the directors, officers, managers, stockholders of
more than 5% of the stock, or members with more than a 5% interest resulting
in any person that is ineligible to hold a local liquor license becoming a
director, officer, manager, stockholder of more than 5%, or member with more
than a 5% interest, the licensee shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter, and such licensee’s local liquor license shall be subject to
revocation.



   (G)   Cessation or interruption of business. Any licensee who ceases
to do business or closes his or her place of business for a period of more
than 30 days without the prior written consent of the Commissioner shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter, and such licensee’s local liquor
license shall be subject to revocation. A licensee who intends to cease to do
business or who intends to close his or her place of business for more than
30 days shall give the Commissioner written notice of such cessation or
closing as soon as practical after the decision to cease business or close is
made, but in any event before the cessation or closing. Such notice shall
state the expected date of cessation or closing and the reason therefor.



(Prior Code, § 4-18)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 2013-65, passed
10-7-2013)




ESTABLISHMENTS




§ 111.060  CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises where sold or to permit any one to
consume alcoholic liquor on such premises, except as provided by the
authorization granted under the provisions of § 111.036 of this chapter for
the several classes of licenses described therein.



(Prior Code, § 4-19)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.061  SANITARY CONDITIONS.



   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the
storage of such liquor, for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinances
regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for
human consumption.



(Prior Code, § 4-20)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)  Penalty, see §
111.999




SALES




§ 111.075  SALES OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.



   (A)   Sales restricted to licensed premises. A local liquor license
shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only at the licensed premises and
only in compliance with the terms of that license.



   (B)   Sales to certain persons.



      (1)   Sales prohibited. No licensee, and no agent of any
licensee, shall sell, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person who
is, or who appears to be, intoxicated or known by the licensee or agent to be
a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or
in need of mental treatment.



      (2)   Secondary transfer prohibited. No person, after
purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or
deliver such alcoholic liquor to any person who is, or who appears to be,
intoxicated, or known by the person to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift,
insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental treatment.



   (C)   Responsibility for unlawful sales. Any sales made in violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall be the responsibility of both any
individual or individuals involved in such sales as well as the licensee
under whose authority such sales were made. Any such licensee shall be
subject to fine, license suspension and/or license revocation for any such
violation.



(Prior Code, § 4-21)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.076  PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS.



   (A)   Sales to minors.



      (1)   Sales prohibited. No licensee, and no agent of any
licensee, shall sell, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any minor.



      (2)   Responsibility of owner. No licensee shall permit any
minor to remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or
situated in the room or place where such licensed premises are located;
provided that, this division (A)(2) shall not apply if the minor is
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or to any licensed premises
which derives its principal business from the sale of services commodities
other than alcoholic liquor.



      (3)   Secondary transfer prohibited. No person, after
purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or
deliver such alcoholic liquor to any minor; provided, however, that, this
division (A)(3) shall not prohibit the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a
minor in the performance of a religious ceremony or in the home of such minor
pursuant to the approval and supervision of the parent or legal guardian of
such minor.



      (4)   Identification required. If a licensee or any agent of a
licensee believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of
alcoholic liquor is prohibited because the prospective recipient may be a
minor, then the licensee or licensee’s agent shall, before making such sale
or delivery, demand adequate written evidence of age.



         (a)   For the purpose of preventing a violation of this
section, any licensee, and any agent of a licensee, may refuse to sell
alcoholic liquor to any individual who is unable to produce adequate written
evidence of identity and age.



         (b)   For purposes of this section, ADEQUATE WRITTEN
EVIDENCE OF IDENTITY AND AGE means a document issued by a federal, state,
county or municipal government, including, but not limited to, a motor
vehicle operator’s license, a registration certificate issued under the
Federal Selective Service Act or an identification card issued to a member of
the armed forces.



         (c)   Proof that the licensee, or an agent of the
licensee, demanded, was shown and reasonably relied on adequate written
evidence of identity and age in any transaction forbidden by this section is
an affirmative defense in any proceeding for the suspension or revocation of
any local liquor license based on the occurrence of such forbidden
transaction. However, it shall not be an affirmative defense if the licensee,
or an agent of the licensee, accepted any written evidence of identity or age
knowing it to be false or fraudulent.



      (5)   Warning required. Every licensee shall display at all
times, in a prominent and conspicuous place within the licensed premises, a
printed card supplied by the City Clerk reading substantially as follows:



WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER 21



YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE UP TO $750 UNDER THE ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LAKE
FOREST IF YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OR IF YOU MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR
THE PURPOSE OF PURCHASING OR OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.



   (B)   Consumption, purchase and possession prohibited. No minor
shall consume alcoholic liquor, purchase alcoholic liquor, accept a gift of
alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession; provided,
however, that, this division (B) shall not prohibit the consumption of
alcoholic liquor by a minor in the performance of a religious ceremony or
service or in a home pursuant to the direct supervision and approval of the
parent or legal guardian of such minor.



   (C)   False identification prohibited.



      (1)   Misrepresentation prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any minor to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or
obtaining alcoholic liquor. It shall be unlawful for any minor to present or
offer to any licensee, or to the agent of any licensee, any written, printed
or photostatic evidence of identity or age that is false, fraudulent, or not
his or her own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to
purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure alcoholic liquor. It
shall be unlawful for any minor to have in his or her possession any false or
fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of identity or age.



      (2)   Transfer and alteration of identification prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any minor to transfer, alter or deface any written,
printed or photostatic evidence of identity or age or to obtain any written,
printed or photostatic evidence of identity or age by means of false or
fraudulent information.



      (3)   Conveyance of false identification prohibited. It shall
be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish to any other person any
false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of identity or
age. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish to any
other person any evidence of identity or age with the knowledge or intent
that such evidence will be used to circumvent the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   Handling prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a person to tend
any bar in a licensed premises when such person is prohibited by law or
ordinance from purchasing, accepting, having in possession or consuming
alcoholic liquors.



   (E)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent
or legal guardian intentionally or knowingly to permit any minor for whom the
parent or guardian is responsible to violate any provision of this chapter.



   (F)   Social hosting.



      (1)   Prohibited gatherings.



         (a)   It is unlawful for any person to host, or fail to
take reasonable steps to prevent a gathering at any residence or site, other
private property, public place or in any conveyance, over which that person
has control or a reasonable opportunity for control where illicit drugs or
alcoholic liquor have been consumed by a minor, if such person either knew or
reasonably should have known that a minor was consuming any illicit drugs or
alcoholic liquor.



         (b)   1.   A person who hosts a gathering shall be
deemed to have known or should have known that a minor was consuming illicit
drugs or alcoholic liquor if:



               a.   Such person is present at the site of
the gathering at the time any minor consumes illicit drugs or alcoholic
liquor; or



               b.   Such person has not taken appropriate
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of illicit drugs or alcoholic
liquor by minors.



            2.   A person who hosts a gathering does not have
to be present at the gathering to be liable under this chapter.



         (c)   It is the duty of any person who hosts a gathering
at his or her place of residence or other private property, public place, any
other site under his or her control, or in any conveyance, where minors will
be present, to take appropriate reasonable steps to prevent the consumption
of illicit drugs or alcoholic liquor by any minor at the gathering.



      (2)   Exceptions.



         (a)   This division (F) shall not apply to conduct
involving the use of alcoholic liquor that occurs at a religious ceremony or
exclusively between a minor and his or her parent, as permitted by state law.



         (b)   A person who hosts a gathering shall not be in
violation of this division (F) if he or she:



            1.   Seeks assistance from the Police Department
or other law enforcement agency to remove any minor who refuses to abide by
the person’s performance of the duties imposed by this division (F) or to
terminate the gathering because the person has been unable to prevent
minor(s) from consuming illicit drugs or alcoholic liquor despite having
taken appropriate reasonable steps to do so, as long as such request is made
before any other person makes a complaint about the gathering; or



            2.   Advises law enforcement in advance of
departing one’s residence that the owner will be away and no minor is
authorized to be present and consume alcoholic liquor at the owners residence.



   (G)   Use of rented room for consumption by minors. No person shall
rent a hotel or motel room from the proprietor or agent thereof for the
purpose of or with the knowledge that such room shall be used for the
consumption of alcoholic liquor by minors.



   (H)   Proof of consumption or possession. There shall be a
rebuttable presumption that a minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic
liquor in violation of this section where either:



      (1)   The presence of alcoholic liquor in a minor’s body is
shown by a measurement of blood alcohol concentration; or



      (2)   The arresting officer:



         (a)   Observes one or more recognized indicia of the
presence of alcoholic liquor in a minor’s body, including, without
limitation, an odor of alcoholic liquor on the minor’s breath or impaired
motor coordination or speech; and



         (b)   Offers the minor an opportunity to submit to a
blood, urine or breath test to determine if alcoholic liquor is present in
the minor’s body and the minor refuses to take such a test.



(Prior Code, § 4-22)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.077  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a liquor license issued
under this chapter, to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquor in the
city between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. in the morning on any day.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing:



      (1)   Sale of alcoholic liquors for on-premises consumption
may not occur in outdoor dining areas after the earlier of:



         (a)   12:00 midnight;



         (b)   The close of restaurant operations at such
licensed premises; or



         (c)   As otherwise limited by ordinance or any
conditions placed on the liquor license.



      (2)   Any licensee whose business operations include
activities other than the sale of alcoholic liquor may continue to operate
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; provided that:



         (a)   Such operations may otherwise continue to operate
during such hours under applicable laws; and



         (b)   The facilities involved in the sale of alcoholic
liquor must either be segregated from other facilities in the licensed
premises or must be capable of being locked during the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m.



(Prior Code, § 4-23)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.078  ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN PUBLIC PLACES AND MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Consumption and possession of open containers in public places
prohibited. Except for beer and wine sold in an approved container provided
by an authorized licensee pursuant to a valid Class K liquor license and
possessed or consumed in the beach area, as defined in § 111.001, or as may
otherwise be expressly permitted, it shall be unlawful for any person to
consume, or to possess open containers of, alcoholic liquor in any public
building or on any public property or right-of-way.



   (B)   Public intoxication prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to be in an intoxicated condition in any public building or on any
public property or right-of-way.



   (C)   Public disturbance prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to be in an intoxicated state in any private house or place to the
disturbance of any other person.



   (D)   Possession of open liquor in motor vehicles prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry or possess any alcoholic
liquor in or about any motor vehicle on any public right-of- way, except in
the original package with the seal unbroken, or as otherwise authorized by
state law.



(Prior Code, § 4-24)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 2017-39, passed
6-19-2017)  Penalty, see § 111.999




FEES




§ 111.090  FEES.



   Fees shall as set out in the fee schedule. All fees shall be per year,
unless otherwise noted.



(Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)




HEARINGS




§ 111.105  VIOLATIONS, COMPLAINTS, HEARINGS AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS BEFORE
COMMISSIONER.



   (A)   Violation determined by Commissioner. The Commissioner may
suspend for not more than 30 days or revoke any local liquor license, and in
addition to any suspension may fine any licensee, for any violation of any
liquor law (including the failure of the licensee to pay any license cost or
fee or any tax imposed on alcoholic liquor or the sale thereof) committed or
permitted by the licensee or any agent of the licensee, or which occurs at
the licensed premises, or for which the licensee or any agent of the licensee
is otherwise legally responsible.



      (1)   Suspension; revocation; fine. Except as provided in
division (A)(2) below, no local liquor license shall be revoked or suspended,
and no fine shall be imposed on any licensee, except after a public hearing
before the Commissioner.



      (2)   Summary suspension. If the Commissioner has reason to
believe that any continued operation of any licensed premises poses a threat
to the welfare of the community, then the Commissioner may, on the issuance
of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice
or hearing, order a licensed premises closed for not more than seven days,
during which time the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard;
provided, however, that, if such licensee also conducts another business or
businesses on the licensed premises, no closing order issued pursuant to this
division (A)(2) shall be applicable to such other business or businesses.



   (B)   Violation determined by court. Whenever any licensee, or any
agent of a licensee, shall be found in any court to have violated any liquor
law, the local liquor license of said licensee may, in the discretion of the
Commissioner, be revoked.



   (C)   Complaints.



      (1)   Any five residents of the city may file a complaint with
the Commissioner alleging that a licensee has been or is violating any liquor
law.



         (a)   Every such complaint shall be in writing, shall be
in the form prescribed by the Commissioner, shall be signed and sworn to by
the complaining residents and shall state the particular liquor law alleged
to have been violated and the facts in detail supporting such allegation.



         (b)   If the Commissioner is satisfied that there is
probable cause to believe a violation has occurred, the Commissioner shall
set the matter for hearing and shall serve notice on the complainant and the
licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charges
in the complaint to be considered at such hearing.



      (2)   On complaint of the State Department of Revenue, the
Commissioner shall refuse the issuance or renewal of any local liquor
license, or shall suspend or revoke any local liquor license, for any of the
following violations of any tax act administered by the State Department of
Revenue:



         (a)   Failure to file a tax return;



         (b)   Filing of a fraudulent return;



         (c)   Failure to pay all or any part of any tax or
penalty finally determined to be due;



         (d)   Failure to keep proper books and records;



         (e)   Failure to secure and display a certificate or
subcertificate of registration; and



         (f)   Willful violation of any rule or regulation of the
State Department of Revenue relating to the administration and enforcement of
tax liability.



   (D)   Hearings. No local liquor license shall be revoked or
suspended, and no licensee shall be fined, except after a public hearing held
before the Commissioner, except as provided in division (A)(2) above. No such
hearing shall be held until at least three days after the licensee has been
given written notice affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and
defend. All such hearings shall be open to the public. The Commissioner shall
reduce all evidence to writing and shall maintain an official record of the
proceedings. Within five days after the hearing, if the Commissioner
determines that the licensee should be disciplined, the Commissioner shall
issue a written order stating the reason or reasons for such determination.
The order shall state that the license has been revoked, or the period of
suspension, and the amount of the fine, if any. The Commissioner shall serve
a copy of the order on the licensee within said five-day period. If a
violation is found to have occurred, the Commissioner may establish
conditions that must be satisfied prior to the reinstatement of the liquor
license.



   (E)   Appeal from Commissioner. Appeals from the decision of the
Commissioner shall be taken to the State Liquor Control Commission in the
manner provided by law. Every review by the State Liquor Control Commission
shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of the
Commissioner.



(Prior Code, § 4-25)  (Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)



§ 111.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Each day on which or during which any person violates any of
the provisions of this chapter, and each separate act or transaction in
violation of this chapter, shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   The Commissioner may impose a fine on a licensee pursuant to
§ 111.105 of this chapter in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for each
violation. No licensee shall be fined more than $10,000 during the term of
such licensee’s local liquor license.



   (C)   Except where higher minimum penalties are established by
statute, and in addition to the penalties provided in § 111.105 of this
chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be fined
not less than $50, nor more than $750, for the first such violation and not
less than $100, nor more than $750, for the second and each subsequent
violation. Each day on which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
violation.



(Prior Code, § 4-26)



   (D)   Any person who violates or assists in the violations of any
provisions of § 111.076(F) of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed
a petty offense and shall reimburse the city for any response costs incurred
and be fined not more than the amounts set forth below for each such
violation. Each day on which, or during which, a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.



      (1)   The first violation of § 111.076(F) of this chapter
shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $250, nor more than $1,000.



      (2)   A second violation of § 111.076(F) of this chapter by
the same responsible person, within a 12-month period shall be punishable by
a fine of no less than $500, nor more than $1,500.



      (3)   A third or subsequent violation of § 111.076(F) of this
chapter by the same responsible person, within a 12-month period shall be
punishable by a fine of no less than $1,000, nor more than $2,500.



(Prior Code, § 4-27)



(Ord. 2013-26, passed 5-20-2013)



CHAPTER 112:  AMUSEMENTS



Section




General Provisions




   112.001   Applicability of chapter provisions



   112.002   Licenses; athletic contests



   112.003   Order; crowding



   112.004   Inspections



   112.005   Indecent shows



   112.006   Smoking



   112.007   Signs



   112.008   Reserved



   112.009   Exhibition of criminals



   112.010   Riots




Bowling Alleys




   112.025   License required; license fee



   112.026   Hours for operation



   112.027   Noise




Circuses




   112.040   License required



   112.041   Application; fee



   112.042   Side shows and concessions



   112.043   Provisions to be obeyed



   112.044   Inspection



   112.045   Cheating




Poolrooms




   112.095   License required; license fee



   112.096   Minors



   112.097   Hours for operation




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 112.001  APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter, except as to licensing and fees, shall
apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the
city, whether licensed specifically in another chapter of this code, or not.



(Prior Code, § 5-1)



§ 112.002  LICENSES; ATHLETIC CONTESTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which
is open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged without
having first secured a license therefor; provided that, the provisions of
this section shall not be held to apply to those amusements which are
specifically licensed by the other subchapters or sections of this chapter.



   (B)   No license fee shall be required for any performance or
exhibition given solely for the benefit of any charitable, religious,
educational or fraternal organization, and under the auspices of such
organization.



   (C)   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the City Clerk
and shall, comply with the general provisions of the ordinances relating to
applications. For such licenses, fees shall be paid as set out in the fee
schedule.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or exhibit any race
between persons, animals or vehicles, or any baseball games, boxing or
wrestling match, or any other athletic contest or exhibition, for admission
to which a fee is charged, without having secured a license therefor.



   (E)   The proprietor of each such exhibition shall submit to the
City Clerk a statement verified under oath of the gross receipts of each such
contest, game, race and the like within one week after such exhibition. At
the same time, such proprietor or person exhibiting or operating such
exhibition shall pay to the City Clerk a sum equal to 3% of the gross
receipts. At the time of application, a cash deposit of as set out in the fee
schedule shall be made, to insure payment of this fee; this deposit shall be
returned without interest upon payment of the fee herein required.



   (E)   Sufficient members of the Police and Fire Departments, in
uniform, shall be admitted, free of charge, to all such exhibitions for the
purpose of inspection and preserving and maintaining order.



   (F)   No fee or percentage shall be required to be paid for any
exhibition or contest conducted solely for the benefit of and under the
auspices of any religious, charitable, educational or fraternal organization.



(Prior Code, § 5-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.003  ORDER; CROWDING.



   (A)   The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical must be
orderly and quiet at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person
attending such amusement, show or theatrical to create a disturbance in the
audience.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to
witness any such amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because
of fire or other risks.



(Prior Code, § 5-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.004  INSPECTIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief each to
see that every exhibition, amusement, theatrical or other public show or
amusement is inspected by a member of the Police Department and of the Fire
Department to ensure conformity with the provisions concerning such
amusements.



(Prior Code, § 5-4)



§ 112.005  INDECENT SHOWS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to present,
exhibit or conduct any indecent show, theatrical, play, motion picture,
exhibition or any other form of public amusement or show.



(Prior Code, § 5-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.006  SMOKING.



   It shall be unlawful to smoke, as defined in § 95.177, upon or beneath
the stage, or in a dressing room of any building used as an assembly hall
with seating accommodations for 100 persons or more, in which theatricals,
shows, amusements, lectures or other entertainments are offered, operated,
presented or exhibited.



(Prior Code, § 5-6) (Ord. 2017-74, passed 12-18-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.007  SIGNS.



   It shall be the duty of the owner of such premises, or of the occupant
in charge, to provide and place printed signs on which the works “No
Smoking” shall appear in letters at least four inches high, in conspicuous
places; at least two such signs being upon the stage or in the wings thereof
and one in each dressing room.



(Prior Code, § 5-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.008  RESERVED.



§ 112.009  EXHIBITIONS OF CRIMINALS.



   It shall be unlawful to exhibit any criminal or the body of any
criminal or any person who shall have become notorious because of the
commission of a crime, in any theatrical, exhibit, carnival or other public
amusement.



(Prior Code, § 5-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.010  RIOTS.



   It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any
kind which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or public
disturbance.



(Prior Code, § 5-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99




BOWLING ALLEYS




§ 112.025  LICENSE REQUIRED; LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   (1)   No person, firm or corporation shall operate,
maintain or conduct within the city any bowling alley, pin or ball alley open
to the public without having first annually obtained a license therefor as is
herein provided.



      (2)   All applications for such a license shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk and shall state thereon the intended location of
the place of business and the number of alleys to be used therein.



   (B)   (1)   There shall be an annual fee as set out in the fee
schedule per alley for such license, and no license shall be issued before
the payment of the fee.



      (2)   Each such license shall terminate on April 30 next
following its issuance.



      (3)   The fee to be paid for a fraction of a fiscal year shall
be reduced in proportion to the number of full calendar months which may have
expired in the year prior to the issuance of the license.



(Prior Code, § 5-17)  (Ord. 565, passed 4-11-1962)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.026  HOURS FOR OPERATION.



   No person shall keep open, operate or play upon any bowling alley, ball
or pin alley, licensed hereunder, during the nighttime between the hours of
12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



(Prior Code, § 5-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.027  NOISE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
keeping or conducting a bowling alley, pin or ball alley to permit the
patrons of the same to make loud and boisterous noises so as to disturb the
peace in the vicinity.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause any such
noise in a bowling alley, pin or ball alley; or to congregate on the sidewalk
or street in front of any such premises in such manner or in such numbers as
to obstruct foot or vehicle traffic along the street or sidewalk.



(Prior Code, § 5-19)  Penalty, see § 10.99




CIRCUSES




§ 112.040  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct or operate a circus in the
city without having obtained a license as is provided in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 5-26)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.041  APPLICATION; FEE.



   (A)   The applications for such licenses shall be made to the City
Clerk, and shall specify the place in or on which the circus is to be
conducted.



   (B)   The fee for circus licenses shall be as set out in the fee
schedule for each day during which the circuses are conducted or open to the
public, and no license shall issue without the payment of the fee.



(Prior Code, § 5-27)



§ 112.042  SIDE SHOWS AND CONCESSIONS.



   The license fee for each side show and concession operated in
connection with circuses shall be as set out in the fee schedule and per day.



(Prior Code, § 5-28)



§ 112.043  PROVISIONS TO BE OBEYED.



   It shall be the duty of every person licensed under this subchapter to
obey the provisions of §§ 112.001 through 112.010 of this chapter, and all
other ordinance provisions relating to circuses or the premises occupied.



(Prior Code, § 5-29)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.044  INSPECTION.



   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief to see
that inspections as provided for in § 112.004 of this chapter shall be made
of all circus performances and of the premises used.



(Prior Code, § 5-30)



§ 112.045  CHEATING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cheat, short-change or otherwise
defraud any person attending or about to attend a circus performance within
the city.



(Prior Code, § 5-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99




POOLROOMS




§ 112.095  LICENSE REQUIRED; LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   (1)   No person, firm or corporation shall operate,
maintain or conduct within the city a billiard, pool bagatelle or pigeon hole
table open to the public without having first annually obtained a license
therefor as is herein provided.



      (2)   All applications for such a license shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk and shall state thereon the intended location of
the place of business and the number of tables to be used therein.



   (B)   (1)   There shall be annual fee as set out in the fee
schedule per table for such license, and no license shall be issued before
the payment of the fee. Each such license shall terminate on April 30 next
following its issuance.



      (2)   The fee to be paid for a fraction of a fiscal year shall
be reduced in proportion to the number of full calendar months which may have
expired in the year prior to the issuance of the license.



(Prior Code, § 5-61)  (Ord. 565, passed 4-11-1962; Ord. 812, passed
4-17-1971; Ord. 1355, passed 4-4-1983)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.096  MINORS.



   Minors under the age of 18 years shall under no circumstances frequent,
loiter, go or remain in any hall licensed hereunder at any time, unless it be
upon some lawful errand and sent by the direction and with the consent and
knowledge of the parent, guardian or other person having the lawful custody
of said minor; and it shall be unlawful for the proprietor of any hall so
licensed to allow or permit any such minor to frequent, loiter or remain
within the hall in violation of this section.



(Prior Code, § 5-62)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.097  HOURS FOR OPERATION.



   All pool or billiard halls open to the public in the city are hereby
required to be closed for all purposes and case doing business of any kind
whatsoever at the hour of 12:00 a.m., and they shall remain so closed and no
business whatever be done therein until the hour of 6:00 a.m. in the morning.



(Prior Code, § 5-63)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 113:  FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS



Section




Restaurants




   113.01   Adoption of Lake County Health Ordinance



   113.02   Definitions



   113.03   Licenses and permits



   113.04   Inspections



   113.05   Enforcement and interpretation




Food Stores; Food Vending Machines




   113.20   Definitions



   113.21   Permits and licenses



   113.22   Inspections



   113.23   Enforcement



   113.24   Minimum sanitary requirements for food stores



   113.25   Food stores which may operate



   113.26   Food service establishments from other jurisdictions



   113.27   Procedure when infestation is suspected



 



   113.99   Penalty




RESTAURANTS




§ 113.01  ADOPTION OF LAKE COUNTY HEALTH ORDINANCE.



   The provisions of the Lake County Board of Health Ordinance, Article
III, Regulation of Restaurants and Itinerant Restaurants, effective January
11, 1960, except §§ II, VI and XIII, as amended by the county, are hereby
adopted by reference, as the rules and regulations of the city.



(Prior Code, § 17-1)



§ 113.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HEALTH OFFICER. All references in this subchapter and in the Lake
County Board of Health Ordinance, Article III, to the HEALTH OFFICER shall
mean the duly appointed Health Officer of the city or his or her authorized
representative.



   ITINERANT VENDOR. Any person traveling from place to place upon the
public highways who shall deal in, sell or offer for sale any article of food
or drink at wholesale or retail and who shall not operate a regular,
established store or warehouse for the merchandising of foods within the city.



(Prior Code, § 17-2)



§ 113.03  LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   (A)   Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
restaurant, itinerant restaurant or do business as an itinerant vendor,
without a valid permit from the County Health Department.



   (B)   Licenses. No person shall operate a restaurant or itinerant
restaurant or do business as an itinerant vendor without first obtaining a
license therefor from the city as provided herein. Such license may be
revoked by the Health Officer upon the violation by the licensee of any of
the provisions of this chapter or of any of the rules and regulations
pertaining thereto or in an emergency when in the judgment of the Health
Officer the condition of the premises or food products handled by the
licensee has or may become a public health menace.



   (C)   Applications. Persons desiring to engage in the restaurant,
itinerant restaurant or itinerant vendor business within the city shall make
written application to the Health Officer of the city, who shall authorize
the issuance of a license upon the presentation of a valid permit issued by
the County Health Department and other satisfactory proof that the applicant
is entitled hereunder to such license.



   (D)   Fees. The annual fee for license for engaging in the
restaurant, itinerant restaurant and food vendor business in the city shall
be as follows.



      (1)   For each restaurant having a capacity of serving not
more than 20 persons, the fee shall be as set out in the fee schedule.



      (2)   For each restaurant having a capacity of serving not
less than 21 and not more than 99 persons, the fee shall be as set out in the
fee schedule.



      (3)   For each restaurant having a capacity of serving 100
persons or more, the fee shall be as set out in the fee schedule.



      (4)   For each itinerant restaurant, the fee shall be as set
out in the fee schedule.



      (5)   For each food vendor, the fee shall be as set out in the
fee schedule (per vehicle).



   (E)   Display of sticker. Anyone engaged in the itinerant restaurant
business or as an itinerant vendor shall have displayed on each vehicle from
which food is served a license plate or sticker issued by the city.



   (F)   Display of certificate. Any person who shall engage in the
restaurant business shall cause his or her license certificate to be placed
and remain in a conspicuous location in his or her place of business.



(Prior Code, § 17-3)  (Ord. 1293, passed 4-5-1982; Ord. 1494, passed
4-13-1985)



§ 113.04  INSPECTIONS.



   Each person to whom a license is issued shall permit inspections of his
or her vehicle or premises by the Health Officer of the city or his or her
authorized representatives.



(Prior Code, § 17-4)



§ 113.05  ENFORCEMENT AND INTERPRETATION.



   This subchapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer.



(Prior Code, § 17-5)




FOOD STORES; FOOD VENDING MACHINES




§ 113.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULTERATED. The condition of a food:



      (1)   If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious
substance in a quantity which may render it injurious to health;



      (2)   If it bears or contains any added poisonous or
deleterious substance for which no safe tolerance has been established by
regulation, or in excess of such tolerance if one has been established;



      (3)   If it consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid
or decomposed substances or if it is otherwise unfit for consumption;



      (4)   If it has been processed, prepared, packed or held under
insanitary conditions, whereby it may have become contaminated with filth, or
whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health;



      (5)   If it is in whole or in part the product of a diseased
anneal, or an animal which has died otherwise than by slaughter; or



      (6)   If its container is composed in whole or in part of any
poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to
health.



   CLOSED. Fitted together snugly leaving no openings large enough to
permit the entrance of vermin.



   EASILY CLEANABLE. Readily accessible and of such material and finish,
and so fabricated that residue may be completely removed by normal cleaning
methods.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person working in a food store who transports food or
food containers, who engages in food preparation or service, or who comes in
contact with any foods utensil or equipment.



   FOOD. Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption.



   FOOD CONTACT SURFACES. Those surfaces of equipment and utensils with
which food normally comes in direct contact, and those surfaces with which
food may come in contact and drain back onto surfaces normally in contact
with food.



   FOOD STORE. Retail grocery, meat market, poultry market, fish market,
fresh fruit and vegetable market, confectionery, nut store, retail bakery or
any other establishment, whether fixed or moveable, where food, intended for
human consumption off the premises, is manufactured, produced, prepared,
handled, transported, sold or offered for sale at retail. A delicatessen
where foods are cooked or prepared, located within a FOOD STORE, may have to
comply with such other food sanitation regulations that apply to such food
preparation operations.



   FOOD VENDING MACHINE. Any and all types of mechanical devices which
operate by insertion of a coin or other token and which delivers or permits
the removal of candy, food or any food product from such machine.



   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Lake County Board of Health.



   HEALTH OFFICER. The duly appointed Health Officer of the city or his or
her authorized representative.



   PERISHABLE FOOD. Any food of a type or in such condition as may spoil,
but does not include foods or beverages enclosed in hermetically sealed
containers, unless such container is labeled so as to indicate that the
contents are perishable.



   PERSON. Person, firm, corporation or association.



   POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD. Any perishable food which consists in whole
or in part of milk or milk products eggs, meats poultry, fish, shellfish or
other ingredients capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of
infectious or toxigenic microorganisms.



   SAFE TEMPERATURES. As applied to potentially hazardous foods shall mean
temperatures of 45°F or below, and 140°F or above. As applied to frozen
perishable foods, SAFE TEMPERATURE shall be 0°F or below, except for a
variation of 15°F during transit, unloading or defrosting during a
mechanical defrosting cycle. Temperatures shall be determined by measurement
of the actual product temperature or the ambient air temperature in the
storage device.



   SEALED. Free of cracks or other openings which permit the entrance or
passage of moisture.



   UTENSIL. All containers or any equipment of any kind or nature with
which food comes in contact after delivery to a food store, during storage,
preparation, display or sale.



(Prior Code, § 17-7)



§ 113.21  PERMITS AND LICENSES.



   (A)   Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food
store or food vending machine who does not possess a permit from the County
Health Department.



   (B)   Licenses. No person shall operate a food store or food vending
machine without first obtaining a license therefor from the city as provided
herein. Such license may be revoked by the Health Officer upon violation by
the licensee of any of the provisions of this subchapter or of any of the
rules and regulations pertaining thereto or in an emergency when in the
judgment of the Health Officer the condition of the premises or food products
handled by the licensee has or may become public health menace.



   (C)   Applications. Persons desiring to engage in the food store or
food vending machine business within the city shall make written application
to the Health Officer of the city who shall have power to issue a license
upon the presentation of a food store or food vending machine permit issued
by the County Health Department and other satisfactory proof that applicant
is entitled to such license.



   (D)   Fees. The annual fees for a license for engaging in the food
store or food vending machine business in the city shall be as follows.



      (1)   For each food store, the fee shall be as set out in the
fee schedule.



      (2)   For each food vending machine, the fee shall be as set
out in the fee schedule.



   (E)   Display of sticker. Any person engaged in the food vending
machine business shall have displayed on each machine from which food is
served a license or sticker issued by the city.



   (F)   Display of certificate. Any person who shall engage in the
food store business shall cause his or her license certificate to be placed
and remain in a conspicuous location in his or her place of business.



(Prior Code, § 17-8)  (Ord. 1160, passed 3-3-1980; Ord. 1293, passed
4-5-1982; Ord. 1494, passed 4-13-1985)



§ 113.22  INSPECTIONS.



   Each person to whom a license is issued shall permit inspections of his
or her food vending machine or premises. Inspections shall be made under the
inspection procedures of the County Board of Health or at the direction of
the Health Officer or his or her authorized representatives.



(Prior Code, § 17-9)



§ 113.23  ENFORCEMENT.



   This subchapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer.



   (A)   Inspection records and notices. Whenever the Health Officer or
his or her authorized representative makes an inspection of a food-service
establishment, he or she shall record his or her findings on an inspection
report form provided for this purpose, and shall furnish the original of such
inspection report form to the license holder or operator. Such inspection
report shall indicate specific violations found and shall establish a
specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of them. Failure to
comply with any notice issued in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter may result in suspension of the license. An opportunity for appeal
from any notice or inspection findings will be provided if a written request
for a hearing is filed with the Health Officer within the period of time
established in the notice of correction.



   (B)   Service of notices. Notices provided for under this section
shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original of the
inspection report form or other notice has been delivered personally to the
license holder or person in charge, or the inspection report or notice has
been posted by the Health Officer upon an inside wall of the establishment,
or such inspection report or notice has been sent by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the license
holder. A copy of such inspection reports or notices shall be filed with the
records of the Health Officer.



   (C)   Examination and condemnation of food. Samples of food and
other substances may be examined or sampled by the Health Officer as often as
may be necessary to determine freedom from adulteration. The Health Officer
may condemn and forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed, destroyed or
denatured, any food which is unwholesome or adulterated.



(Prior Code, § 17-10)



§ 113.24  MINIMUM SANITARY REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD STORES.



   (A)   Wholesomeness of food.



      (1)   General. All food shall be from approved sources or
sources considered satisfactory by the Health Officer, and shall be clean,
wholesome, free from adulteration and spoilage and shall be safe for human
consumption.



      (2)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   All foods are from approved sources or are
considered satisfactory by the Health Officer or are in compliance with
applicable state and local laws and regulations.



         (b)   Food from such sources have been protected from
contamination and spoilage during subsequent handling, packaging and storage
and while in transit.



         (c)   All milk and fluid milk products sold meet the
State Grade A Milk Law.



         (d)   All oysters, clams and mussels are from sources
that are certified by the state of origin, shell stock is in the containers
originally packed at the shucking plant and identified with the name and
address of the packer, repacker or distributor along with the appropriate
certificate number.



         (e)   Meat, meat products and poultry have been
inspected and approved under an official regulatory program; provided that,
the Health Officer may accept other sources which are, in his or her opinion,
satisfactory and which are in compliance with applicable state and local laws
and regulations.



         (f)   All food is wholesome, free from spoilage and
adulteration.



   (B)   Food protection.



      (1)   Contamination. All food while being stored, prepared,
displayed, served or sold, or during transport shall be protected from
contamination. Perishable foods shall be stored such that spoilage will be
minimized. All potentially hazardous foods shall be maintained at safe
temperature (45°F or below, or 140°F or above), except during necessary
periods of preparation and service.



      (2)   Identification. Poisonous and toxic substances shall be
identified, and shall be used only in such manner and under such conditions
as will not contaminate food nor constitute a hazard to employees or
customers.



      (3)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   All foods, while being stored, prepared, displayed
served or sold, or transported, are protected against contamination from
dust, flies, rodents or other vermin; unclean utensils and work surfaces;
unnecessary handling; coughs and sneezes, flooding, drainage and overhead
leakage, and any other source.



            1.   All food is handled so as to minimize the
opportunity for contamination; minimum manual contact with food shall be made
insofar as is practicable.



            2.   Food on display, such as meats, candy, bakery
products, are adequately protected from public handling or other
contamination, unless such products are securely wrapped.



            3.   Foods during transportation and delivery are
securely wrapped or otherwise protected from flies, dirt, handling or other
contamination and delivery trucks and other equipment used for such
transportation are kept clean and are so constructed as to protect the food
carried from dust and other contamination. Reasonable care is taken in the
handling of large cuts of meat.



            4.   No animals or fowls are kept or allowed in
any room in which food is prepared, processed or stored.



            5.   Equipment and utensils used in the
preparation and processing of poultry are not used in the preparation or
processing of foods that subsequently would not normally be cooked.



         (b)   Conveniently located refrigeration facilities hot
food storage and display facilities and effective insulated facilities are
provided in numbers sufficient to assure the maintenance of all food at
required temperatures during storage, preparation and display.



            1.   All potentially hazardous food is, except
when being kept at 45°F or below, or 140°F or above.



            2.   Potentially hazardous foods are pre-chilled
to 45°F or below before being placed in refrigerated display cases or
pre-heated to 140°F or above before being placed in heated display cases.



            3.   Frozen foods are kept at such temperatures as
to remain frozen; potentially hazardous frozen foods are kept at 0°F or
below, except for a variation of 15°F during transit and unloading and
except when being thawed provided that thawing is at refrigerator
temperatures of 45°F or below, or by any other method approved by the Health
Officer.



         (c)   Containers of food are stored above the floor, on
clean racks, dollies or shelving in such a manner as to be protected from
splash and other contamination, and such that accessibility for floor
cleaning is provided.



         (d)   Only those poisonous and toxic substances required
to maintain the establishment in a sanitary condition and for sanitization of
equipment and utensils are used and containers are adequately labeled as to
contents. When not in use, poisonous and toxic substances are stored in
cabinets which are used for no other purpose. Bactericides and cleaning
compounds are not stored in the same cabinet with insecticides, rodenticides
or other poisonous substances.



         (e)   Poisonous substances are not used in any way as to
contaminate food, equipment or utensils, not to constitute a hazard to
employees or customers.



   (C)   Equipment and utensils.



      (1)   General. All equipment, utensils, display cases,
preparation tables, refrigerators, walk-in coolers, freezers, sinks and other
equipment used in the operation of a food store shall be so constructed,
located and installed as to be durable, accessible for cleaning, easily
cleanable, shall be kept in good repair and shall not contain or be plated
with toxic metals or finishes.



      (2)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   Equipment design, construction and materials.



            1.   All equipment and utensils shall be so
durable under normal conditions and operations as to be resistant to denting,
buckling, pitting, chipping, crazing and excessive wear; and shall be capable
of withstanding repeated scrubbing, scouring and the corrosive action of
cleaning and sanitizing agents and food with which they come in contact.



            2.   Food contact surfaces of equipment and
utensils shall be smooth; shall be free of breaks, open seams, cracks, chips,
pits and similar imperfections; shall be in good repair, and shall be easily
cleanable.



            3.   Materials used as food-contact surfaces of
equipment and utensils shall, under use conditions, be corrosion resistant,
relatively non-absorbent and non-toxic.



            4.   Food-contact surfaces of equipment and
utensils shall be free of difficult-to-clean internal corners and crevices.
Threads which routinely contact food shall be of a sanitary design, and no
V-type threads shall be used in such a situation.



            5.   Lubricated bearings and gears of equipment
shall be so constructed that lubricants cannot get into the food or onto
food-contact surfaces.



            6.   All food-contact surfaces, unless designed
for in place cleaning shall be accessible for manual cleaning and for
inspection either:



               a.   Without being disassembled;



               b.   By disassembling without the use of
tools; or



               c.   By easy disassembling with the use of
only simple tools kept available near the equipment, and such simple tools
are kept separate from utensils that come into contact with foods.



            7.   Equipment intended for in- place cleaning
shall be designed and constructed that:



               a.   Cleaning and sanitizing solutions can
be circulated throughout a fixed system;



               b.   Cleaning and sanitizing solutions will
contact all interior food contact surfaces;



               c.   The system is self draining or
otherwise completely evacuated; and



               d.   Cleaning procedures result in thorough
cleaning of the equipment.



            8.   Surfaces of equipment not intended for
contact with food, but which are exposed to splash, food debris or otherwise
require frequent cleaning, shall be reasonably smooth; washable free of
unnecessary ledges, projections or crevices readily accessible for cleaning;
and of such material and in such repair as to be readily maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition.



            9.   Hard solder (silver solder), when used as a
food contact surface, shall be of such formulation as to be non-toxic under
use conditions; shall be corrosion resistant; and shall, consistent with good
industrial practice in the refining of its constituent elements, be free of
cadmium, toxic amounts of antimony, bismuth and other toxic materials.



         (b)   Equipment installation.



            1.   Equipment which is placed on tables or
counters, unless readily movable, shall be sealed thereto or mounted on legs
or feet at least four inches high, and shall be so installed as to facilitate
the cleaning of equipment and areas adjacent thereto.



            2.   Floor-mounted equipment, unless readily
movable, is closed at the floor; or installed on raised platforms of concrete
or other smooth masonry in such a manner as to prevent liquids or debris from
seeping or settling underneath, between or behind such equipment in spaces
which are not fully open for cleaning and inspection; or such equipment is
elevated at least six inches above the floor on sanitary feet and legs. The
space between adjoining units, and between a unit and the adjacent wall,
shall be closed unless exposed to seepage, in which event it shall be sealed;
or sufficient space shall be provided to facilitate easy cleaning between,
behind, and beside all such equipment.



            3.   All sewer and/or water connected fixtures and
equipment are installed so as to preclude the backflow or backsiphonage of
waste water into the fixture or equipment or into the water supply or
distribution system; and are in compliance with the backflow protection
requirements of the State Plumbing Code.



   (D)   Cleanliness, cleaning and sanitization and storage of
equipment and utensils.



      (1)   General. All equipment and utensils, including display
cases or windows, preparation tables, refrigerators, walk-in coolers,
freezers, sinks, counters, shelving, mixers, grinders, slicers, saws and
display and preparation utensils shall be kept clean and free from dust,
dirt, food soil accumulations insects and other contaminating materials. Food
contact surfaces shall be effectively sanitized after being washed to remove
visible soil. Cleaned and sanitized utensils and equipment shall be stored so
as to be protected from flies, dust and other contamination and utensils
shall be handled in such a manner as to minimize contamination.
Single-service utensils shall be purchased in sanitary containers, shall be
stored therein in a clean, dry place until used, shall be dispensed and
handled in a sanitary manner and shall be used only once.



      (2)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   Adequate facilities and equipment are provided for
effective cleansing and sanitizing.



            1.   Sinks of sufficient size and capacity are
provided so as to immerse the largest utensil or implement used. Large tubs
and containers that may be washed and sanitized separately shall not be used
to determine sink size.



            2.   A minimum of two compartments and a
drainboard are provided.



         (b)   Utensils and food contact surfaces of equipment
used in the preparation, display and storage of food are thoroughly cleaned
and sanitized after each usage or at sufficiently frequent intervals during
continuous operation to prevent the growth and multiplication of
microorganisms. Cleaning and sanitation shall consist of:



            1.   Washing in warm water containing a sufficient
amount of detergent to remove greases, solids and visible soil;



            2.   After cleaning immersion in clean, hot water
of at least 170°F for a period of one-half minute;



            3.   Immersion in a water bath containing at least
100 parts per million at all times of available chlorine; or



            4.   Any other method approved by the Health
Officer.



         (c)   Non-food contact surfaces of all equipment are
cleaned at such frequency as is necessary to be free of accumulations of
dust, dirt, food particles and other debris.



         (d)   Food-contact surfaces of cleaned and sanitized
utensils and equipment are handled in such a manner so as to be protected
from contamination.



         (e)   Cleaned and sanitized portable and removable
equipment and utensils are stored above the floor in a clean, dry location
and suitable space and facilities are provided for such storage so that
food-contact surfaces are protected from splash, dust and other contamination.



         (f)   Food-contact surfaces of fixed equipment are
cleaned and swab sanitized in place and are protected from splash, dust and
other contamination.



         (g)   Utensils are air dried before being stored or are
stored in a self draining position on suitably located hooks or racks
constructed of corrosion-resistant material, where practical, stored utensils
and containers are covered or inverted.



         (h)   Single-service articles are used only once and are
received, stored, handled and dispensed in a sanitary manner.



   (E)   Health and cleanliness of employees.



      (1)   General.



         (a)   No person who is affected with any disease in a
communicable form or is a carrier of such disease shall work in any food
store. If the owner or manager suspects that any employee has contracted any
disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such diseases he or
she shall exclude the employee from the premises or notify the Health Officer
immediately.



         (b)   All employees shall wear clean outer garments and
shall keep their hands and fingernails clean at all times while engaged in
the handling of food, utensils or equipment. Employees shall not expectorate
or use tobacco in any form in rooms in which food is prepared or processed or
in which utensils are washed, sanitized or stored.



      (2)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   No person while affected with a disease in a
communicable form or while a carrier of such a disease, or while afflicted
with boils, wounds or an acute respiratory infection is working in the food
store in an area and capacity in which there is a likelihood of transmission
of disease to patrons or to fellow employees, either through direct contact
or through contamination of food or food-contact surfaces with pathogenic
organisms.



         (b)   All employees must thoroughly wash their hands and
arms with soap and warm water before starting work and during work hours as
often as may be required to remove soil and contamination, as well as after
visiting the toilet room.



         (c)   The hands of all employees are kept clean while
engaged in handling food and food-contact surfaces and fingernails are clean
and neatly trimmed.



         (d)   The outer garments of all employees engaged in
handling food, utensils and equipment are reasonably clean, and employees
maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness and conform to good hygienic
practices during all working periods.



   (F)   Toilet facilities.



      (1)   General. Every food store shall have adequate and
convenient toilet and handwashing facilities for its employees. Toilet and
lavatory fixtures shall be of sanitary design, readily cleanable and
maintained in a clean condition and in good repair. The doors of all toilet
rooms shall be self-closing. Toilet tissue shall be provided. Easily
cleanable receptacles shall be provided for waste materials, and such
receptacles in toilet rooms for women shall be covered. Lavatories shall be
provided with hot and cold running water, hand cleansing soap or detergent
and approved sanitary towels or other approved hand drying devices. When
toilet facilities are provided for patrons, such facilities shall meet the
requirements of this section.



      (2)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   Toilet facilities are adequate, of sanitary
design, conveniently located and are accessible to employees at all times.



         (b)   Toilet facilities are installed in accordance with
the requirements of the State Plumbing Code and applicable local regulations.



         (c)   Toilet rooms are completely enclosed and have
tight-fitting, self-closing doors. Toilet rooms vented to the outside air by
mechanical exhaust systems may be provided with doors that contain screened
louvers.



         (d)   Easily cleanable waste receptacles are provided
and such receptacles are emptied at least once a day and more frequently when
necessary to prevent excessive accumulation of waste materials.



         (e)   Lavatories are located within or immediately
adjacent to all toilet rooms. If toilet rooms are not readily accessible,
handwashing facilities are provided within or adjacent to food preparation or
processing areas. Handwashing facilities are provided in food preparation
areas in all food stores constructed after the effective date of this chapter.



         (f)   Each lavatory is provided with hot and cold or
tempered running water. A mixing valve or combination faucet is recommended
and is provided in new installations.



         (g)   Toilet tissue, hand cleansing soap or detergent
and sanitary towels or approved hand drying devices are conveniently
available and provided in adequate supply or number. Common towels shall not
be used.



         (h)   Toilet fixtures, lavatories, soap dispensers, hand
drying devices and all other components of the toilet facilities and the
toilet rooms are maintained clean and in good repair.



   (G)   Water supply.



      (1)   General.



         (a)   The water supply shall be adequate, of a safe,
sanitary quality and from an approved source. Hot and cold running water,
under pressure, shall be provided in all areas where food is prepared,
processed or handled, or utensils, equipment or containers are washed.



         (b)   Ice used for any purpose shall be made from water
which comes from an approved source, and shall be used only if it has been
manufactured, stored, transported and handled in a sanitary manner.



      (2)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   Hot and cold running water, under pressure is
provided in all areas where food is prepared or processed and where utensils
or equipment are washed; except that, produce washing sinks need not be
provided with hot water.



         (b)   The potable water-supply piping is not directly
connected with any non-potable water-supply system whereby the non-potable
water can be drawn or discharged into the potable water-supply system.



         (c)   The water system and all water supplied or
connected fixtures or equipment are protected by air gaps or appropriately
located vacuum breakers where needed, against the possibility of backflow or
backsiphonage and are otherwise in compliance with the City Plumbing Code.



   (H)   Disposal of refuse and other wastes.



      (1)   General. Proper disposal shall be made of all waste. All
garbage and refuse shall be stored in suitable containers and in such a
manner as not to become a nuisance. Gaseous wastes shall not cause a nuisance.



      (2)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   Solid wastes.



            1.   All garbage and other refuse containing food
waste is kept in containers constructed of durable metal or other approved
material that does not leak or absorb liquid, provided with tight-fitting
lids or covers and is, unless kept in a special vermin-proofed room or
enclosure or in a waste refrigerator, kept covered when stored or not in
continuous use.



            2.   After being emptied, containers are
thoroughly cleaned on the inside and outside in a manner so as not to
contaminate food, equipment, utensils or food preparation areas.



            3.   Food stores constructed after the effective
date of this chapter are provided with adequate facilities for washing refuse
containers, such as a washing platform or sink provided with running water
and a proper drain and brushes that are used for no other purpose.



            4.   Waste storage rooms or enclosures if provided
are constructed of easily cleanable, washable materials, are vermin proof and
are cleaned regularly.



            5.   Refuse storage areas, inside and outside, are
clean and do not constitute a nuisance.



            6.   Other refuse and rubbish is stored in a
manner approved by the Health Officer, is removed regularly, and does not
constitute a nuisance.



            7.   All garbage and refuse is disposed of daily,
or at such other frequencies as may be approved by the Health Officer and in
such a manner as to prevent a nuisance.



         (b)   Gaseous wastes.



            1.   Vents, exhaust ducts and smoke stacks are not
located in close proximity to windows or air intake vents of adjacent
structures.



            2.   Incinerators are of approved design and are
operated in accordance with the regulations of the State Air Pollution
Control Board.



            3.   Areas around incinerators are kept in a clean
and orderly condition.



   (I)   Floors.



      (1)   General. The floors of all rooms shall be of such
construction as to be easily cleaned and shall be kept clean and in good
repair.



      (2)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   The floors of all rooms in which food is prepared,
stored, handled, processed or in which utensils are washed, and toilet rooms,
are of such construction as to be easily cleanable, are smooth, non-absorbent
and are kept clean and in good



repair; except that, the floors of non-refrigerated, dry-food-storage areas
need not be non-absorbent.



         (b)   The floors of rooms in which food is displayed for
sale are of a material that can be readily cleaned and are kept clean and in
good repair.



         (c)   All floors are kept clean, free of filth, oil,
litter and soil accumulations. Dustless methods of floor cleaning are used,
all, except emergency, cleaning is done during those periods when the least
amount of food is exposed, and adequate cleaning facilities, including
service sinks, are provided.



         (d)   The floors hereafter installed in food
preparation, processing and utensil washing rooms, and in walk-in
refrigerators dressing or locker rooms and toilet rooms are coved at the
juncture between the floor and the base of walls.



   (J)   Walls and ceilings.



      (1)   General. Walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept
clean and in good repair.



      (2)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   All walls and ceilings of rooms in which food is
prepared or processed or in which utensils are washed, and toilet rooms have
a smooth, washable surface and are finished in a light color.



         (b)   All walls and ceilings are clean and in good
repair.



         (c)   Acoustical materials, easily washable with water,
may be used on ceilings, provided ventilation is adequate to minimize grease
and moisture absorption.



   (K)   Doors and windows.



      (1)   General. When flies are prevalent, all openings to the
outside shall be effectively screened and doors shall be self-closing, unless
other effective means are provided to prevent the entrance of flies. Doors,
windows and screens shall be kept clean.



      (2)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   All openings to the outside are effectively
screened and all screen doors are self-closing and in good repair.



         (b)   Air curtains with air velocities sufficient to
prevent the entrance of flies are in use at all otherwise ineffectively
protected openings.



         (c)   Flies are absent.



         (d)   Window, door, transom and skylight screens are
tight-fitting and free from holes.



         (e)   Doors, windows and screens are clean.



   (L)   Lighting.



      (1)   General. All rooms in which food is prepared processed
or stored, or in which utensils are washed, and toilet rooms shall be kept
adequately lighted.



      (2)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   Artificial light sources provide approximately 50
foot-candles of illumination on all working surfaces in rooms in which food
is processed or prepared or in which utensils are washed, except when
equivalent natural light is present.



         (b)   Storage and toilet rooms are provided with
illumination sufficient to provide 20 foot-candles at a height 30 inches
above the floor.



   (M)   Ventilation.



      (1)   General. All rooms in which food is prepared processed,
stored or sold or in which utensils are washed shall be adequately ventilated.



      (2)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   All rooms are reasonably free of odors, excess
heat and water vapor.



         (b)   Toilet rooms are vented directly to the outside
air in conformance with local building regulations.



   (N)   Vermin control.



      (1)   General. Adequate means for the elimination of flies,
roaches, rodents and other insects and vermin shall be taken.



      (2)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   The premises are reasonably rat proof.



         (b)   All openings to the outside are effectively
screened or provided with self-closing doors or other effective vermin
control devices and the premises are maintained reasonably tight so as to
minimize vermin entrance.



         (c)   Pesticides and other toxic or poisonous substances
are used and stored such that they do not present a hazard to employees or
customers and will not contaminate foods or food contact surfaces.



   (O)   Miscellaneous.



      (1)   General. The premises of all food markets shall be kept
clean and free from litter and rubbish. None of the operations connected with
the food market shall be conducted in any room used as living or sleeping
quarters or in any room which opens directly into living or sleeping
quarters. Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall be provided for
employees’ clothing and shall be kept clean. Soiled linens, coats and
aprons shall be kept in containers provided for this purpose.



      (2)   Satisfactory compliance.



         (a)   The premises are clean and free of litter and
rubbish.



         (b)   None of the operations connected with the
establishment are conducted in any room used as living or sleeping quarters
or in any room which opens directly into living or sleeping quarters.



         (c)   Dressing rooms or locker rooms or other suitable
storage spaces are provided for employees’ clothing and are kept clean.



         (d)   Containers are provided and soiled linens, coats
and aprons are kept therein.



(Prior Code, § 17-11)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.25  FOOD STORES WHICH MAY OPERATE.



   (A)   General. From and after 12 months of the effective date of
this chapter, no existing food store shall continue to operate within the
city unless it conforms with the requirements of this chapter; provided that,
equipment and facilities, installed in a food store prior to the effective
date of this chapter, which do not meet fully all of the design and
construction requirements of this section, shall be deemed acceptable in that
establishment if they are in good repair, capable of being maintained in a
sanitary condition and the food-contact surfaces are non-toxic.



   (B)   New food stores. All food stores which are hereafter
constructed, reconstructed or extensively altered shall conform in such
construction to the requirements of this chapter. New and replacement
equipment shall meet the requirements of this chapter as to construction and
installation.



   (C)   Plan review-new construction. Properly prepared plans,
including equipment specifications and installation layouts, shall be
submitted to the Health Officer for review and approval before work is begun
on the construction of new food stores or the reconstruction or extensive
alteration of existing ones.



(Prior Code, § 17-12)



§ 113.26  FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.



   Food from food-service establishments outside the jurisdiction of the
city may be sold within the city if such food-service establishments conform
to the provisions of this chapter or to substantially equivalent provisions.
To determine the extent of compliance with such provisions, the Health
Officer may accept reports from the responsible authority in other
jurisdictions where such food-service establishments are located.



(Prior Code, § 17-13)



§ 113.27  PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION IS SUSPECTED.



   (A)   When the Health Officer has reasonable cause to suspect the
possibility of disease transmission from any food-service establishment or
employee he or she shall make such investigation as may be indicated
including the morbidity history of suspected employees and take appropriate
action.



   (B)   The Health Officer may require any or all of the following
measures:



      (1)   The immediate closure of the food-service establishment
concerned until, in the opinion of the Health Officer, no further danger of
disease outbreak exists;



      (2)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from all
food-service establishments;



      (3)   Restriction of the employee’s services to some area of
the establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease; and



      (4)   Adequate medical and laboratory examinations of the
employee, of other employees and of his, her and their body discharges.



(Prior Code, § 17-14)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§ 113.01
through 113.05 of this chapter shall be fined not more than $750 for each day
that the violation exists. Each and every violation of the provisions of §§
113.01 through 113.05 of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition, any cost of collection of fines or other amounts due to the city
under this division (B) may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99 of this
code or ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 17-6)



   (C)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§ 113.20
through 113.27 of this chapter shall be fined not more than $750 for each day
that the violation exists. Each and every violation shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition, any cost of collection of fines or other
amounts due to the city under this division (C) may be assessed in accordance
with § 10.99 of this code or ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 17-15)



(Ord. 815, passed 4-17-1971; Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)



CHAPTER 114:  JUNK



Section




General Provisions




   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Charitable organizations excepted



   114.03   Enforcement and interpretation



   114.04   Stolen goods



   114.05   Purchase from minors



   114.06   Inspection and protection from view



   114.07   Location; frontage consents




Licenses




   114.20   License required for junk yard



   114.21   License required for vehicles



   114.22   Fees; junk yard



   114.23   Fees; vehicles



   114.24   Applications for license



   114.25   Residence of applicant




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   JUNK SHOP. Any place where second hand furniture, junk, clothing,
jewelry, rags, old metal and miscellaneous articles of personal property are
bought or sold, and where all such articles are kept in a building or
buildings. This definition shall not be designed to include sale of
secondhand furniture where such furniture is taken in on trade by a dealer
and disposed of, such business not being the main business in which the
seller is engaged.



   JUNK YARD. Any place where miscellaneous junk, rags, old metal or iron
are kept upon premises partly within and partly outside the confines of a
building. JUNK YARDS shall also include automobile wrecking yards where
automobiles are wrecked, parts sold, and the balance disposed of for junk. It
shall not be construed to include an automobile sales yard wherein no cars
are wrecked.



   PAPER DEALER. One who engages only in the collecting, baling and
selling of paper.



(Prior Code, § 21-1)



§ 114.02  CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS EXCEPTED.



   This chapter shall not be construed to include charitable organizations.



(Prior Code, § 21-2)



§ 114.03  ENFORCEMENT AND INTERPRETATION.



   This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 21-3)



§ 114.04  STOLEN GOODS.



   Every keeper of a junk shop who shall receive or be in possession of
any goods, articles or things of value which may have been lost or stolen
shall upon demand produce such article or thing to any member of the Police
Department for examination.



(Prior Code, § 21-22)



§ 114.05  PURCHASE FROM MINORS.



   No person, firm or corporation having a license from said city to keep
a second hand store or junk shop or junk yard shall purchase or receive from
minors without written consent of the parents or guardians any article or
property whatsoever, and any person, firm or corporation violating this
section shall not be eligible to receive a license from the city thereafter.



(Prior Code, § 21-23)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.06  INSPECTION AND PROTECTION FROM VIEW.



   (A)   The Police Department and the City Health Officer shall have
power to inspect the premises of any holder of a license issued under this
chapter or any vehicle engaged in such business.



   (B)   The City Council may, by resolution, provide that junk yards
be concealed from public view by the erection of a suitable fence or
planting, or a structure as may be approved by the Director of Building and
Zoning.



(Prior Code, § 21-24)



§ 114.07  LOCATION; FRONTAGE CONSENTS.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall locate, build, construct,
operate or maintain any junk yard, or store any junk in violation of the
zoning ordinance of the city, or (unless such material originates on the
premises) in any block in the city where a majority of the houses abutting on
both sides of the street in the block are used exclusively for residence
purposes without having first secured the written consent of the owners of a
majority of the frontage abutting on such street on both sides within such
block.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      BLOCK. The portion of the street between the two intersections
with other public streets nearest the specified location on each side;
provided that, if, on either or both sides of such location, there is no such
intersection within 300 feet of the center of the specified location, the
block shall be considered as terminating at a point 300 feet from such center.



      STREET. Such highways as have been dedicated by either common law
or statutory dedication as public streets and are actually in use as such;
and the term shall not be construed to include or mean merely service
highways which are commonly known as alleys.



(Prior Code, § 21-25)




LICENSES




§ 114.20  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR JUNK YARD.



   It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business of keeper of a
junk yards, junk shop, store or place, for the purchase or sale of junk,
rags, old repel paper or bagging, old iron, brass, copper or empty bottles
without having obtained a license therefor as is herein provided.



(Prior Code, § 21-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.21  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle for the collection or
distribution of junk without having a license therefor as herein provided. If
the operator of said vehicle also has a junk yard in the city, said license
shall be in addition to the license for said junk yard.



(Prior Code, § 21-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.22  FEES; JUNK YARD.



   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to operate and maintain a junk
shop or junk yard for the purpose of collecting, selling, delivering or
distributing junk, shall pay the sum as set out in the fee schedule for an
annual license. Each paper dealer collecting or storing paper for sale shall
pay a license fee as set out in the fee schedule for an annual license.



(Prior Code, § 21-12)



§ 114.23  FEES; VEHICLES.



   Each junk dealer or junk shop or paper dealer collecting by vehicle
shall pay a license fee as set out in the fee schedule per year for each
vehicle used. The daily license fee shall be as set out in the fee schedule.
Upon the issuance of a license for each vehicle, track wagon or push cart,
there shall be assigned by the City Clerk a plate or sticker stating the
number and nature of the license and the year for which used, said plate or
sticker to be firmly affixed so as to be readily visible on the vehicle so
used.



(Prior Code, § 21-13)



§ 114.24  APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE.



   Applications for such licenses shall be made in conformance with the
provisions of the ordinances relating to licenses.



(Prior Code, § 21-14)



§ 114.25  RESIDENCE OF APPLICANT.



   No license shall be granted to any keeper of a junk shop or junk yard
unless the applicant for such license shall leave resided in the city for
more than one year immediately prior to such application.



(Prior Code, § 21-15)



CHAPTER 115:  MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS



Section




Milk Production and Distribution




   115.01   Adoption of Lake County Milk Ordinance



   115.02   Health Officer



   115.03   Permits and licenses



   115.04   Inspections



   115.05   Enforcement and interpretation



 



   115.99   Penalty




MILK PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION




§ 115.01  ADOPTION OF LAKE COUNTY MILK ORDINANCE.



   There is hereby adopted by reference, as the rules and regulations for
milk production and distribution in the city, the Lake County Board of Health
Ordinance, Article IV, Regulation of Milk and Milk Products, in effect on
June 13, 1960, except § 16 thereof, as amended by the county.



(Prior Code, § 24-1)



§ 115.02  HEALTH OFFICER.



   All references in Article IV of the County Board of Health Ordinance to
the “Health Officer” shall mean the duly appointed Health Officer of the
city or his or her authorized representative.



(Prior Code, § 24-2)



§ 115.03  PERMITS AND LICENSES.



   (A)   Permits.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to send into, bring
into or receive in the city for sale, or to sell, or offer for sale therein,
or to have in storage where milk or milk products are sold or served, any
milk or milk products defined in this subchapter, who does not possess a
permit from the County Health Department.



      (2)   Only persons who comply with the requirements of this
subchapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit.



   (B)   Licenses.



      (1)   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in sale,
delivery or distribution of milk or milk products within the city without
first obtaining a license therefor as herein provided.



      (2)   Such license may be revoked by the Health Officer upon
the violation by the licensee of any of the provisions of this subchapter or
of any of the rules and regulations pertaining thereto or in an emergency
when, in the judgment of the Health Officer, the milk or milk products
handled by the licensee has or may become a public health menace.



   (C)   Applications. Persons desiring to engage in the sale, delivery
or distribution of milk or milk products within the city shall make written
application to the Health Officer of the city, who may authorize the issuance
of a license upon satisfactory proof that applicant is entitled hereunder to
such license.



   (D)   Fees. The annual fees for the various licenses for engaging in
the business of the sale, delivery and distribution of milk and milk products
in the city shall be as follows:



      (1)   For engaging in the business of the delivery, or
distribution of milk, the sum as set out in the fee schedule for each vehicle
employed in such delivery or distribution;



      (2)   For retail business where milk is sold or kept on the
premises, except where a food dealer’s license has been issued the sum as
set out in the fee schedule; and



      (3)   For each milk vending machine, the sum as set out in the
fee schedule.



   (E)   Display of sticker. Any person engaged in the business of
delivering or distributing milk or milk products within the city shall have
displayed on each vehicle engaged in such business a milk dealer’s license
plate or sticker issued by the city.



   (F)   Display of certificate. Any person who shall engage in the
wholesale or retail milk business in the city shall cause his or her license
certificate to be placed and to remain in a conspicuous place in his or her
place of business.



(Prior Code, § 24-3)  (Ord. 1293, passed 4-5-1982; Ord. 1496, passed
4-13-1985)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.04  INSPECTIONS.



   Each person to whom a license is issued shall permit inspection of his
or her vehicles or premises by the Health Officer or his or her authorized
representative.



(Prior Code, § 24-4)



§ 115.05  ENFORCEMENT AND INTERPRETATION.



   This chapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer.



(Prior Code, § 24-5)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§ 115.01
through 115.05 of this chapter shall be fined not more than $750 for each day
that the violation exists. Each and every violation of the provisions of §§
115.01 through 115.05 of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition, any cost of collection of fines or other amounts due to the city
under this division (B) may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99 of this
code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 24-6)  (Ord. 818, passed 4-17-1971; Ord. 03-37, passed
7-7-2003)



CHAPTER 116:  PAWNBROKERS



Section




Licenses




   116.01   License required



   116.02   Application; investigation



   116.03   Fees



   116.04   Minors




Operations




   116.15   Records



   116.16   Weapons



   116.17   Stolen goods



   116.18   Zoning compliance




LICENSES




§ 116.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct or operate the
business of pawnbroker: (i)  without having first been licensed therefor as
is herein provided; or (ii) in violation of any of the provisions herein
contained.



   (B)   Any pawnbroker’s license shall be for a specified premises
as identified on the license, and any pawnbroker operating from more than one
location in the city shall obtain a license for each such location. Any
pawnbroker’s license may be revoked by the Mayor for any violation of any
provision of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 28-11)  (Ord. 2016-60, passed 11-7-2016)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 116.02  APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Applications for pawnbrokers’ licenses shall be made to the
City Clerk, and shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the place of
business and the number of employees intended to be engaged.



   (B)   The application shall include:



      (1)   Application generally. Applications for local pawn
broker licenses shall be made to the Clerk on a form prescribed by the Clerk;
shall be in writing; shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, or by
one of the partners on behalf of all partners if a partnership. by a member
or manager of a limited liability company, or by a duly authorized agent if a
corporation; and shall be verified by an oath or affidavit. Each application
shall specifically identify the applicant and the licensed premises to which
a local pawn broker license would be issued. and the filing of an application
shall authorize the local Chief of Police or agents to conduct all necessary
or appropriate background checks of the applicant and its agents, owners and
representatives.



      (2)   Background information. Each application shall include
the following background information:



         (a)   The name, age, address and social security number
of the applicant; in the case of a partnership, all partners and also of the
persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a
corporation or club, the names and addresses of the officers and directors
and every person owning or controlling more than 5% of the voting shares of
stock or the ownership interest; in the case of a limited liability company,
all members and managers;



         (b)   In the case of an individual, the citizenship and
place of birth of the applicant and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and
place of his or her naturalization. In the case of a corporation, the date
and place of incorporation and the objects for which it was formed and proof
that it is a corporation in good standing and authorized to conduct business
in the state;



         (c)   The character of business of the applicant;



         (d)   The length of time that the applicant has been in
the business of the character specified in response to division (B)(2)(c)
above;



         (e)   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand
at the time application is made;



         (f)   The location and description of the premises for
which a local pawn broker license is sought and the specific name of the
business that is to be operated under such local pawn broker license;



         (g)   The names of each governmental body from which the
applicant (and all other persons identified in division (B)(2)(a) above) has
received a pawn broker license within ten years immediately prior to the date
of the present application; and



         (h)   A telephone number or numbers at which the
licensee or the manager can be contacted 24 hours per day.



      (3)   Statements required.



         (a)   For any license or renewal of a license, the
applicant shall be required to make statements regarding such applicant and
all persons to be identified pursuant to division (B)(2)(a) above. If the
applicant is an individual, that individual shall subscribe to all of the
statements set out below. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner
shall subscribe to all of the statements set out below; provided, however,
that if the applicant is organized as a limited partnership, then the
statement concerning active involvement provided in division (B)(3)(b)6.
below shall be required only of all general partners. If the applicant is a
corporation, each director and officer thereof and every person owning or
controlling more than 5% of the voting shares or the ownership interest of
such corporation shall subscribe to all of the statements set out below. If
the applicant is a limited liability company, each member and manager shall
subscribe to all of the statements set out below.



         (b)   If the business for which a local pawn brokers
license is sought will be managed by a manager or agent, every such manager
or agent shall subscribe to all of the statements set out below. The
submission of false information in regarding the following statements shall
be grounds for denial, revocation or non-renewal of a pawn broker license:



            1.   A statement as to whether or not the
applicant has a current, valid state pawn broker license for the premises
covered by the application (with a copy of such state license included as
part of the application);



            2.   A statement as to whether or not the
applicant has ever been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law;



            3.   A statement as to whether or not the
applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law
or local ordinance concerning fraud or has ever forfeited his or her bond to
appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;



            4.   A statement as to whether the applicant has
ever been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any state or
federal law or regulation or has ever forfeited his or her bond to appear in
court to answer charges for any such violation;



            5.   A statement whether the applicant has made
similar application for a similar license for a premises other than described
in the application, and the disposition of such application;



            6.   A statement as to whether or not the
applicant has had revoked any pawn broker license issued under state or
federal law or under the ordinances of any municipality within ten years
immediately prior to the date of the present application;



            7.   A statement as to whether or not the
applicant has had suspended more than once any pawn broker license issued
under state or federal law or under the ordinances of any municipality within
one year immediately prior to the present application;



            8.   A statement as to whether or not the
applicant is a city employee or a law enforcing official of the city or any
other government or government agency;



            9.   A statement as to whether or not the
applicant has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp for the current tax period;



            10.   A statement as to whether or not a federal
gaming device stamp has been issued for the current taxable year with respect
to the premises for which the local pawn license is sought:



            11.   A statement as to whether or not the
premises for which a local pawn license is sought comprises a store or other
place of business where the majority of customers are under the age of 21
years or where the principal business transacted consists of the sale of
school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such customers;



            12.   A statement as to whether or not the
premises for which a license is sought is within 100 feet of any church
building used for worship or educational purposes, school (other than an
institution of higher learning), hospital, senior citizen housing, daycare
center, nursing or personal care facility or any military or naval station;



            13.   A statement as to whether or not the
applicant is a permanent resident of the city; or



for any applicant that is partnership, all of the general partners of the
partnership are residents of the city;



            14.   A statement as to whether or not the
applicant beneficially owns the premises for which a license is sought or has
a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued;



            15.   A statement as to whether or not the
applicant is the beneficial owner of the business to be licensed;



            16.   A statement as to whether or not the
applicant will be personally and actively involved in the operation of the
business to be licensed;



            17.   A statement as to whether or not the
business is or will be managed by a manager or agent;



            18.   A statement as to the nature of the business
and the amount of anticipated pawn sales as a percentage of gross annual
sales of the business;



            19.   A statement that the applicant is not
disqualified from receiving a license by reason of any matter or item
contained in the laws of the state, this chapter or any other code or
ordinance of the city;



            20.   A statement that the applicant will not
violate any federal or state laws, this chapter or any other code or
ordinance of the city in the conduct of the applicant's business;



            21.   If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a
statement as to whether or not it is qualified under the State Business
Corporations Act of 1983, 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq., to transact business in
the state;



            22.   If the business to be operated pursuant to
the local pawn license is operating under an assumed name, a statement that
the applicant has complied with the state assumed business name act and other
applicable laws; and



            23.   Such other statements or information as may
be necessary to demonstrate that the applicant, the applicant's business and
the premises from which such business will be conducted satisfy all
conditions and requirements applicable to the local pawn license being sought.



   (C)   The Chief of Police or any other officer designated by the
Mayor or by the City Council shall investigate each applicant for such
license, and shall report back whether or not such applicant is a person of
good character; no license shall be issued to any but a person of good
character, nor shall such license be issued to a person who has been
convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods or of burglary or robbery.



(Prior Code, § 28-12)



   (D)   Examination of applicant. At any time during the pendency of
an application, the Chief of Police shall have the right to compel the
applicant to submit to any examination and to produce any books and records
which, in the judgment of the Chief of Police, are material to the
determination of whether the applicant and the applicant's business are
qualified to receive a local pawn license or whether the premises sought to
be licensed is suitable for such purposes. The Chief of Police shall also
have the right to require the applicant to answer any charges made in any
objection to the issuance of the license. The failure of any applicant to
appear at the time and place fixed by the Chief of Police for his or her
examination or to produce books and records requested. unless for good cause
shown, shall be deemed to be admission that the applicant is not qualified to
receive a local pawn broker license and a request to withdraw the application.



   (E)   Investigation and disclosure of information contained in
application; waiver of claims. By applying for, or providing information in
support of an application for, a local pawn broker license, every person so
applying or providing information thereby:



      (1)   Authorizes any person to disclose, and the city to
investigate, all information pertaining to such application;



      (2)   Waives any and all claims against the city; and



      (3)   Agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city and its
elected and appointed officials, officers, boards, Chiefs of Police,
attorneys, employees, agents and representatives from any and all claims
resulting from, or arising out of, or alleged to result from or arise out of
the processing of such application and any investigation related thereto.
Each such person shall consent to and sign any written authorization, waiver
and indemnification agreement as the city may require in connection with the
processing of such application and any investigation related thereto, but no
such separate authorization, waiver, or indemnification shall be required to
make effective the terms of this division (E).



   (F)   Denial or issuance of license. If after review of an
application and all relevant facts, the Chief of Police determines that the
application should be denied, the Chief of Police shall notify the applicant
within a reasonable time, in writing, stating the reasons for the denial, but
otherwise shall issue the local pawn license as soon as all fees required by
this chapter have been paid and all other requirements of this chapter have
been satisfied.



   (G)   Supplemental information following issuance. Any change in
information provided on, or in connection with, any application for a pawn
license that does or might affect the right of any licensee to continue to
hold a local pawn license shall be reported in writing to the Chief of Police
within ten days after the change. All such changes shall be subject to review
and approval by the Chief of Police in the same manner as the original
application. When any such change affects the ownership of any partnership
licensee or any director, officer, manager or person owning or controlling
more than 5% of the shares of any corporate licensee, all such persons that
have not previously submitted information pursuant to the application process
shall, within ten days after such change, submit all information required of
a new applicant.



   (H)   Waiver of application requirements. The City Manager may, in
consultation with the Chief of Police, waive some or all of the license
application requirements set forth in this chapter provided that the City
Manager determines that such waived portion of the application requirements
will not impact the public health, safety, or welfare. Grounds for such
waiver may include without limitation evidence of a pawn license having been
previously approved or substantial identity between a current pawn license
holder and an applicant for another pawn license.



(Ord. 2016-60, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 116.03  FEES.



   (A)   The annual fee to be paid for a pawnbroker’s license shall
be as set out in the fee schedule.



   (B)   This fee shall be payable in advance and no license shall be
issued until the fee is paid.



(Prior Code, § 28-13)



§ 116.04  MINORS.



   No pawnbroker’s license shall be issued to any person who is not 21
years of age or over; and no pawnbroker shall employ a person of less than 21
years of age to assist him or her in his or her business.



(Prior Code, § 28-14)  (Ord. 2016-60, passed 11-7-2016)




OPERATIONS




§ 116.15  RECORDS.



   Every pawnbroker doing business in the city shall keep a record of
every article pledged with him or her or sold to him or her, and this record
shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at any time during
business hours.



(Prior Code, § 28-21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.16  WEAPONS.



   No pawnbroker shall receive, as a pledge, or purchase any blackjack or
firearm.



(Prior Code, § 28-22)  (Ord. 2016-60, passed 11-7-2016)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 116.17  STOLEN GOODS.



   It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any
article pledged with him or her or which it is sought to pledge with him or
her if he or she shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen.



(Prior Code, § 28-23)



§ 116.18  ZONING COMPLIANCE.



   Any business to be operated pursuant to the local pawn license must
obtain a certificate of zoning compliance as a condition to the issuance of
any license under this chapter and in connection with any change of use,
expansion of uses on a site, or the issuance of any building permits.



(Ord. 2016-60, passed 11-7-2016)



CHAPTER 117:  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSING



Section




Peddlers




   117.01   License required



   117.02   Exemptions



   117.03   Applications



   117.04   Fraud



   117.05   Sales from vehicles




Transient Merchants and Itinerant Vendors




   117.20   Transient merchants and itinerant vendors




Solicitors




   117.35   Purpose



   117.36   Definitions



   117.37   Solicitation permit; required



   117.38   Solicitation permit; issuance, revocation and renewal



   117.39   Permit application; contents



   117.40   Permit application; fees



   117.41   City policy on soliciting and trespassing



   117.42   Notice regulating soliciting



   117.43   Duty of solicitors to obey notice or to leave when requested



   117.44   Uninvited solicitors prohibited



   117.45   Time limit on soliciting



   117.46   Soliciting on highways or streets



   117.47   Appeal of permit denial or revocation



   117.48   False application



   117.49   Additional requirements



   117.50   Severability



 



   117.99   Penalty




PEDDLERS




§ 117.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   lt shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
engage in the business of hawker or peddler in the city without first having
obtained a license as herein provided.



   (B)   The fee for a peddler or hawker using a cart, wagon, auto or
any other vehicle shall be as set out in the fee schedule for each cart or
other vehicle for a yearly license; a fee as set out in the fee schedule for
each cart or other vehicle for a monthly license; and a fee as set out in the
fee schedule for each cart or other vehicle for a daily license. The fee for
peddlers and hawkers not using any vehicle shall be as set out in the fee
schedule for a yearly license; a fee as set out in the fee schedule for a
monthly license; and a fee as set out in the fee schedule for a daily license.



(Prior Code, § 29-11)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.02  EXEMPTIONS.



   No license fee shall be required from any person from whom the city is
prohibited by state or federal law from requiring a license fee.



(Prior Code, § 29-12)



§ 117.03  APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for peddlers’ and hawkers’ licenses shall be made to
the City Clerk, and shall state thereon the number of vehicles, if any,
intended to be operated; the kind of article or merchandise to be peddle; and
a permanent address of the peddler. No license shall be issued without the
payment of the fee provided for in § 117.01 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 29-13)



§ 117.04  FRAUD.



   Any licensed peddler or hawker who shall be guilty of any fraud,
cheating or misrepresentation, either through himself or herself or through
an employee, while acting as a peddler in the city; or who shall barter, or
sell or peddle any goods, wares or merchandise other than those specified in
his or her application for a license shall be fined not less than $5 nor more
than $750 for each offense, and the Mayor may revoke his or her license for
such offense. In addition, any cost of collection of fines or other amounts
due to the city under this section may be assessed in accordance with §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 29-14)  (Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003) Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.05  SALES FROM VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares,
merchandise or any food or beverage for human consumption, from any motor
vehicle or any vehicle or cart of any kind, on any public street or sidewalk
in the city.



(Prior Code, § 29-15)  Penalty, see § 117.99




TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND ITINERANT VENDORS




§ 117.20  TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND ITINERANT VENDORS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ITINERANT VENDOR. Any person who transports tangible personal
property for retail sale within the city who does not maintain in the city an
established office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse, service
center or residence from which such business is conducted. However, this act
does not apply to any person who delivers tangible personal property within
the city who is fulfilling an order for such property which was solicited or
placed by mail or other means. This subchapter does not apply to any person
holding a valid license issued by a county or municipality to engage in
retail sales.



      PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, firm,
association or other entity.



      TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person who is engaged temporarily in the
retail sale of goods, wares or merchandise in the city and who, for the
purpose of conducting such business, occupies any building, room, vehicle,
structure of any kind or vacant lot. However, this subchapter does not apply
to any person selling goods, wares or merchandise which are raised, produced
or manufactured by him or her, to any person selling vegetables, fruit or
perishable farm products at an established city or village market, to any
person operating a store or refreshment stand at a resort, to any person
operating a stand or booth on or adjacent to property owned by him or her or
upon which he or she resides, or to any person operating a stand or booth at
a state or county fair. This subchapter does not apply to any person holding
a valid license issued by a county or municipality to engage in retail sales.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to do business in the city as a transient
merchant or itinerant vendor without having first secured a license therefor
from the Police Department of the city which is hereby declared to be the
licensing agency for transient merchants and itinerant vendors.



   (C)   The license application shall include the applicant’s name,
permanent business address, which just include a street address, residence
address of the principal and if the applicant is a corporation the residence
address of its officers, the location at which the applicant intends to do
business, the nature of the business the applicant intends to conduct, a copy
of the applicant’s certificate of registration under the Retailer’s
Occupation Tax Act, a complete inventory of the goods the applicant intends
to offer for sale, and a list of all licenses to conduct business as a
transient merchant or an itinerant vendor obtained by the applicant in the
city in the 12 months preceding the date of filing the application.



   (D)   The applicant shall file with the Police Department a surety
bond or cash deposit. The amount of the bond or cash deposit shall be equal
to 50% of the wholesale value of the merchandise that the applicant intends
to offer for sale; however, the amount of the bond or cash deposit shall not
be as set out in the fee schedule.



   (E)   The Police Department shall transfer the deposit or bond to
the Attorney General of the state within 14 days after the applicant ceases
to do business in the city and the Attorney General shall hold such deposit
or bond for two years for the benefit of any person who suffers loss or
damages as a result of the purchase of merchandise from said person licensed
under this subchapter or as a result of the negligent or intentionally
tortuous act of the person licensed under this subchapter. The Attorney
General shall pay any portion of the bond or deposit to any person in
accordance with the order of the Court without making an independent finding
as to the amount of the bond or deposit that is payable to that person. Any
balance of said deposit held by the Attorney General two years after the
expiration of a license of a person under this subchapter shall be refunded
to the person.



   (F)   A license under this subchapter shall expire on December 31 of
the year it was issued. The Police Department shall collect a license
application fee of as set out in the fee schedule from any person wishing to
conduct business as either a transient merchant or itinerant vendor under
this subchapter.



   (G)   If any person makes retail sales as a transient merchant or
itinerant vendor without having obtained a license under this subchapter, the
Police Department may hold the inventory, truck or other personal property of
the person until he or she obtains a license to conduct business as a
transient merchant or itinerant vendor. If the property has been held by the
Police Department for more than 60 days and the person whose property is
being held has not obtained a license under this subchapter, the Police
Department may petition the Circuit Court for an order for the sale of
property being held. If the Court finds that the person whose property is
held has not obtained a license under this subchapter, the Court may order
the Police Department to sell the property. Proceeds of the sale of the
property, less reimbursement to the Police Department for the reasonable
expenses of storage and sale of the property, shall be deposited in the
treasury of the city.



   (H)   It shall be prima facie evidence that a person is a transient
merchant or itinerant vendor under this subchapter if the person does not
transact business from a fixed location or if the person does not own or
lease for a term of at least six months the property from which the business
is conducted.



(Prior Code, § 29-22)  (Ord. 1990-49, passed 9-10-1990)  Penalty, see §
117.99




SOLICITORS




§ 117.35  PURPOSE.



   lt is the declared purpose of this subchapter to prevent crime and
protect the health and safety of city citizens; to ensure that the Police
Department is aware of the number and identity of persons who will be
soliciting for commercial, religious and charitable purposes and the
geographic area and time periods in and during which such activities will
occur within the city; and to prevent the imitation of religious and
charitable purposes and organizations by unscrupulous individuals who would
defraud the public and cause religious and charitable purposes and
organizations to be endangered by the suspicions engendered by such
practices, and to protect the welfare, safety, peace, comfort and convenience
of the public in their homes and traveling upon the streets, highways and
sidewalks within the city.



(Prior Code, § 29-31)



§ 117.36  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE. The words patriotic, philanthropic, social services,
welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal, either actual or
purported.



   COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION. Any one or more of the following activities:



      (1)   The sale of, or seeking to obtain orders for the
purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, food stuff or services of any kind,
character or description, for any kind of consideration whatever;



      (2)   The sale of, or seeking to obtain prospective customers
for any application or purchase of insurance of any type or kind or
character; or



      (3)   The sale of, or seeking to obtain subscriptions to
books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers or any other type or kind of
publications.



   CONTRIBUTIONS. Alms, food, clothing, money, subscription, property or
donations under the guise of a loan of money or property.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company,
association or joint stock, association, church, religious sect, religious
denomination, society, organization or league, and includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof.



   RELIGIOUS and RELIGION. Shall not mean and include the word
“charitable”, as herein defined, but shall be given their commonly
accepted definitions.



   RELIGIOUS OR CHARITABLE SOLICITATION.



      (1)   The request, by a person on sidewalks, and at residences
within the city, directly or indirectly of money, credit, property, financial
assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that such
money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be
used for a religious or charitable purpose as those purposes are defined in
this subchapter. These words shall also mean and include the following
methods of securing money, credit, property, financial assistance or other
thing of value on the plea or representation that it will be used for a
religious or charitable purpose as herein defined:



         (a)   Any oral or written request or exchange of
religious literature for money or other thing or value;



         (b)   The distribution, circulation, posting or
publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or publication;



         (c)   The public making of any announcement concerning
an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sports event, bazaar benefit, campaign,
contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party,
performance, picnic, sale or social gathering to be held within the city,
which the public is requested to patronize or to which the public is
requested to make a contribution for any religious or charitable purpose
connected therewith;



         (d)   The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, any
advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device,
magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing in
connection with which any appeal is made for any religious or charitable
purpose or where the name of any religious or charitable person is used or
referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such
sale, or when or where in connection with any such sale, any statement is
made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sate will go or
be donated to any religious or charitable purpose.



      (2)   A solicitation, as defined herein, shall be deemed
completed when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any
contribution or makes any sale referred to in this section.



   RESIDENCE. Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes
by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.



(Prior Code, § 29-32)  (Ord. 1555, passed 11-16-1985)



§ 117.37  SOLICITATION PERMIT; REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every person desiring to engage in commercial, charitable or
religious solicitation as defined in this subchapter from persons in
residences, or on sidewalks located in the city, except for a merchant
conducting a sale on the sidewalk immediately adjacent to his or her place of
business, is hereby required to make written application for a solicitation
permit as hereinafter provided, and obtain such permit prior to engaging in
solicitation within the city.



   (B)   Application for solicitation permits shall be made upon a form
provided by, and shall be submitted to, the City Clerk, and shall be
accompanied by such other documentation as is required herein.



   (C)   All statements made by the applicant upon the application or
in connection therewith shall be under oath.



   (D)   The City Clerk and the Chief of Police shall cause to be kept
in their offices an accurate record of every application received and acted
upon, together with all other information and date pertaining thereto, and
copies of all solicitation permits issued under the provisions of this
subchapter. Applications for permits shall be numbered in consecutive order,
as filed, and every permit issued any renewal thereof shall be identified
with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued.



   (E)   No solicitation permit permitting door-to-door residential
solicitation shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the
commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or
federal law of the United States, or misconduct which constitutes a Class A
misdemeanor under the state law, within five years of the date of the permit
application. No solicitation permit shall be issued to any person who has
been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter,
nor to any person whose solicitation permit issued hereunder has previously
been revoked, as herein provided, for a period of one year from the date of
such conviction or revocation.



(Prior Code, § 29-33)



§ 117.38  SOLICITATION PERMIT; ISSUANCE, REVOCATION AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   The City Clerk, within seven business days of filing of the
application, after consideration of the application and all information
obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if the applicant is not
entitled to a permit, pursuant to the provisions of § 117.37(E) of this
chapter or if the application does not contain all of the information and
documentation required in this section. Endorsement shall be made by the City
Clerk on the application of the reason for the denial of the application. If
the applicant has complied with all the provisions of § 117.37 and this
section, the solicitation permit shall be issued forthwith. If the
application is denied, the license fee shall be deemed to have covered the
cost of investigation and shall not be returned.



   (B)   (1)   A commercial solicitation permit shall be a
plastic-encased pin-on card, approximately two inches by four inches,
containing a full facial photograph of the solicitor which photograph shall
be supplied by solicitor, the name of the soliciting company, the dates
solicitation shall occur in different geographic areas of the city and the
effective dates of the permit, in easily readable form. All permits shall
bear the name of the city and the signature of the City Clerk or Deputy City
Clerk designated to examine applications for and issue such permits.



      (2)   Each person engaged in commercial solicitation shall
prominently display the solicitation permit issued hereunder on his or her
person while so soliciting within the city.



   (C)   A charitable or religious solicitation permit shall state the
name and address of the charitable or religious organization, the names and
addresses of the persons who will conduct the solicitation, and the dates
during which such solicitation will occur within an indicated area. The
permit shall bear the name of the city and the signature of the City Clerk or
Deputy City Clerk designed to examine applications for and issue such
permits. Each individual soliciting under a charitable or religious permit
shall prominently display while soliciting a plastic-encased pin-on card,
approximately two inches by four inches, containing a full facial photograph
of the solicitor, which photograph shall be supplied by the solicitor, the
name of the charitable or religious organization involved, the name of the
solicitor and the effective dates of the permit in easily readable form. The
card shall bear the name of the city and the signature of the City Clerk or
Deputy City Clerk designated to examine applications for and issue such
permits. In addition, each person engaged in charitable or religious
solicitation shall have on his or her person a copy of the permit issued
herein while so soliciting within the city and shall produce same for
examination when so requested by any person.



   (D)   Any solicitation permit issued hereunder shall be revoked by
the City Clerk of the holder of the permit or anyone soliciting under the
permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
subchapter, or has made a false material statement in the application, or
otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a solicitation permit
under the terms of this subchapter. Immediately upon such revocation, written
notice thereof shall be given by the City Clerk to the holder of the permit
in person or by United States mail, return receipt requested, addressed to
his or her residence address set forth in the application, The permit shall
become null and void upon the first to occur of the follows:



      (1)   Actual notice of revocation; and/or



      (2)   Return of the return receipt of the mailed notice,
whether or not delivered to the permit holder personally.



   (E)   Upon expiration of a solicitation permit, the holder shall be
entitled to renew his or her permit; provided that, the application for
renewal continues to satisfy all conditions and requirements necessary to
obtain an original permit and provided any changes in the information
originally submitted in the initial application, if any, are made. The
application for a renewal of a solicitation permit shall also pay the fee
required for a renewal permit.



(Prior Code, § 29-34)



§ 117.39  PERMIT APPLICATION; CONTENTS.



   (A)   Commercial solicitation permits. An application for a
commercial solicitation permit shall contain the following information
regarding the applicant:



      (1)   Name and address of present place of residence, length
of residence at such address and Social Security number;



      (2)   Address of place of residence during the past three
years, if older than present address;



      (3)   Physical description of the applicant and make and
license number of applicant’s automobile used during soliciting;



      (4)   Name and address of the person, firm, corporation or
association with whom the applicant is employed or represents and the length
of time of such employment or representation;



      (5)   Description sufficient for identification of the subject
matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage;



      (6)   Starting date and termination date of which the permit
is to be used, provided that the maximum time period for which the permit
shall be issued shall to exceed 30 days;



      (7)   Information as to whether a solicitation permit has been
previously issued to the applicant, and if so, whether the permit was ever
revoked;



      (8)   Information as to whether the applicant has ever been
convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter; and



      (9)   Information as to whether the applicant has ever been
convicted to the commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any
other state or federal law of the United States, or misconduct which
constitutes a Class A misdemeanor under state law, within five years of the
date of the permit application.



   (B)   Charitable solicitation permits. An application for a
charitable solicitation permit shall include or be accompanied by the
following:



      (1)   The name of the organization and the name under which it
intends to solicit contributions;



      (2)   The name and address of the person in charge of
solicitation in the city;



      (3)   The names and addresses of all persons who will solicit
contributions in the city;



      (4)   The dates and times of day such solicitations are to be
made and the geographic area in the city wherein such solicitation shall be
conducted at a particular time and day; provided that, the maximum time
period for which the permit shall be issued shall not exceed 30 days; and,
provided that, permit renewals shall not exceed 30 days;



      (5)   A written statement of recent date by the Attorney
General of the state that the organization is in compliance with the
provisions of “An Act to Regulate Solicitation and Collection of Funds for
Charitable Purposes,” Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 33, § 5101, and such statute as
it may hereafter be amended; and



      (6)   A written statement from the Internal Revenue Service
that the organization is a tax exempt organization under the Internal Revenue
Code of the United States, § 501(c)(3).



   (C)   Religious solicitation permit. An application for a religious
solicitation permit shall include or be accompanied by the following:



      (1)   The name and address or headquarters of the religious
organization making the application;



      (2)   The names and addresses of all the persons who will be
making the solicitations;



      (3)   The dates and times of day such solicitations are to be
made and the geographic area in which the solicitation will occur within the
city at a particular time and day; provided that, the maximum time period for
which the permit shall be issued shall not exceed 30 days; and, provided
that, permit renewals shall not exceed 30 days; and



      (4)   A letter from the Internal Revenue Service stating that
the organization is a tax exempt organization under the Internal Revenue Code
of the United States, § 501(c)(3);



(Prior Code, § 29-35)



§ 117.40  PERMIT APPLICATION; FEES.



   (A)   Original. The fee to be charged for an original solicitation
permit shall be as set out in the fee schedule.



   (B)   Renewal. The fee to be charged for the issuance of a renewal
solicitation permit shall be as set out in the fee schedule.



   (C)   Religious solicitation. No fee shall be charged for a
religious solicitation permit or the renewal thereof.



(Prior Code, § 29-36)  (Ord. 1555, passed 11-16-1985; Ord. 03-06, passed
2-3-2003)



§ 117.41  CITY POLICY ON SOLICITING AND TRESPASSING.



   It shall be the policy of the governing body of the municipality that
the occupant or occupants of any residence located within the city shall make
a determination of whether solicitors or any person shall be or shall not be
invited to their respective residences. Any person or solicitor who is not,
pursuant to the provisions contained in § 117.42 of this chapter, invited
onto the premises of any residence or who has obtained entrance to such
premises and does not leave the same, upon being so requested by the occupant
or occupants of such premises, shall be deemed a trespasser.



(Prior Code, § 29-37)



§ 117.42  NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.



   (A)   Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be
provided by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this
subchapter shall give notice of the determination by the occupant of the
refusal of invitation to solicitors to any residence by displaying a card
upon or near the main entrance door to the residence, containing such
language as “No Solicitors,” “No Solicitors Invited” or such other
language as would indicate that solicitors are not to enter or engage in
solicitation on the premises.



   (B)   Such card so exhibited shall constitute notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.



(Prior Code, § 29-38)



§ 117.43  DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO OBEY NOTICE OR TO LEAVE WHEN REQUESTED.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor, upon going onto any
premises in the city upon which a residence is located, to first examine the
notice provided for in § 117.42 of this chapter, if any is attached, and be
governed by the statement contained hereon. If the notice states “No
Solicitors” or “No Solicitors Invited” or other language as would
indicate that solicitors are not to enter or engage in solicitation on the
premises, the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises.



   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence,
whether or not invited, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises when requested to do so by the occupant.



(Prior Code, § 29-39)



§ 117.44  UNINVITED SOLICITORS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance and a trespass for
any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near the
door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an
audience with occupant thereof and engage in commercial, religious or
charitable solicitation as defined in this subchapter, in defiance of the
notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
117.42 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 29-40)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.45  TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go about any residence and ring the door bell, or rap or knock upon
any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof and engage in commercial or charitable
solicitation, as defined in this subchapter, at any time on a Sunday or on a
state or national holiday; or before the hour of 10:00 a.m., or after the
hour of 9:00 p.m. Religious solicitation is permitted on all days of the
week, but only during the hours set forth in this subchapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to engage in commercial, charitable or
religious solicitation on sidewalks or other public places within the city
before the hour of 7:00 a.m. or after the hour of 9:00 p.m.



(Prior Code, § 29-41)  (Ord. 1555, passed 11-16-1985; Ord. 1612, passed
6-14-1986; Ord. 1695, passed 4-18-1987)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.46  SOLICITING ON HIGHWAYS OR STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any individual to solicit on any highway or
street.



(Prior Code, § 29-42)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.47  APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   The City Manager shall hear appeals on the denial of an
application for a solicitation permit or revocation of a permit by the City
Clerk. A written appeal must be filed in the City Manager’s office within
21 days after the date of denial of the application or revocation of the
permit by the City Clerk and shall contain a specific request for or waiver
of a hearing before the City Manager.



   (B)   Where a hearing is waived, the appealing party shall submit
what documentation it desires to have the City Manager consider with the
written appeal, and the City Manager shall render a decision within 14 days
of the filing of the written appeal.



   (C)   If a hearing is requested, the City Manager shall schedule a
hearing to be held within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal. The
appealing party shall have the right to file additional documents, amend the
written appeal and to appear at such hearing in person, or by attorney, or
otherwise to examine and cross-examine witnesses.



   (D)   The City Manager shall not be bound by the rules of evidence
prevailing in the courts of law, but shall, in ascertaining the conditions
and practices involved in the decision appealed, take into account all
reliable, probative and substantial evidence produced at the hearing relating
to the denial of the application or revocation of the permit.



   (E)   The appealing party may supply, at its own cost, a court
reporter.



   (F)   The written decision of the City Manager shall be made
available to the appealing party not later than ten days after the hearing on
the appeal is concluded.



(Prior Code, § 29-43)



§ 117.48  FALSE APPLICATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to file an application for permit
which contains false, misleading or untrue information.



(Prior Code, § 29-44)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.49  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall release or relieve any
person from complying with any additional license requirements established by
the city.



(Prior Code, § 29-45)



§ 117.50  SEVERABILITY.



   If any phrase, sentence, division or section of this subchapter shall
be found invalid, this shall not invalidate the remaining terms and
conditions of the subchapter which shall then still remain in full force and
effect. Any ordinances or any provisions thereof in conflict with the terms
of this subchapter are hereby repealed.



(Prior Code, § 29-47)  (Ord. 874, passed 1-20-1972; Ord. 1242, passed
9-26-1981)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of§
117.20 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than $750,
and each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall be considered a
separate violation. In addition, any cost of collection of fines or other
amounts due to the city under this division (B) may be assessed in accordance
with § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 29-24)



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of committing a
violation of §§ 117.35 through 117.50 of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $10, nor more than $750, and each separate violation
hereof shall be considered a separate offense hereunder. In addition, any
cost of collection of fines or other amounts due to the city under this
section may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99 of this code of
ordinances. Further, the city may seek and obtain injunctions against persons
violating the terms and conditions of §§ 117.35 through 117.50 of this
chapter and shall not otherwise be limited in remedies.



(Prior Code, § 29-46)



(Ord. 1990-49, passed 9-10-1990; Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)



CHAPTER 118:  VEHICLES FOR HIRE



Section




General Provisions




   118.001   Definitions




Administration




   118.015   Appointment; duties




Public Passenger Vehicle Business License




   118.045   Service requirements




Fares and Charges




   118.105   Maximum rates



   118.106   Receipt for fare



   118.107   Fare in advance



   118.108   Consent required for additional passengers



   118.109   Failure or refusal to pay fare



   118.110   Excess charge



   118.111   Soliciting patrons prohibited




Parking and Standing




   118.125   Parking



   118.126   Standing




Motor Buses




   118.140   Grant of authority required




Expressmen and Draymen




   118.155   License required



   118.156   Fee



   118.157   Regulations




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 118.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LIMOUSINES. Construed to include and to mean all public passenger
vehicles duly licensed as herein provided; except that, such vehicle shall
not be required to have affixed thereto a taximeter, and the use thereof
shall be confined to hire upon a hourly basis or upon a trip basis; the
operator of a LIMOUSINE shall not be permitted to solicit passengers for hire
in the public streets of the city.



   PUBLIC PASSENGER VEHICLE. Includes taxicabs and limousines, as defined
herein, and shall mean a motor vehicle, as defined in the Motor Vehicle Law
of the state, which is used for the transportation of passengers for hire,
excepting in operation of a public utility under the laws of the state.



   TAXICAB. A public passenger vehicle for hire only at lawful rates of
fare recorded and indicated by taximeter in operation when the vehicle is in
use for transportation of any passenger.



(Prior Code, § 43-1)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974; Ord. 91-34, passed
6-15-1991)




ADMINISTRATION




§ 118.015  APPOINTMENT; DUTIES.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the City
Manager, unless otherwise specified.



(Prior Code, § 43-10)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974)



PUBLIC PASSENGER VEHICLE BUSINESS LICENSE



§ 118.045  SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.



   The following minimum service requirements shall be maintained by each
vehicle for hire.



   (A)   No more than that number of persons for which any vehicle has
seating accommodations shall be conveyed at any one time.



   (B)   When any vehicle for hire has been engaged by one or more
persons traveling together, the driver of the vehicle shall not pick up other
persons, except upon the express request or consent of the person or persons
first engaging the vehicle.



   (C)   No vehicle for hire shall be occupied by anyone other than a
driver, a farepaying passenger or passengers, or officers or employees of the
owner at any time while such vehicle is standing near any railroad station or
other public place or while such vehicle is either standing or in operation
upon any street or alley or parcel of land owned or leased by the city.



   (D)   Each vehicle, except a vehicle licensed and used exclusively
as a public limousine, shall be equipped and operated with two-way radio
maintained in good operating order at all times.



(Prior Code, § 43-26)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974; Ord. 2016-01, passed
1-19-2016)



FARES AND CHARGES



§ 118.105  MAXIMUM RATES.



   No person, firm or corporation, owning, operating or controlling any
motor vehicle operated as a public passenger vehicle and used upon the
streets within the limits of the city shall charge not to exceed the
following rates.



   (A)   General. A fee as set out in the fee schedule to get into the
vehicle (meter drop), a charge as set out in the fee schedule for the first
mile (which includes the meter drop charge) and a fee as set out in the fee
schedule for each additional mile thereafter.



   (B)   Waiting time.



      (1)   Waiting time may be computed in one minute segments at
the rate per hour as set out in the fee schedule.



      (2)   WAITING TIME shall include the time when a vehicle is
not in motion, beginning with the arrival at the place to which it has been
directed to, for time consumed while standing at the direction of the
passenger.



   (C)   Trips outside the city limits, including trips to Chicago
O’Hare International Airport. The operator shall keep on file a list of the
current rates with the Police Department of the city and shall notify each
passenger of the cost prior to the commencement of any such trip.



(Prior Code, § 43-73)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974; Ord. 1097, passed
5-26-1979; Ord. 1269, passed - -; Ord. 1797, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 1888,
passed 10-14-1989; Ord. 91-5, passed 1-7-1991; Ord. 94-36, passed 8-1-1994;
Ord. 97-8, passed 4-7-1997; Ord. 01-05, passed 2-5-2001; Ord. 2008-25, passed
8-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.106  RECEIPT FOR FARE.



   If demanded by the passenger, the driver in charge of a public
passenger vehicle shall deliver to the person paying for the hiring of the
same, at the time of such payment, a receipt therefor in legible type or
writing containing the name of the owner, the city license number of the
vehicle or the driver’s city license number or the taximeter number and any
items for which a charge is made, the total amount paid and the date of
payment.



(Prior Code, § 43-74)  (Ord. 782, passed 9-26-1970; Ord. 916, passed
3-6-1974)



§ 118.107  FARE IN ADVANCE.



   Every driver of a public passenger vehicle shall have the right to
demand payment of the fare in advance and may refuse employment unless so
prepaid, but no driver of a public passenger vehicle shall otherwise refuse
or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons upon request anywhere in
the city unless previously engaged or unable to do so.



(Prior Code, § 43-75)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.108  CONSENT REQUIRED FOR ADDITIONAL PASSENGERS.



   No driver of a public passenger vehicle shall carry any person other
than the first passenger first employing such vehicle without the consent of
said passenger.



(Prior Code, § 43-76)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.109  FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO PAY FARE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who shall employ any public
passenger vehicle to neglect or refuse to pay for the service rendered in
accordance with the established rates or fare.



(Prior Code, § 43-77)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.110  EXCESS CHARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, controlling or operating
any public passenger vehicle to demand or collect different rates of
compensation for service other than those established by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 43-78)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.111  SOLICITING PATRONS PROHIBITED.



   No public passenger vehicle driver shall solicit by word, gesture or
otherwise, the patronage of any person upon any public cab stand or on any
street in the city.



(Prior Code, § 43-79)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PARKING AND STANDING



§ 118.125  PARKING.



   It shall be unlawful for taxicabs, motor buses or other public
passenger vehicles to park upon any public street or parking lot, except in
those areas and at such time as allowed by city code.



(Prior Code, § 43-84)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974; Ord. 2016-01, passed
1-19-2016)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.126  STANDING.



   Public passenger vehicles licensed under this chapter may stand only at
such places and times as designated by city code.



(Prior Code, § 43-85)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974; Ord. 2016-01, passed
1-19-2016)  Penalty, see § 10.99




MOTOR BUSES




§ 118.140  GRANT OF AUTHORITY REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a
motor bus not operating as a public carrier under the laws of the state along
or upon any public way of the city for the carriage of passengers for hire,
indiscriminately accepting and discharging such passengers as may offer
themselves for transportation, along the course on which such motor bus is
operated without first having obtained a specific grant of authority to do so
by the City Council designating the routes and fixing the terms and
conditions under which such motor bus may be operated.



(Prior Code, § 43-91)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974)  Penalty, see § 10.99




EXPRESSMEN AND DRAYMEN




§ 118.155  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
having its principal place of business in the city and not licensed by the
state and/or the Interstate Commerce Commission to conduct the business of
drayman, carter, deliveryman or expressman in the city without first annually
obtaining a license therefor, except where that person, firm or corporation
owns or leases such vehicles to haul, move or deliver its own goods, wares,
merchandise or material.



   (B)   Applications for such license shall be made to the City Clerk,
and shall designate thereon the name of the licensee, the location of his or
her business, the number of vehicles intended to be used by him or her, and
such other information at the Finance Director requires from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 43-95)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.156  FEE.



   The fee for such license shall be as set out in the fee schedule and
shall be due and payable on May 1 of each year.



(Prior Code, § 43-96)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974)



§ 118.157  REGULATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any drayman, carter, deliveryman or expressman
to receive, move or conceal any goods or articles which he or she knows to be
or has reason to believe or suspect to be stolen. Every vehicle used for such
business shall have printed thereon, in a place easily visible from the side
of the vehicle, the name and address of the owner in letters of not less than
two inches in height.



(Prior Code, § 43-97)  (Ord. 916, passed 3-6-1974)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 119:  CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS



Section




Cable/Video Service Provider Fee and PEG Access Support Fee




   119.01   Definitions



   119.02   Cable/video service provider fee imposed



   119.03   PEG access support fee imposed



   119.04   Applicable principles



   119.05   No impact on other taxes due from holder



   119.06   Audits of cable/video service provider



   119.07   Late fees; payments




Cable and Video Customer Protection Law




   119.20   Customer service and privacy protection law



   119.21   Enforcement



   119.22   Customer credits



 



   119.99   Penalty




CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE




§ 119.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



   COMMISSION. The State Commerce Commission.



   GROSS REVENUES.



      (1)   All consideration of any kind or nature, including,
without limitation, cash, credits, property and in-kind contributions
received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to
provide cable service or video service within the holder’s cable service or
video service area within the city.



      (2)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:



         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service;



         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand
charges;



         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or
video service equipment;



         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable
service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation,
installation and repair charges;



         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of
cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order
and service termination charges;



         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds
check charges and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting
delinquent payments;



         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the
holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
or video service within the city. The allocation shall be based on the number
of subscribers in the city divided by the total number of subscribers in
relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement;



         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder
as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on
the holder’s network, such as a “home shopping” or similar channel,
subject to division (2)(i) below;



         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service
that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities
or applications, the portion of the holder’s revenue attributable to the
other services, capabilities or applications shall be included in the GROSS
REVENUE unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion
of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course
of business; and



         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS
5/21-801(b).



      (3)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:



         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed,
such as bad debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi);



         (b)   Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments that
reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the
state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or
discount is attributable to cable service or video service;



         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled,
packaged or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any
revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video
service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services or the provision of
directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement and electronic publishing or any other revenues
attributed by the holder to non-cable service or non-video service in
accordance with the holder’s books and records and records kept in the
regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards or orders;



         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for
resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee
from the purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in
writing that it will resell the service within the city and pay the fee
permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service;



         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed
upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal or any
other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including
sales and use taxes;



         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers;



         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping”
or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel
offered as part of the cable service or video service; and



         (h)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be
included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of
the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect
of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which
would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.



   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS
5/21-401.



   PEG. Public, education and governmental.



   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this subchapter and 220
ILLS 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the city for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.



   SERVICE. The provision of “cable service” or “video service” to
subscribers an the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that
has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from
the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.



   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this subchapter and 220
ILCS 5/21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.



   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services,
and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in
the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including
internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video
programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47
U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and
via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail or other services offered over the public internet.



(Ord. 07-42, passed 11-5-2007)



§ 119.02  CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.



   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing
cable service or video service in the city.



   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be
5% of the holder’s gross revenues.



   (C)   Notice to the city. The holder shall notify the city at least
ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the city.



   (D)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay
the service provider fee to the city. The holder’s liability for the fee
shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after
receipt of the ordinance adopting this subchapter by the holder. The
ordinance adopting this subchapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to
the address listed on the holder’s application notice sent pursuant to 220
ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the city.



   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be
due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.



   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing
cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise
agreement with the city in which a fee is paid.



   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)
with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the
amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under division (B)
above.



(Ord. 07-42, passed 11-5-2007)



§ 119.03  PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED.



   (A)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on
any holder providing cable service or video service in the city in addition
to the fee imposed pursuant to § 119.02 of this chapter.



   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee
imposed hereby shall be 1% of the holder’s gross revenues or, if greater,
the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the
city or its designee for PEG access support in the city.



   (C)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to
the city or to the entity designated by the city to manage PEG access. The
holder’s liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the
date set forth in § 119.02(D) of this chapter.



   (D)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall
be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.



   (E)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)
shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for
PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of the
agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments
made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be
credited against the fees that that operator owes under division (B) above.



(Ord. 07-42, passed 11-5-2007)



§ 119.04  APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.



   All determinations and calculations under this subchapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.



(Ord. 07-42, passed 11-5-2007)



§ 119.05  NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to exempt a
holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city, including
any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder
with respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
city’s telecommunications tax, telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service
provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of
government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.



(Ord. 07-42, passed 11-5-2007)



§ 119.06  AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.



   (A)   Audit requirement. The city will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the city imposes on offer cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and
to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of
the city. If all local franchises between the city and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the city pursuant
to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the
amounts are correct.



   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit
shall be paid within 30 days after the city’s submission of an invoice for
the sum.



(Ord. 07-42, passed 11-5-2007)



§ 119.07  LATE FEES; PAYMENTS.



   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by
ordinances adopted by the city pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’
Bill of Rights Act, 50 II CS 45/1 et seq.



(Ord. 07-42, passed 11-5-2007)




CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW




§ 119.20  CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW.



   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby
adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers
offering services within the city’s boundaries.



   (B)   Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer
Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this
subchapter shall be incorporated into this subchapter by reference and shall
be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the
municipality’s boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions
optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this
subchapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of
the city.



(Ord. 07-42, passed 11-5-2007)



§ 119.21  ENFORCEMENT.



   The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all
of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and
Video Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents
within the city.



(Ord. 07-42, passed 11-5-2007)



§ 119.22  CUSTOMER CREDITS.



   The city hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations.
Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS
5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next
billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the
violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the
credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit.



(Ord. 07-42, passed 11-5-2007)



§ 119.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The city, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby
provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and
Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties
provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively
neutral basis and shall not exceed $750 for each day of the material breach
and shall not exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a material breach per
customer.



   (B)   MATERIAL BREACH means any substantial failure of a cable or
video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified
in any provision of the law.



   (C)   The city shall give the cable or video provider written notice
of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least
30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material
breach.



   (D)   A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties,
shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been
remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in division
(C) above.



(Ord. 07-42, passed 11-5-2007)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      131.   INCHOATE OFFENSES



      132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



      133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



      134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



      135.   OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND DECENCY



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   130.01   Definitions




Criminal Act and Mental State




   130.15   Voluntary act



   130.16   Possession as voluntary act



   130.17   Mental state



   130.18   Intent



   130.19   Knowledge



   130.20   Recklessness



   130.21   Absolute liability




Parties to Crime




   130.35   Accountability for conduct of another



   130.36   When accountability exists



   130.37   Separate conviction of person accountable



   130.38   Responsibility of corporation




Parental Responsibility




   130.50   Definitions



   130.51   Parental responsibility



   130.52   Parental responsibility for damages



   130.53   Parental responsibility for unpaid penalties



   130.54   Presumptions of knowledge and permission



 



   130.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 130.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number include the
singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.



      AGENT. The authorized or acting representative of the owner or
occupant of real property with the city.



      AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance used or designated for navigation or
for flight in the air. The word AIRCRAFT shall include helicopters and
lighter than air dirigibles and balloons.



      CITY. The City of Lake Forest.



      OCCUPANT. Any person in possession or having the right to
possession of real property within the city.



      OWNER. Any person having any interest, legal, equitable,
beneficial or otherwise, in real property within the city.



      PARK. A park reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other public area in the city owned or used by the city devoted to active
or passive recreation.



      PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation
of any kind.



      PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys
or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds
and buildings.



      VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   (B)   In the event that an offense is not specifically defined in
this chapter, then the definitions of the offense as is found in the Illinois
Criminal Code of 1969, as it may from time to time be amended, is hereby
adopted and incorporated as the definition of such offense in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 26-1)




CRIMINAL ACT AND MENTAL STATE




§ 130.15  VOLUNTARY ACT.



   A material element of every offense is a voluntary act, which includes
an omission to perform a duty which the law imposes on the offender and which
he or she is physically capable, of performing.



(Prior Code, § 47-1.1)



§ 130.16  POSSESSION AS VOLUNTARY ACT.



   Possession is a voluntary act if the offender knowingly procured or
received the thing possessed, or was aware of his or her control thereof for
a sufficient time and to have been able to terminate his or her possession.



(Prior Code, § 47-1.2)



§ 130.17  MENTAL STATE.



   (A)   A person is not guilty of an offense, other than an offense
which involves absolute liability, unless, with respect to each element
described by the section defining the offense, he or she acts while having
one of the mental states described in §§ 130.18 through 130.21.



   (B)   If the statute defining an offense prescribed a particular
mental state with respect to the offense as a whole, without distinguishing
among the elements thereof, the prescribed mental state applies to each such
element. If the section does not prescribe a particular mental state
applicable to an element of an offense (other than an offense which involves
absolute liability), any mental state defined in §§ 130.18, 130.19 or
130.20.



   (C)   Knowledge that certain conduct constitutes an offense, or
knowledge of the existence, meaning or application of the section defining an
offense, is not an element of the offense unless the section clearly defines
is as such.



(Prior Code, § 47-1.3)



§ 130.18  INTENT.



   A person intends, or acts intentionally or with intent, to accomplish a
result or engage in conduct described by the section defining the offense,
when his or her conscious objective or purpose is to accomplish that result
or engage in that conduct.



(Prior Code, § 47-1.4)



§ 130.19  KNOWLEDGE.



   (A)   A person knows, or acts knowingly or with knowledge of:



      (1)   The nature or attendant circumstances of his or her
conduct, described by the section defining the offense, when he or she is
consciously aware that his or her conduct is of such nature or that such
circumstances exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the
substantial probability that such fact exists; and/or



      (2)   The result of his or her conduct, described by the
section defining the offense, when he or she is consciously aware that such
result is practically certain to be caused by his or her conduct.



   (B)   Conduct performed knowingly or with knowledge is performed
willfully, within the meaning of a section using the latter term, unless the
section clearly requires another meaning.



(Prior Code, § 47-1.5)



§ 130.20  RECKLESSNESS.



   A person is reckless or acts recklessly when he or she consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or
that a result will follow, described by the section defining the offense; and
such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which
a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. An act performed
recklessly is performed wantonly, within the meaning of a section using the
latter term, unless the section clearly requires another meaning.



(Prior Code, § 47-1.6)



§ 130.21  ABSOLUTE LIABILITY.



   (A)   A person may be guilty of an offense without having, as to
each element thereof, one of the mental states described in §§ 130.18
through 130.21 if the offense is an offense which is not punishable by
incarceration or by a fine exceeding $750, or the section defining the
offense clearly indicates a legislative purpose to impose absolute liability
for the conduct described.



   (B)   In addition, any cost of collection of fines or other amounts
due to the city under this section may be assessed in according with § 10.99
of this code.



(Prior Code, § 47-1.7)  (Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)




PARTIES TO CRIME




§ 130.35  ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONDUCT OF ANOTHER.



   A person is responsible for conduct which is an element of an offense
if the conduct is either that of the person himself or herself, or that of
another and he or she is legally accountable for such conduct as provided in
§ 130.36 or both.



(Prior Code, § 47-2.1)



§ 130.36  WHEN ACCOUNTABILITY EXISTS.



   A person is legally accountable for the conduct of another when:



   (A)   Having a mental state described by the section defining the
offense, he or she causes another to perform the conduct, and the other
person in fact or by reason of legal incapacity lacks such a mental state;



   (B)   The statute defining the offense makes him or her so
accountable; or



   (C)   Either before or during the commission of an offense, and with
the intent to promote or facilitate such commission, he or she solicits,
aids, abets, agrees or attempts to aid, such other person in the planning or
commission of the offense. However, a person is not so accountable, unless
the statute defining the offense provides otherwise, if:



      (1)   He or she is a victim of the offense committed;



      (2)   The offense is so defined that his or her conduct was
inevitably incident to its commission; or



      (3)   Before the commission of the offense, he or she
terminates his or her effort to promote or facilitate such commission, and
does one of the following: wholly deprives his or her prior efforts of
effectiveness in such commission, or gives timely warning to the proper law
enforcement authorities, or otherwise makes proper effort to prevent the
commission of the offense.



(Prior Code, § 47-2.2)



§ 130.37  SEPARATE CONVICTION OF PERSON ACCOUNTABLE.



   A person who is legally accountable for the conduct of another which is
an element of an offense may be convicted upon proof that the offense was
committed and that he or she was so accountable, although the other person
claimed to have committed the offense has not been prosecuted or convicted,
or has been convicted of a different offense or degree of offense, or is not
amenable to justice, or has been acquitted.



(Prior Code, § 47-2.3)



§ 130.38  RESPONSIBILITY OF CORPORATION.



   (A)   A corporation may be prosecuted for the commission of an
offense if the commission of the offense is authorized, requested, commanded
or performed, by the board of directors or by a high managerial agent who is
acting within the scope of his or her employment in behalf of the corporation.



   (B)   A corporation’s proof, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that the high managerial agent having supervisory responsibility over the
conduct which is the subject matter of the offense exercised due diligence to
prevent the commission of the offense, is a defense to a prosecution for any
offense to which division (A) above refers, other than an offense for which
absolute liability is imposed. This division (B) is inapplicable if the
legislative purpose of the section defining the offense is inconsistent with
the provisions of this division (B).



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      AGENT. Any director, officer, servant, employee or other person
who is authorized to act in behalf of the corporation.



      HIGH MANAGERIAL AGENT. An officer of the corporation, or any
other agent who has a position of comparable authority for the formulation of
corporate policy or the supervision of subordinate employees in a managerial
capacity.



(Prior Code, § 47-2.4)




PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY




§ 130.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MINOR. A person under the age of 18 years, except in the case of
alcohol-related offenses, in which case, a MINOR is defined as a person under
the age of 21 years.



   PARENT. A person who is a natural or adoptive parent of a minor, or a
person appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor by a court of
competent jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 47.8-1)  (Ord. 99-49, passed 11-18-1999)



§ 130.51  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any parent of a minor who resides with such
parent to fail to make all reasonable, necessary and effective efforts to
prevent such minor from violating any provision of the city code, including,
but not limited to, the following offenses:



   (A)   Curfew and school curfew (§ 135.009);



   (B)   Illegal possession of alcohol (§ 111.076);



   (C)   Illegal consumption of alcohol (§ 111.076);



   (D)   Unlawful possession of cannabis (§ 135.029);



   (E)   Unlawful possession of controlled substance (§ 135.028);



   (F)   Disorderly conduct (§ 135.001);



   (G)   Reckless conduct (§ 133.03);



   (H)   Battery (§ 133.02);



   (I)   Criminal damage to property (§ 134.03);



   (J)   Criminal trespass (vehicle § 134.04 and land § 134.05);



   (K)   Theft (§ 134.35 and retail § 134.55);



   (L)   Unlawful use of a weapon (§ 135.055);



   (M)   Or any of the offenses enumerated in Ch. 111 of this code of
ordinances and this Title XIII.



(Prior Code, § 47.8-2)  (Ord. 99-49, passed 11-18-1999; Ord. 2016-30,
passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.52  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES.



   The parent of the minor shall be liable, to the full extent allowed by
law, for the actual damages for the willful or malicious acts of such minor
which cause injury to persons or property.



(Prior Code, § 47.8-3)  (Ord. 99-49, passed 11-18-1999)



§ 130.53  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR UNPAID PENALTIES.



   The parent of a minor shall be liable for any fine, condition or
restriction or reparation imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction upon
such minor for a violation of any provision of the city code.



(Prior Code, § 47.8-4)  (Ord. 99-49, passed 11-18-1999)



§ 130.54  PRESUMPTIONS OF KNOWLEDGE AND PERMISSION.



   (A)   For the purposes of this subchapter, the parent of a minor
shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have
knowingly permitted such minor to have committed a violation of this
subchapter if:



      (1)   Such minor shall have either:



         (a)   Been adjudicated to be in violation of;



         (b)   Incurred non-judicial sanctions from an official
public agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of; or



         (c) Received a written warning or citation from the Lake
Forest Police Department of a potential or probable violation of any of the
above enumerated provisions of the city code.



      (2)   The parent shall have received a written notice from the
Lake Forest Police Department of such adjudication, sanction or warning; and



      (3)   After written notice of a violation has been given to
such parent by the Lake Forest Police Department, there is a continued or
repeated violation by such minor within three years of the date of the notice
of violation.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, such parent shall not be
presumed to have knowingly permitted such minor to have committed such
violation if such parent shall have, prior to the occurrence of the repeat
violation:



      (1)   Delivered written notice to the Police Chief of the city
of his or her inability to prevent such continued or repeat violation; and



      (2)   Requested that the City Police Department, or the proper
public authority, take the necessary legal steps to have the minor declared
and dealt with as a delinquent minor. All notices required to be delivered
pursuant to this section shall be delivered either by certified or registered
mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, with a certificate of
personal service returned.



(Prior Code, § 47.8-5)  (Ord. 99-49, passed 11-18-1999)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of this title, except
where another penalty is specifically provided, shall be punished by a fine
of not less than $10, nor more than $750, for each offense.



      (2)   Any person who damages, defaces or otherwise interferes
with public property shall reimburse the city for all costs of repairs to
such public property within 30 days after receipt of invoice therefor from
the city.



      (3)   In addition, any cost of collection of fines, charges or
payments due under this title may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99 of
this code.



(Prior Code, § 26-100)



   (B)   Whoever violates any provisions or section of §§ 130.50
through 130.54 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than
$25, nor more than $750, for each offense. In addition, any cost of
collection of fines or other amounts due to the city under this section may
be assessed in accordance with § 10.99 of this code.



(Prior Code, § 47.8-5)



(Ord. 98-31, passed 7-6-1998; Ord. 99-49, passed 11-18-1999; Ord. 03-37,
passed 7-7-2003)



CHAPTER 131:  INCHOATE OFFENSES



Section



   131.01   Solicitation



   131.02   Defense



   131.03   Attempt



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  SOLICITATION.



   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits solicitation when,
with intent that an offense be committed, he or she commands, encourages or
requests another to commit that offense.



   (B)   Penalty. A person convicted of solicitation may be fined not
to exceed the maximum provided for the offense solicited.



(Prior Code, § 47-3.1)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.02  DEFENSE.



   It is a defense to a charge of solicitation that if the criminal object
were achieved the accused would not be guilty of an offense.



(Prior Code, § 47-3.2)



§ 131.03  ATTEMPT.



   (A)   Element of the offense. A person commits an attempt when, with
intent to commit a specific offense, he or she does any act which constitutes
a substantial step toward the commission of that offense.



   (B)   Impossibility. It shall not be a defense to a charge of
attempt that because of a misapprehension of the circumstances it would have
been impossible for the accused to commit the offense attempted.



(Prior Code, § 47-3.3)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished
by a fine not less than $100, nor more than $750, for each offense, a term of
imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.25)  (Ord. 98-31, passed 7-6-1998)



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section



   132.01   Definitions



   132.02   Public indecency



   132.03   Contributing to the sexual delinquency of a child



   132.04   Prostitution



   132.05   Soliciting for prostitute



   132.06   Pandering



   132.07   Keeping a place of prostitution



   132.08   Patronizing a prostitute



   132.09   Pimping



   132.10   Obscenity



   132.11   Child pornography



   132.12   Distribution of harmful material



 



   132.99   Penalty



§ 132.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OBSCENE.Any material or performance is OBSCENE if:



      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult
community standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the
prurient interest; and



      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult
community standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently
offensive way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory
functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and



      (3)   Taken as a whole, it lack serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place where the conduct may reasonable be expected to
be viewed by others.



   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Any knowing touching or fondling by the victim or the
accused, either directly or through clothing, of the sex organs, anus, or
breast of the victim or the accused, or any part of the body of a child under
13 years of age, or any transfer or transmission of semen by the accused upon
any part of the clothed or unclothed body of the victim, for the purpose of
sexual gratification or arousal of the victim or the accused.



   SEXUAL PENETRATION. Any contact, however slight, between the sex organ
or anus of one person and an object or the sex organ, mouth, or anus of
another person, or any intrusion, however slight, of any part of the body of
one person or of any animal or object into the sex organ or anus of another
person, including, but not limited to, cunnilingus, fellatio, or anal
penetration. Evidence of emission of semen is not required to prove SEXUAL
PENETRATION.



(Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)



§ 132.02  PUBLIC INDECENCY.



   Any person who performs any of the following acts in a public place
commits a public indecency:



   (A)   An act of sexual penetration;



   (B)   An act of sexual conduct; or



   (C)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to
satisfy the sexual desire of the person.



(Prior Code, § 47-4.2)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2017)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.03  CONTRIBUTING TO THE SEXUAL DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.



   (A)   Any person of the age of 14 years and upwards who performs or
submits to any of the following acts with any person under the age of 18
contributes to the sexual delinquency of a child:



      (1)   Any act of sexual penetration;



      (2)   Any act of sexual conduct;



      (3)   Any lewd fondling or touching of either the child or the
person done or submitted to with the intent to arouse or to satisfy the
sexual desires of either the child or the person or both; or



      (4)   Any lewd act done in the presence of the child with the
intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desires of either the person or the
child or both.



   (B)   It shall not be a defense to contributing to the sexual
delinquency of a child that the accused reasonably believed the child to be
of the age of 18 or upwards.



(Prior Code, § 47-4.1)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.04  PROSTITUTION.



   Any person who performs, offers or agrees to perform any of the
following acts for money commits an act of prostitution:



   (A)   Any act of sexual penetration;



   (B)   Any act of sexual conduct.



(Prior Code, § 47-4.4)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.05  SOLICITING FOR PROSTITUTE.



   Any person who performs any of the following acts commits soliciting
for a prostitute:



   (A)   Solicits another for the purpose of prostitution;



   (B)   Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for the
purpose of prostitution; and/or



   (C)   Directs another to a place knowing such direction is for the
purpose of prostitution.



(Prior Code, § 47-4.5)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.06  PANDERING.



   Any person who performs any of the following acts for money commits
pandering:



   (A)   Compels a person to become a prostitute; and/or



   (B)   Arranges or offers to arrange a situation in which a person
may practice prostitution.



(Prior Code, § 47-4.6)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.07  KEEPING A PLACE OF PROSTITUTION.



   Any person who has or exercises control over the use of any place which
could offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution who
performs any of the following acts keeps a place or prostitution:



   (A)   Knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the
purpose of prostitution;



   (B)   Grants or permits the use of such place under circumstances
from which he or she could reasonably know that the place is used or is to be
used for purposes of prostitution; and/or



   (C)   Permits the continued use of a place after becoming aware of
facts or circumstances from which he or she should reasonably know that the
place is being used for purposes of prostitution.



(Prior Code, § 47-4.7)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.08  PATRONIZING A PROSTITUTE.



   Any person who performs any of the following acts with a person not his
or her spouse commits the offense of patronizing a prostitute:



   (A)   Engages in an act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct with
a prostitute; and/or



   (B)   Enters or remains in a place of prostitution on with intent to
engage in an act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct.



(Prior Code, § 47-4.8)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.09  PIMPING.



   Any person who receives money or other property from a prostitute, not
for a lawful consideration, knowing it was earned in whole or in part from
the practice of prostitution, commits pimping.



(Prior Code, § 47-4.9)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.10  OBSCENITY.



   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content
thereof, he or she:



      (1)   Sells, delivers or provides or offers or agrees to sell,
deliver or provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other
representation or embodiment of the obscene;



      (2)   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other
performance or participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it
obscene;



      (3)   Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available
anything obscene;



      (4)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene
exhibition of his or her body for gain;



      (5)   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or
material with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of
the penal laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; and/or



      (6)   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material
represented or held out by him or her to be obscene, whether or not it is
obscene.



   (B)   Interpretation of evidence.



      (1)   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary
adults, except that it shall be judged with reference to children or other
specially susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the
material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed
for or directed to such an audience.



      (2)   Where circumstances or production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is
probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is utterly without redeeming social importance.



      (3)   In any prosecution for an offense under this section,
evidence shall be admissible to show:



         (a)   The character of the audience for which the
material was designed or to which it was directed;



         (b)   What the predominant appeal or the material would
be for ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect if any, it
would probably have on the behavior of such people;



         (c)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or
other merits of the material, or absence thereof;



         (d)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the
material in the state;



         (e)   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof in
advertising or other promotion of the material; and/or



         (f)   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or
disseminator.



   (C)   Prima facie evidence. The creation, purchase, procurement or
possession of a mold, engraved plate or other embodiment of obscenity
specially adapted for reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more
than three copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an
intent to disseminate.



   (D)   Affirmative defense. It shall be an affirmative defense to
obscenity that the dissemination:



      (1)   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates
other than children under 18 years of age; and/or



      (2)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or
other special justification for possession of such material.



(Prior Code, § 47-4.10)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.11  CHILD PORNOGRAPHY.



   (A)   A person commits child pornography who:



      (1)   Films, videotapes, photographs, or otherwise depicts or
portrays by means of any similar visual medium or reproduction or depicts by
computer any child whom he or she knows or reasonably should know to be under
the age of 18 or any person with a severe or profound intellectual disability
where such child or person with a severe or profound intellectual disability
is:



         (a)   Actually or by simulation engaged in any act of
sexual penetration or sexual conduct with any person or animal; or



         (b)   Actually or by simulation engaged in any act of
sexual penetration or sexual conduct involving the sex organs of the child or
person with a severe or profound intellectual disability and the mouth, anus,
or sex organs of another person or animal; or which involves the mouth, anus
or sex organs of the child or person with a severe or profound intellectual
disability and the sex organs of another person or animal; or



         (c)   Actually or by simulation engaged in any act of
masturbation; or



         (d)   Actually or by simulation portrayed as being the
object of, or otherwise engaged in, any act of lewd fondling, touching, or
caressing involving another person or animal; or



         (e)   Actually or by simulation engaged in any act of
excretion or urination within a sexual context; or



         (f)   Actually or by simulation portrayed or depicted as
bound, fettered, or subject to sadistic, masochistic, or sadomasochistic
abuse in any sexual context; or



         (g)   Depicted or portrayed in any pose, posture or
setting involving a lewd exhibition of the unclothed or transparently clothed
genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person is female, a fully or
partially developed breast of the child or other person; or



      (2)   With the knowledge of the nature or content thereof,
reproduces, disseminates, offers to disseminate, exhibits or possesses with
intent to disseminate any film, videotape, photograph or other similar visual
reproduction or depiction by computer of any child or person with a severe or
profound intellectual disability whom the person knows or reasonably should
know to be under the age of 18 or to be a person with a severe or profound
intellectual disability, engaged in any activity described in division
(A)(1)(a) through (g) above; or



      (3)   With knowledge of the subject matter or theme thereof,
produces any stage play, live performance, film, videotape or other similar
visual portrayal or depiction by computer which includes a child whom the
person knows or reasonably should know to be under the age of 18 or a person
with a severe or profound intellectual disability engaged in any activity
described in division (A)(1)(a) through (g) above; or



      (4)   Solicits, uses, persuades, induces, entices, or coerces
any child whom he or she knows or reasonably should know to be under the age
of 18 or a person with a severe or profound intellectual disability to appear
in any stage play, live presentation, film, videotape, photograph or other
similar visual reproduction or depiction by computer in which the child or
person with a severe or profound intellectual disability is or will be
depicted, actually or by simulation, in any act, pose or setting described in
division (A)(1)(a) through (g) above; or



      (5)   Is a parent, step-parent, legal guardian or other person
having care or custody of a child whom the person knows or reasonably should
know to be under the age of 18 or a person with a severe or profound
intellectual disability and who knowingly permits, induces, promotes, or
arranges for such child or person with a severe or profound intellectual
disability to appear in any stage play, live performance, film, videotape,
photograph or other similar visual presentation, portrayal or simulation or
depiction by computer of any act or activity described in division (A)(1)(a)
through (g) above; or



      (6)   With knowledge of the nature or content thereof,
possesses any film, videotape, photograph or other similar visual
reproduction or depiction by computer of any child or person with a severe or
profound intellectual disability whom the person knows or reasonably should
know to be under the age of 18 or to be a person with a severe or profound
intellectual disability, engaged in any activity described in division
(A)(1)(a) through (g) above; or



      (7)   Solicits, or knowingly uses, persuades, induces,
entices, or coerces, a person to provide a child under the age of 18 or a
person with a severe or



profound intellectual disability to appear in any videotape, photograph,
film, stage play, live presentation, or other similar visual reproduction or
depiction by computer in which the child or person with a severe or profound
intellectual disability will be depicted, actually or by simulation, in any
act, pose, or setting described in division (A)(1)(a) through (g) above.



   (B)   The possession of each individual film, videotape, photograph,
or other similar visual reproduction or depiction by computer in violation of
this section constitutes a single and separate violation. This division (B)
does not apply to multiple copies of the same film, videotape, photograph, or
other similar visual reproduction or depiction by computer that are identical
to each other.



   (C)   It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of child
pornography that the defendant reasonably believed, under all of the
circumstances, that the child was 18 years of age or older or that the person
was not a person with a severe or profound intellectual disability but only
where, prior to the act or acts giving rise to a prosecution under this
section, he or she took some affirmative action or made a bonafide inquiry
designed to ascertain whether the child was 18 years of age or older or that
the person was not a person with a severe or profound intellectual disability
and his or her reliance upon the information so obtained was clearly
reasonable.



   (D)   Telecommunications carriers, commercial mobile service
providers, and providers of information services, including, but not limited
to, internet service providers and hosting service providers, are not liable
under this section by virtue of the transmission, storage, or caching of
electronic communications or messages of others or by virtue of the provision
of other related telecommunications, commercial mobile services, or
information services used by others in violation of this section.



   (E)   The charge of child pornography shall not apply to the
performance of official duties by law enforcement or prosecuting officers or
persons employed by law enforcement or prosecuting agencies, court personnel
or attorneys, nor to bonafide treatment or professional education programs
conducted by licensed physicians, psychologists or social workers.



   (F)   If the defendant possessed more than one of the same film,
videotape or visual reproduction or depiction by computer in which child
pornography is depicted, then the trier of fact may infer that the defendant
possessed such materials with the intent to disseminate them.



   (G)   The charge of child pornography does not apply to a person who
does not voluntarily possess a film, videotape, or visual reproduction or
depiction by computer in which child pornography is depicted. Possession is
voluntary if the defendant knowingly procures or receives a film, videotape,
or visual reproduction or depiction for a sufficient time to be able to
terminate his or her possession.



   (H)   The penalties for violating this section are provided in §
132.99.



   (I)   Any film, videotape, photograph or other similar visual
reproduction or depiction by computer which includes a child under the age of
18 or a person with a severe or profound intellectual disability engaged in
any activity described in division (A)(1)(a) through (g) above, and any
material or equipment used or intended for use in photographing, filming,
printing, producing, reproducing, manufacturing, projecting, exhibiting,
depiction by computer, or disseminating such material shall be seized and
forfeited in the manner, method and procedure provided by either the city
code or § 36-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code for the seizure and forfeiture
of vessels, vehicles and aircraft. In addition, any person convicted under
this section is subject to the property forfeiture provisions set forth in
Article 124B of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963.



   (J)   Upon the conclusion of a case brought under this section, the
court shall seal all evidence depicting a victim or witness that is sexually
explicit. The evidence may be unsealed and viewed, on a motion of the party
seeking to unseal and view the evidence, only for good cause shown and in the
discretion of the court. The motion must expressly set forth the purpose for
viewing the material. The state's attorney and the victim, if possible, shall
be provided reasonable notice of the hearing on the motion to unseal the
evidence. Any person entitled to notice of a hearing under this division (K)
may object to the motion.



   (K)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:



      COMPUTER, COMPUTER PROGRAM, and DATA. Have the meanings ascribed
to them in § 160-2 of the Illinois Criminal Code.



      DEPICT BY COMPUTER. To generate or create, or cause to be created
or generated, a computer program or data that, after being processed by a
computer either alone or in conjunction with one or more computer programs,
results in a visual depiction on a computer monitor, screen, or display.



      DEPICTION BY COMPUTER. A computer program or data that, after
being processed by a computer either alone or in conjunction with one or more
computer programs, results in a visual depiction on a computer monitor,
screen, or display.



      DISSEMINATE.



         (a)   To sell, distribute, exchange or transfer
possession, whether with or without consideration; or



         (b)   To make a depiction by computer available for
distribution or downloading through the facilities of any telecommunications
network or through any other means of transferring computer programs or data
to a computer.



   PRODUCE. To direct, promote, advertise, publish, manufacture, issue,
present or show.



   REPRODUCE.To make a duplication or copy.



   (L)   For the purposes of this section, CHILD PORNOGRAPHY includes a
film, videotape, photograph, or other similar visual medium or reproduction
or depiction by computer that is, or appears to be, that of a person, either
in part, or in total, under the age of 18 or a person with a severe or
profound intellectual disability, regardless of the method by which the film,
videotape, photograph, or other similar visual medium or reproduction or
depiction by computer is created, adopted, or modified to appear as such.
CHILD PORNOGRAPHY also includes a film, videotape, photograph, or other
similar visual medium or reproduction or depiction by computer that is
advertised, promoted, presented, described, or distributed in such a manner
that conveys the impression that the film, videotape, photograph, or other
similar visual medium or reproduction or depiction by computer is of a person
under the age of 18 or a person with a severe or profound intellectual
disability.



(Prior Code, § 47-4.11)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.12  DISTRIBUTION OF HARMFUL MATERIAL.



   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person who, with knowledge that a
person is a child, that is a person under 18 years of age, or who fails to
exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of a child, knowingly
distributes to or sends or causes to be sent to, or exhibits to, or offers to
distribute or exhibit any harmful material to a child, is guilty of an
offense.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DISTRIBUTE. To transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.



      KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the contents of the subject
matter, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would
have disclosed the contents thereof.



      MATERIAL. Is harmful if, to the average person applying
contemporary standards, its predominant appeal, taken as a whole, is to
prurient interest, that is a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or
excretion, which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in
description or representation of such matters, and is MATERIAL, the redeeming
social importance of which is substantially less than its prurient appeal.
MATERIAL, as used in this section, means any writing, picture, record or
other representation or embodiment.



   (C)   Interpretation of evidence.



      (1)   The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the
material shall be judged with reference to average children of the same
general age of the child to whom such material was offered, distributed, sent
or exhibited, unless it appears from the nature of the matter or the
circumstances of its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is
designed for specially susceptible groups, in which case the predominant
appeal of the material shall be judged with reference to its intended or
probable recipient group.



      (2)   In prosecutions under this section, where circumstances
of production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution or publicity
indicate the material is being commercially exploited for the sake of its
prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the
material and can justify the conclusion that the redeeming social importance
of the material is in fact substantially less than its prurient appeal.



   (D)   Affirmative defenses.



      (1)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any public
library or any library operated by an accredited institution of higher
education from circulating harmful material to any person under 18 years of
age; provided, such circulation is in aid of a legitimate scientific or
educational purpose, and it shall be an affirmative defense in any
prosecution for a violation of this section that the act charged was
committed in aid of legitimate scientific of educational purposes.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any parent from
distributing to his or her child any harmful material.



      (3)   Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown and acted
in reliance upon any of the following documents as proof of the age of a
child, shall be a defense to any criminal prosecution under this section: A
document issued by the federal government or any state, county or municipal
government or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a
motor vehicle operator’s license, a registration certificate issued under
the Federal Selective Service Act or an identification card issued to a
member of the armed forces.



      (4)   In the event an advertisement of harmful material as
defined in this section culminates in the sale or distribution of such
harmful material to a child, under circumstances where there was no personal
confrontation of the child by the defendant, his or her employees or agents,
as where the order or request for such harmful material was transmitted by
mail, telephone or similar means of communication, and delivery of such
harmful material to the child was by mail, freight or similar means of
transport, it shall be a defense in any prosecution for a violation of this
section that the advertisement contained the following statement, or a
statement substantially similar thereto, and that the defendant required the
purchaser to certify that he or she was not under 18 years of age and that
the purchaser falsely stated that he or she was not under 18 years of age:
“NOTICE: It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to purchase
the matter herein advertised. Any person under 18 years of age who falsely
states that he is not under 18 years of age for the purpose of obtaining the
material advertised herein, is guilty of an offense under the Ordinances of
the City of Lake Forest.”



   (E)   Child falsifying age. Any person under 18 years of age who
falsely states, either orally or in writing, that he or she is not under the
age of 18 years, or who presents or offers to any person any evidence of age
and identity which is false or not actually his or her own for the purpose of
ordering, obtaining/viewing or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure
or view any harmful material, is guilty of an offense.



(Prior Code, § 47-4.12)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2017)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished
by a fine not less than $100, nor more than $750, for each offense, a term of
imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.25)  (Ord. 98-31, passed 7-6-1998)



CHAPTER 133:  OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



Section



   133.01   Assault



   133.02   Battery



   133.03   Reckless conduct



 



   133.99   Penalty



§ 133.01  ASSAULT.



   A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he or she
engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of
receiving a battery.



(Prior Code, § 47-5.1)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.02  BATTERY.



   A person commits battery if he or she intentionally or knowingly
without legal justification and by any means:



   (A)   A causes bodily harm to an individual; and/or



   (B)   Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature
with an individual.



(Prior Code, § 47-5.2)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.03  RECKLESS CONDUCT.



   A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of an
individual by any means, commits reckless conduct if he or she performs
recklessly the acts which cause the harm or endanger safety, whether they
otherwise are lawful or unlawful.



(Prior Code, § 47-5.3)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished
by a fine not less than $100, nor more than $750, for each offense, unless a
higher amount is set forth in any ordinance or resolution hereafter passed by
the City Council setting fees, charges, and penalties generally.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.25)  (Ord. 98-31, passed 7-6-1998; Ord. 2016-30, passed
5-2-2016)



CHAPTER 134:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section




General Provisions




   134.01   Deceptive practices



   134.02   Forgery



   134.03   Criminal damage to property



   134.04   Criminal trespass to vehicles



   134.05   Criminal trespass to land



   134.06   Posting bills on fences, buildings or poles



   134.07   Damaging library books or furniture; failure to return a
book




Definitions




   134.20   Definitions




Theft and Related Offenses




   134.35   Theft



   134.36   Prima facie evidence; theft by lessee



   134.37   Theft of lost or mislaid property



   134.38   Theft of labor or services or use of property



   134.39   Offender’s interest in the property



   134.40   Theft from coin-operated machines



   134.41   Legislative declaration




Retail Theft




   134.55   Definitions



   134.56   Detention



   134.57   Affirmative defense



   134.58   Civil liability



   134.59   Severability



 



   134.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 134.01  DECEPTIVE PRACTICES.



   (A)   A person commits a deceptive practice when, with intent to
defraud:



      (1)   He or she causes another, by deception or threat, to
execute a document disposing of property or a document by which a pecuniary
obligation is incurred;



      (2)   Being an officer, manager or other person participating
in the direction of a financial institution, he or she knowingly receives or
permits the receipt of a deposit or other investment, knowing that the
institution is insolvent;



      (3)   He or she knowingly makes or directs another to make a
false or deceptive statement addressed to the public for the purpose of
promoting the sale of property or services; and/or



      (4)   With intent to obtain control over property or to pay
for property, labor or services of another, he or she issues or delivers a
check or other order upon a real or fictitious depository for the payment of
money, knowing that it will not be paid by the depository. Failure to have
sufficient funds or credit with the depository when the check or other order
is issued or delivered is prima facie evidence that the offender knows that
it will not be paid by the depository.



   (B)   A FINANCIAL INSTITUTION means a bank, insurance company,
credit union, savings and loan association investment trust or other
depository of money or medium of savings or collective investment.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.35)



§ 134.02  FORGERY.



   (A)   A person commits forgery when, with intent to defraud, if he
or she knowingly:



      (1)   Makes or alters any document apparently capable of
defrauding another in such manner that it purports to have been made by
another or at another time, or with different provisions, or by authority of
one who did not give such authority;



      (2)   Issues or delivers such document knowing it to have been
thus made or altered; and/or



      (3)   Possesses, with intent to issue or deliver, any such
document knowing it to have been thus made or altered.



   (B)   An INTENT TO DEFRAUD means an intention to cause another to
assume, create, transfer, alter or terminate any right, obligation or power
with reference to any person or property.



   (C)   A document apparently capable of defrauding another includes,
but is not limited to, one by which any right, obligation or power with
reference to any person or property may be created, transferred, altered or
terminated.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.36)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.03  CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.



   A person commits the offense of criminal damage to property who:



   (A)   Knowingly damages any property of another without his or her
consent;



   (B)   Recklessly by means of fire or explosive damages property of
another;



   (C)   Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another without his or
her consent;



   (D)   Knowingly injures an animal of another without his or her
consent;



   (E)   Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of another,
without his or her consent, any stink bomb of any offensive smelling compound
and thereby intends to interfere with the use by another of the land or
building;



   (F)   Damages any property with intent to defraud an insurer; and/or



   (G)   Knowingly damages the property of another without his or her
consent by defacing, deforming or otherwise damaging such property by the use
of paint or any other similar substance.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.37)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.04  CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO VEHICLES.



   Whoever knowingly and without authority enters any vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft, snowmobile, golf cart or other motorized apparatus, or any part
thereof of another, without his or her consent commits an offense.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.38)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.05  CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO LAND.



   (A)   Whoever enters upon the land or any part thereof of another,
after receiving, immediately prior to such entry, notice from the owner or
occupant that such entry is forbidden, or remains upon the land of another
after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart, commits an
offense.



   (B)   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within
the meaning of division (A) above if he or she has been notified personally,
either orally or in writing, or by a printed or written exhibit at the main
entrance to such land or the forbidden part thereof.



   (C)   This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant
worker or otherwise, living on the land with permission of the owner or of
his or her agent having apparent authority to hire workers on such land and
assign them living quarters or a place of accommodations for living thereon,
nor to anyone living on such land at the request of, or by occupancy, leasing
or other agreement or arrangement with the owner or his or her agent, not to
anyone invited by such migrant worker or other person so living on such land
to visit him or her at the place he or she is so living upon the land.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.39)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
134.99



§ 134.06  POSTING BILLS ON FENCES, BUILDINGS OR POLES.



   (A)   No person shall post up or place any handbill or placard or
notice or sign upon any building, fence, telephone, light, electric or other
pole, or tree or lawn or shall mark, scratch, cut or otherwise deface any
part of any building, fence or tree box.



   (B)   it shall be a defense to this section that the party posting
the handbill, placard, notice or sign had the consent of the owner or
occupant of the premises to so place any such bill.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.40)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2- 2016)  Penalty, see §
134.99



§ 134.07  DAMAGING LIBRARY BOOKS OR FURNITURE; FAILURE TO RETURN A BOOK.



   (A)   No person shall willfully or maliciously cut, write upon,
injure, deface, tear or destroy any property or materials belonging to the
public library.



   (B)   No person shall willfully or maliciously commit any injury
upon the public library or upon the grounds, buildings, furniture, fixtures
or other property thereof.



   (C)   No person shall fail to return any materials or media
belonging to the public library, according to the requirements of the by-laws
duly made and adopted by the directors of such library for the government
thereof.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.41)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-20-2016)  Penalty, see §
134.99




DEFINITIONS




§ 134.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DECEPTION. To:



      (1)   Create or confirm another’s impression which is false
and which the offender does not believe to be true;



      (2)   Fail to correct a false impression which the offender
previously has created or confirmed;



      (3)   Prevent another from acquiring information pertinent to
the disposition of the property involved;



      (4)   Sell or otherwise transfer or encumber property, failing
to disclose a lien, adverse claim or other legal impediment to the enjoyment
of the property, whether such impediment is or is not valid, or is or is not
a matter of official record; or



      (5)   Promise performance which the offender does not intend
to perform or knows will not be performed. Failure to perform standing alone
is not evidence that the offender did not intend to perform.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.4)



   OBTAIN.



      (1)   In relation to property, to bring about a transfer of
interest or possession, whether to the offender or to another; and



      (2)   In relation to labor or services to secure the
performance thereof.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.7)



   OBTAIN CONTROL. As used in this chapter, the phrase “obtains or
exerts control” over property, includes, but is not limited to, the taking,
carrying away or the sale, conveyance or transfer of title to or interest in
or possession of property.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.8)



   OWNER. A person, other than the offender, who has possession of or any
other interest in the property involved, even though such interest or
possession is unlawful, and without whose consent the offender has no
authority to exert control over the property.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.2)



   PERMANENT DEPRIVATION. To:



      (1)   Defeat recovery of the property by the owner;



      (2)   Deprive the owner permanently of the beneficial use of
the property;



      (3)   Retain the property with intent to restore it to the
owner only if the owner purchases or leases it back, or pays a reward or
other compensation for its return; or



      (4)   Sell, give, pledge or otherwise transfer any interest in
the property or subject it to the claim of a person other than the owner.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.3)



   PROPERTY. Anything of value. PROPERTY includes real estate, money,
commercial instruments, admission or transportation tickets, written
instruments representing or embodying rights concerning anything of value,
labor or services, or otherwise of value to the owner; things growing on,
affixed to or found on land, or part of or affixed to any building;
electricity, gas and water; birds, animals and fish, which ordinarily are
kept in a state of confinement; food and drink; samples, cultures,
microorganisms, specimens, records, recordings, documents, blueprints,
drawings, maps and whole or partial copies, descriptions, photographs,
prototypes or models thereof, or any other articles, materials, devises,
substances and whole or partial copies, descriptions, photographs, prototypes
or models thereof which constitute, represent, evidence, reflect or record a
secret scientific, technical, merchandising, production or management
information, design, process, procedure, formula, invention or improvement.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.1)



   STOLEN PROPERTY. Property over which control has been obtained by theft.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.6)



   THREAT. A menace, however communicated, to:



      (1)   Inflict physical harm to the person threatened or any
other person or on property;



      (2)   Subject any person to physical confinement or restraint;



      (3)   Commit any criminal offense;



      (4)   Accuse any person of a criminal offense;



      (5)   Expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule;



      (6)   Harm the credit or business repute of any person;



      (7)   Reveal any information sought to be concealed by the
person threatened;



      (8)   Take action as an official against anyone or anything,
or withhold official action, or cause such action or withholding;



      (9)   Bring about or continue a strike, boycott or other
similar collective action if the property is not demanded of received for the
benefit of the group which he or she purports to represent;



      (10)   Testify or provide information or withhold testimony or
information with respect to another’s legal claim or defense; or



      (11)   Inflict any other harm which would not benefit the
offender.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.5)



   VALUE. As used in this chapter, the VALUE of property consisting of any
commercial instrument or any written instrument representing or embodying
rights concerning any thing of value, labor or services or otherwise of VALUE
to the owner shall be:



      (1)   The MARKET VALUE of such instrument if such instrument
is negotiable and has a market value; and



      (2)   The ACTUAL VALUE of such instrument if such instrument
is not negotiable or is otherwise without a market value. For the purpose of
establishing such ACTUAL VALUE, the interest of any owner or owners entitled
to part or all of the property represented by such instrument, by reason of
such instrument, may be shown, even if another owner may be named in the
complaint, information or indictment.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.9)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)




THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES




§ 134.35  THEFT.



   A person commits theft when he or she knowingly:



   (A)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the
owner;



   (B)   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner;



   (C)   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; and/or



   (D)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to
have been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably
induce him or her to believe that the property was stolen, and:



      (1)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or
benefit of the property;



      (2)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in
such manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; and/or



      (3)   Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such
use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently
of such use or benefit.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.10)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
134.99



§ 134.36  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE; THEFT BY LESSEE.



   (A)   It shall be prima facie evidence that a person “knowingly
obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner” when a
lessee of the personal property of another fails to return it to the owner
within ten days after written demand from the owner for its return.



   (B)   A notice in writing, given after the expiration of the leasing
agreement, addressed and mailed, by registered mail, to the lessees at the
address given by him or her and shown on the leasing agreement shall
constitute proper demand.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.11)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)



§ 134.37  THEFT OF LOST OR MISLAID PROPERTY.



   A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits
theft when he or she:



   (A)   Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or is
aware of, or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner;



   (B)   Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to
the owner; and/or



   (C)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit
of the property.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.12)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.38  THEFT OF LABOR OR SERVICES OR USE OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   A person commits theft when he or she obtains the temporary
use of property, labor or services of another which are available only for
hire, by means of threat or deception or knowing that such use is without the
consent of the person providing the property, labor or services.



   (B)   A person commits theft when after renting or leasing a motor
vehicle under an agreement, in writing which provides for the return of the
vehicle to a particular place at a particular time, he or she fails to return
the vehicle to that place within the time specified, and is thereafter
served, with a written demand, or upon whom oral demand is thereafter
personally made, to return such vehicle within 72 hours from the time of the
service or personal communication of such demand, and who willfully fails to
return the vehicle to any place of business of the lessor within such period.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.13)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.39  OFFENDER’S INTEREST IN THE PROPERTY.



   (A)   It is no defense to a charge of theft of property that the
offender has an interest therein, when the owner also has an interest to
which the offender is not entitled.



   (B)   Where the property involved is that of the offender’s
spouse, a prosecution for theft may not be maintained unless the parties were
not living together as married spouses and were living in separate abodes at
the time of the alleged theft.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.14)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)



§ 134.40  THEFT FROM COIN-OPERATED MACHINES.



   (A)   A person commits the offense of theft from a coin-operated
machine when he or she knowingly and without authority and with intent to
commit a theft from such machine, opens, breaks into, tampers with or damages
a coin-operated machine.



   (B)   As used in this section, the term COIN-OPERATED MACHINE shall
include any automatic vending machine or any part thereof, parking meter,
coin telephone, coin laundry machine, coin dry cleaning machine, amusement
machine, music machine, vending machine dispensing goods or services, money
changer.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.15)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.41  LEGISLATIVE DECLARATION.



   It is the public policy of the city that the substantial burden laced
upon the economy of the city resulting from the rising incidence of retail
theft is a matter of grave concern to the people of the city who have a right
to be protected in their health, safety and welfare from the effects of this
crime.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.16)




RETAIL THEFT




§ 134.55  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONCEAL. Although there may be some notice of its presence, that
merchandise is not visible through ordinary observation.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.18)



   FULL RETAIL VALUE.  The merchant’s stated or advertised price of the
merchandise.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.19)



   MERCHANDISE. Any item of tangible personal property.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.20)



   MERCHANT. An  owner or operator if any retail mercantile establishment
or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or
independent contractor of such owner or operator.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.21)



   MINOR. A person who is less than 18 years of age, is unemancipated and
resides with his parents or legal guardian.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.22)



   OFFENSE OF RETAIL THEFT. A person commits the offense of retail theft
when he or she knowingly:



      (1)   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes
to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or
offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of
retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant
permanently of the possession, use of benefit of such merchandise without
paying the full retail value of such merchandise;



      (2)   Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag,
marking, indication of value or any other markings which aid in determining
value affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale,
in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such
merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the full
retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail
value of such merchandise;



      (3)   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or
offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in
or on which such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the
intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise;



      (4)   Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant
of the full retail value of the merchandise; or



      (5)   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail
mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the
time of such removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently
of the possession, use or benefit of such  cart.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.28)



   PEACE OFFICER. The meaning ascribed to that term in § 32.026 of this
code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.23)



   PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT. Includes, but is not
limited to, the retail mercantile establishment; any common use areas in
shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf
of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons
of such retail mercantile establishment.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.24)



   PRESUMPTIONS. If any person:



      (1)   Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her
belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment; and



      (2)   Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station
for receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile
establishment such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away
or transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with
the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or
benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such
merchandise.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.29)



   RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where merchandisers
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale to the public.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.25)



   SHOPPING CART. Those push carts of the type or types which are commonly
provided by grocery stores, drug stores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in
stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the
store.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.26)



   UNDER-RING. To cause the cash register or other sales recording device
to reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.27)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)



§ 134.56  DETENTION.



   (A)   Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a
person has committed retail theft may detain such person, on or off the
premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for
a reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:



      (1)   To request identification;



      (2)   To verify such identification;



      (3)   To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has
in his or her possession unpurchased merchandise and, to make reasonable
investigation of the ownership of such merchandise;



      (4)   To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person
and surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer; and/or



      (5)   In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the
parents, guardian or other private person interested in the welfare of that
minor of this detention and to surrender custody of such minor to such person.



   (B)   A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the
premises of a retail mercantile establishment only if such detention is
pursuant to an immediate pursuit of such person.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.30)



§ 134.57  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.



   A detention, as permitted in this subchapter, does not constitute an
arrest or an unlawful restraint, nor shall it render the merchant liable to
the person so detained.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.31)



§ 134.58  CIVIL LIABILITY.



   The parents or legal guardian of a minor who commits the offense of
retail theft, as herein defined, shall be civilly liable for the full retail
value or cost of repair or cost of replacement of the merchandise and actual
damages not to exceed the limitations provided by § 5 of the Parental
Responsibility Law (Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 70, § 55). A conviction or plea of
guilty of the retail theft is not a prerequisite to the bringing, of a civil
suit hereunder. Recovery under this section may be had in addition to, and is
not limited by, any other provision of law which limits the liability of a
parent or legal guardian for tortuous conduct of a minor.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.32)



§ 134.59  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this subchapter
is for any reason adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such judgment will not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the section, clause,
sentence, paragraph or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in
which such judgment shall have been rendered.



(Prior Code, § 47-6.33)



§ 134.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished
by a fine not less than $100, nor more than $750, unless a higher amount is
set forth in any ordinance or resolution hereafter passed by the City Council
setting fees, charges, and penalties generally.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.25)  (Ord. 98-31, passed 7-6-1998; Ord. 2016-30, passed
5-2-2016)



CHAPTER 135:  OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND DECENCY



Section




General Provisions




   135.001   Disorderly conduct; elements of the offense



   135.002   Transmission of obscene messages prohibited



   135.003   Harassment by telephone



   135.004   Reserved



   135.005   Disturbing religious worship



   135.006   Congregating on street corners; blocking passage



   135.007   Intoxicating beverage in public place



   135.008   Loitering



   135.009   Curfew



   135.010   Impersonating a public official



   135.011   Fireworks



   135.012   Smoke




Drug Offenses




   135.025   Possession of instruments adapted for use of controlled
substances or cannabis by subcutaneous injection prohibited; exceptions



   135.026   Intoxicating compounds; use



   135.027   Sale



   135.028   Illegal controlled substance



   135.029   Illegal control of cannabis




Drug Paraphernalia




   135.040   Definitions



   135.041   Prohibited acts



   135.042   Effective date




Weapons




   135.055   Unlawful use of weapons



   135.056   Reserved



   135.057   Confiscation and disposition of weapons



   135.058   Missiles



   135.059   Unlawful use of air rifles



   135.060   Discharge of firearms



   135.061   Weapons; concealed




Gambling




   135.075   Gambling



   135.076   Definitions




Offenses and Law Enforcement




   135.090   Resisting or obstructing a peace officer



   135.091   Refusing to aid an officer



   135.092   Obstructing justice



   135.093   Impersonating a police officer




Noise Offenses




   135.105   Vehicles with music



   135.106   Loud speaking devices



   135.107   Advertising by calling out



   135.108   Noise; generally




Permits, Licenses or Grants




   135.120   False information for permit, license or grant



   135.121   Illegal use of permit, license or grant




Tobacco Products and Minors




   135.135   Definitions; prohibitions



   135.136   Vending machines prohibited



   135.137   Notice required



   135.138   License required



   135.139   Suspension of tobacco dealer’s license



 



   135.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 135.001  DISORDERLY CONDUCT; ELEMENTS OF THE OFFENSE.



   A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:



   (A)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or
disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace;



   (B)   Transmits in any manner to the fire department of any city,
town, village or fire protection district a false alarm of fire, knowing at
the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such fire exists;



   (C)   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect
that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that
its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such
transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb
or explosive is concealed in such place;



   (D)   Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer
or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed,
knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground
for believing that such an offense has been committed;



   (E)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening in it;



   (F)   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the
Collection Agency Act, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 121-1/2, § 801, or as an employee
of an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which is
designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor; and/or



   (G)   Congregates with other persons in a public place and refuses
to comply with a lawful order of the police to disperse where failure to
disperse would result in likelihood of harm or unnecessary inconvenience to
the public.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.5)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.002  TRANSMISSION OF OBSCENE MESSAGES PROHIBITED.



   Any person in this city who sends messages which are obscene with the
intent to offend by means of or while using a telephone or telegraph
facilities, equipment or wires of any person, firm or corporation engages in
the transmission of news or messages between states or within the city is
guilty of an offense. The use of language or terms which are obscene is prima
facie evidence of the intent to offend.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.6)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
135.999



§ 135.003  HARASSMENT BY TELEPHONE.



   (A)   Harassment by telephone is use of telephone communication for
any of the following purposes:



      (1)   Making any comment, request, suggestion or proposal
which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent with an intent to
offend;



      (2)   Making a telephone call, whether or not conversation
ensues, with intent to abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called
number;



      (3)   Making or causing the telephone of another repeatedly to
ring, with intent to harass any person at the called number;



      (4)   Making repeated telephone calls, during which
conversation ensues, solely to harass any person at the called number; and/or



      (5)   Knowingly permitting any telephone under one’s control
to be used for any of the purposes mentioned herein.



   (B)   Harassment by telephone is an offense.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.7)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.004  RESERVED.



§ 135.005  DISTURBING RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.



   Whomever shall, within the limits of the city, disquiet or disturb any
congregation or assembly met for any lawful purpose, religious or otherwise,
by making noise, or by any rude, indecent behavior or profane discourse of
disorderly conduct, within their place of meeting, or so near the same as to
disturb the other of solemnity of the meeting, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.18)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.006  CONGREGATING ON STREET CORNERS; BLOCKING PASSAGE.



   No person shall congregate about or upon any stairway, doorway, window
or in front of any business or dwelling house, theater, lecture room, church,
street corner or elsewhere, and by so doing obstruct or interfere with the
free passage of persons entering or occupying such building or premises, or
by language, conversation or conduct annoy, insult or disturb persons passing
along the street or alleys, or occupying, residing or doing business in any
of said houses or places.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.19)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.007  INTOXICATING BEVERAGE IN PUBLIC PLACE.



   (A)   No person shall consume or ingest any intoxicating beverage,
or carry or possess the same except in the original container, unopened, and
with the seal unbroken, in or on any street or public place,



   (B)   This section shall not apply to parks in Lake Forest which are
covered by Chapter 97 in this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.20)



§ 135.008  LOITERING.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      LOITERING. Remaining idle in essentially one location and shall
include the concepts of spending time idly, stand, standing, loafing or
walking about aimlessly, and shall also include the colloquial expressions
“hanging around.”



      PARENT or GUARDIAN. Any adult person having care or custody of a
minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of any court or
otherwise.



      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public has access and shall
include any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk, It shall also include
the front of the neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other
place of business, in front of any hall, lobby, doorway, passage or entrance
to any public building, public grounds, area, parks, as well as parking lots
or other vacant private property not owned by or under the control of the
person charged with violating this section, or in any case of a minor, not
owned or under the control of his or her parent or guardian.



   (B)   Certain types of loitering prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any person to loiter in a public place in such manner as to:



      (1)   Clearly cause an immediate, actual, physical violent
reaction from any person or ordinary sensibilities, which reaction will cause
or create a threat to the peace and good order of the public;



      (2)   So disturbs person of ordinary sensibilities as to cause
such person to react immediately in such a way as to threaten by, physical
violence the peace and good order of the public;



      (3)   Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; or



      (4)   Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully
in a public place as defined in division (A) above. This division (B)(4)
shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting
or insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb a person of
ordinary sensibilities so as to cause such person to react immediately in
such a way as to threaten by physical violence the peace and good order of
the public. No person shall be convicted of loitering in a public place in
violation of this section unless a police officer at the time determined that
such person was causing any of the conditions enumerated hereinabove and such
police officer, at that time, ordered the person to cease the enumerated
conducted, which police order the person refused to obey.



   (C)   Loitering by minors. No parent or guardian of a minor under
the age, of 18 years shall knowingly permit the minor to loiter in violation
of this section.



   (D)   Notice of violation. Whenever any minor under the age of 18
years is adjudicated to be in violation of this section, his or her parent or
guardian shall be notified of this fact by the Chief of Police or any other
person designated by him or her to give such notice.



   (E)   Presumption. If at any time within 30 days following the
giving of notice as provided in division (D) above, the minor to whom such
notice relates again violation this section, it shall be presumed in the
absence of evidence of the contrary that the minor did so with the knowledge
and permission of his or her parent or guardian.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.21)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
135.999



§ 135.009  CURFEW.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CURFEW HOURS.



         (a)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;



         (b)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday; and



         (c)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday,
inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the following day.



      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.



      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for
a profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any
place of amusement or entertainment.



      GUARDIAN.



         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the GUARDIAN
of the person of a minor; or



         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has
been placed by a court.



      MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.



      PARENT. A person who is:



         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent
of another person; or



         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a
parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses,
office buildings, transport facilities and shops.



      REMAIN. To:



         (a)   Linger or stay; or



         (b)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by
a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the
premises.



      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.



   (B)   Offenses.



      (1)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours.



      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in
custody or control of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly
permits the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment during curfew hours.



   (C)   Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under division (B)
above that the minor was:



      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian or other
person in custody or control of the minor;



      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or
guardian, without any detour or stop;



      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



      (5)   Involved in an emergency;



      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the Police Department about the minor’s presence;



      (7)   Attending an official school, religious. or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or
governmental agency, a civic organization or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from,
without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or
governmental agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor;



      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly; or



      (9)   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor
under the Emancipation of Minors Act.



   (D)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this
section, a law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age
and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a
citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably
believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and
other circumstances, no defense in division (C) above is present.



   (E)   A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this
section shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not more than
$750, except that neither a person who has been made a ward of the court
under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, nor that person’s legal guardian,
shall be subject to any fine. ln addition to or instead of the fine imposed
by this section, the court may order a parent, legal guardian or other person
convicted of a violation of division (B) above to perform community service
as determined by the court, except that the legal guardian of a person who
has been made a ward of the court under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987 may
not be ordered to perform community service. The dates and times established
for the performance of community service by the parent, legal guardian or
other person convicted of a violation of division (B) above shall not
conflict with the dates and times that the person is employed in his or her
regular occupation.



   (F)   School curfew for minors.



      (1)   Definitions. For the purposes of this division (F), the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         KNOWINGLY. Having general knowledge of, or reason to know,
or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inquiry or inspection.



         LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person appointed guardian, or given
custody, of a minor by a circuit court of this state, but does not include a
person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile
Court Act of 1987, 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.



         MINOR. A person under the age of 18 years.



         PARENT. A natural or adoptive parent or a court designated
guardian.



         UNEMANCIPATED MINOR. A minor still under the care and
custody of at least one of his or her parents or a legal guardian.



         WILLFUL. Proceeding from a conscious and voluntary
intentional motion of the will.



      (2)   Daytime/school curfew. It shall be unlawful for any
minor who is enrolled in any public, private, or parochial school to be
present at or upon, or to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in or upon, any
street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, park, playground, or other public place, or
in or on any public building, place of amusement or entertainment, or any
vacant lot in the village, other than school, during any hours when school is
in session during the regular school term, unless such minor is:



         (a)   Traveling to or from school by the most direct
route: or



         (b)   Engaged in school related activities with written
approval of school authorities or as otherwise authorized by written school
policy; or



         (c)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or
other person in custody or control of the minor;



         (d)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's
parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;



         (e)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



         (f)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



         (g)   Involved in an emergency;



         (h)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the Police Department about the minor's presence;



         (i)   Attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or
governmental agency, a civic organization or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from,
without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or
governmental agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor;



         (j)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly; or



         (k)   Married or had been married or is an emancipated
minor under the Emancipation of Minors Act.



      (3)   Investigatory detention. Any police officer may stop and
detain a person whom the police officer reasonably suspects to be violating
this division (F) for purpose of verifying the detained person's identity,
age, school enrollment and authority to be absent from school. The police
officer shall immediately inform the detained person of the reason for the
detention and that he or she will be released upon verification of
authorization to be absent from school. If the detained person refuses to
provide the police officer with the necessary information, or if
authorization to be absent from school cannot be verified within 15 minutes
of the detention, the detained person shall, if practicable, be taken to
school authorities or a parent or legal guardian or other adult having lawful
custody or supervision of such person.



      (4)   First and subsequent violations. Any person who violates
this division (F) shall be warned by any police officer forthwith to comply
with such provisions, and such officer shall also, without delay, report such
violation to his or her superior officer, who shall cause a written notice to
be served upon the parent, legal guardian or other adult having lawful
custody or supervision of such person, setting forth the manner in which this
division (F) has been violated. In case any minor, after such warning, shall
again violate any of the provisions of this division (F), he or she shall be
subject to penalties pursuant to § 135.999.



      (5)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any
parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor to knowingly suffer,
permit, or allow such minor to violate any provision of this division (F).



(720 ILCS 555/1)  (Prior Code, § 47-7.22)  (Ord. 99-50, passed 2-17-2000;
Ord. 04-31, passed 6-17-2004; Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see
§ 135.999



§ 135.010  IMPERSONATING A PUBLIC OFFICIAL.



   No person, unless authorized by the city or an officer thereof, shall
cause to be exhibited or displayed upon his or her person, or upon any animal
or vehicle, or upon any article or substance or thing, any metal plate or
tag, badge, official star or license issued as a mark of identification.



(Prior Code, § 26-3)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.011  FIREWORKS.



   It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, deliver, give, possess or
to discharge or set off any fireworks or pyrotechnics anywhere in the city,
except as provided in § 94.01.



(Prior Code, § 26-8)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
135.999



§ 135.012  SMOKE.



   The emission of dense smoke from the smoke stack of any locomotive, or
from any chimney, or from any fire, furnace boiler, engine, chimney or stack,
anywhere within the corporate limits of the city, shall be deemed and is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and is prohibited; the owner or
owners of any locomotive or engine, and the person or persons employed as
engineers, or otherwise, in the working of said engine or engines, or in the
operating of such locomotive, and the proprietor, lessee and occupant of any
laundry, green house, factory, power house or of any building or structure
whatsoever, who shall cause, permit to allow dense smoke to issue or to be
emitted from any such locomotive, engine, laundry, greenhouse, factory, power
house or of any building or structure whatsoever shall be deemed and held
guilty of creating a nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 26-11)  Penalty, see § 135.999




DRUG OFFENSES




§ 135.025  POSSESSION OF INSTRUMENTS ADAPTED FOR USE OF CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES OR CANNABIS BY SUBCUTANEOUS INJECTION PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person, not being a physician, dentist, chiropodist or
veterinarian licensed under the laws of this state or of the state where he
or she resides, or a registered professional nurse, or a registered embalmer,
manufacturer or dealer in embalming supplies, wholesale druggist,
manufacturing pharmacist, registered pharmacist, manufacturer of surgical
instruments, industrial user, official of any government having possession of
the articles hereinafter mentioned by reason of his or her official duties,
nurse or a medical laboratory technician acting under the direction of a
physician or dentist, employee of an incorporated hospital acting under the
direction of its superintendent or officer in immediate charge, or a carrier
or messenger engaged in the transportation of such articles, or the holder of
a permit issued under Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, § 22-54, or a farmer engaged
in the use of such instruments on livestock, or a person engaged in chemical,
clinical, pharmaceutical or other scientific research, shall have in his or
her possession a hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle or any instrument
adapted for the use of controlled substances or cannabis by subcutaneous
injection.



   (B)   Any person in possession of a hypodermic syringe, hypodermic
needle or any Instrument adapted for the use of a controlled substance or
cannabis by subcutaneous injection in violation of this section is guilty of
an offense.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.1)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.026  INTOXICATING COMPOUNDS; USE.



   No person shall breathe, inhale or drink any compound, liquid or
chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene,
ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl ketone, trichoroathane, isopropanol, methyl
isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosoive acetate cyclohexanone or any other
substance for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication,
stupefaction, depression, giddiness, paralysis or irrational behavior, or in
any manner changing, distorting or disturbing the auditory, visual or mental
processes. For the purposes of this section, any such condition so induced
shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.10)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.027  SALE.



   No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale, deliver or give to
any person under 18 years of age, unless upon written order of such
person’s parent or guardian, any compound, liquid or chemical containing
toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl
ethyl ketone, trichloroathane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl
cellosoive acetate cyclohexanone, or any other substance which will induce an
intoxicated condition, as defined herein, when the seller, offeror or
deliverer knows or has reason to know that such compound is intended for use
to induce such condition.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.11)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.028  ILLEGAL CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.



   It shall be unlawful except as authorized by state statute, for any
person knowingly to possess, sell, offer for sale, give, produce,
manufacture, deliver or possess with intent to deliver or manufacture any
controlled substance as listed in Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56, §§ 1204, 1206,
1208 and 1210.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.15)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.029  ILLEGAL CONTROL OF CANNABIS.



   (A)   Cannabis includes marijuana, hashish and other substances
which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa,
whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part
of such plan; and any compound, manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture or
preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including
tetrahydrocannabinel (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including
its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether
produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of
chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis;
but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from
such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of .such plant, any other
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such
mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil or cake, or
the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of termination).



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to possess, sell, offer to sell, give
produce, manufacture, deliver or possess with intent to deliver or
manufacture, cannabis which includes marijuana, hashish or other1 derivatives
from any part of the plant Cannabis Sativa.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.16)  Penalty, see § 135.999




DRUG PARAPHERNALIA




§ 135.040  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CANNABIS. As defined in Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56-1/2, § 703, Public Act
79-1465, as amended.



   COCAINE SPOON. A spoon with a bowl so small that the primary use for
which it is reasonably adapted or designed is to hold or administer cocaine,
and which is so small as to be unsuited for the typical, lawful uses of a
spoon. A COCAINE SPOON may or may not be merchandised on a chain and may or
may not be labeled as a “cocaine” spoon or “coke” spoon.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any drug, substance, or immediate precursor
enumerated in Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56-1/2, Schedules 1 through 5, Public Act
79-465, as amended, commonly known as the Controlled Substances Act.



   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



      (1)   All equipment, products and materials of any kind which
are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance as defined in Ill.
Rev. Stat. Ch. 56-1/2, Schedules 1 through 5, Public Act 79-454, as amended
or cannabis as defined in Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56-1/2, § 703, Public Act
79-1465, as amended. It includes, but is not limited to:



         (a)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or cannabis or from which a controlled
substance or cannabis can be derived;



         (b)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substance or cannabis;



         (c)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance or cannabis;



         (d)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or
designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness
or purity of controlled substances or cannabis;



         (e)   Scales and balances, used, intended for use, or
designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances or cannabis;



         (f)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine
hydrochloride, manitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use
or designed for use in cutting controlled substances or cannabis;



         (g)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use
or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise
cleaning or refining marijuana;



         (h)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing
devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances or cannabis;



         (i)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers
used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances or cannabis;



         (j)   Containers and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances or
cannabis;



         (k)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use
in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish
or hashish oil into the human body such as:



            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic
or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls;



            2.   Water pipes;



            3.   Carburetor tubes and devices;



            4.   Smoking and carburetor masks;



            5.   Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold
burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or
too short to be held in the hand;



            6.   Chamber pipes;



            7.   Carburetor pipes;



            8.   Electric pipes;



            9.   Air-driven pipes;



            10.   Chillums;



            11.   Bongs;



            12.   Ice pipes or chillers;



            13.   Vape-pen; and/or



            14.   E-cigarettes.



      (2)   In determining whether an object is DRUG PARAPHERNALIA,
a court order or other authority should consider in addition to all other
logically relevant factors, the following:



         (a)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of
the object concerning its use;



         (b)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to
any controlled substance;



         (c)   The proximity of the object, in time and space to
a direct violation of this subchapter;



         (d)   The proximity of the object to controlled
substances;



         (e)   The existence of any residue of controlled
substances on the objects;



         (f)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of
an owner, or anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom
he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a
violation of this subchapter; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, as to a direct violation of this act shall not prevent
a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug
paraphernalia;



         (g)   Instruction, oral or written, provided with the
object concerning its use;



         (h)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object
which explain or depict its use;



         (i)   National and local advertising concerning its use;



         (j)   The manner in which the object is displayed for
sale;



         (k)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the
object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community,
such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;



         (l)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of
sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;



         (m)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community; and/or



         (n)   Expert testimony concerning its use.



   MARIJUANA OR HASHISH PIPE. A pipe characterized by a bowl which is so
small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adapted or designed is
the smoking of marijuana or hashish, rather than lawful smoking tobacco, and
which may or may not be equipped with a screen.



   PERSON. An individual, corporation, government or governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or
association.



(Prior Code, § 26-16)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)



§ 135.041  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, offer
for sale, display, furnish, supply or give away any cocaine spoon, marijuana
pipe, hashish pipe or any drug paraphernalia, as defined herein.



   (B)   The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to
manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians,
technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical
laboratories, medical doctors, osteopaths, physicians, dentists,
chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists or embalmers in the normal lawful
course of their respective businesses or professions, nor to common carriers
or warehousers or their employees engaged in the lawful transportation of
such paraphernalia, nor to public officers or employees while engaged in the
performance of their official duties, nor to persons suffering from a
medically diagnosed medical condition requiring subcutaneous injection, but
only with regard to the possession of those instruments medically necessary
for such injection.



(Prior Code, § 26-17)  (Ord. 00-14, passed 4-3-2000)  Penalty, see §
135.999



§ 135.042  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall be in effect from and after its passage as
provided by laws.



(Prior Code, § 26-19)  (Ord. 1450, passed 7-14-1984)




WEAPONS




§ 135.055  UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS.



   (A)   A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons when
he or she knowingly:



      (1)   Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries any
bludgeon or similar weapon, including, but not limited to, black-jacks,
slung-shots, sand-clubs, and sand-bags, metal knuckles or other knuckle
weapon regardless of its composition, throwing star, or any knife, commonly
referred to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens
automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in
the handle of the knife, or a ballistic knife, which is a device that propels
a knifelike blade as a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic material
or compressed gas, or sling-shot;



      (2)   Carries or possesses with intent to use the same
unlawfully against another, a dagger, dirk, billy club, dangerous knife,
razor, stiletto, broken bottle or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser or
any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character;



      (3)   Carries on or about his or her person or in any vehicle,
a tear gas gun projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas
or substance, other than an object containing a non-lethal noxious liquid gas
or substance designed solely for personal defense carried by a person 18
years of age or older; or



      (4)   Carries or possesses in any vehicle or concealed on or
about his or her person, except when on his or her land or in his or her own
abode, legal dwelling, or fixed place of business, or on the land or in the
legal dwelling of another person as an invitee with that person’s
permission,  any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser or other firearm,
except that this division (A)(4) does not apply to or affect transportation
of weapons that meet one of the following conditions:



         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state; or



         (b)   Are not immediately accessible; or



         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm
carrying box, shipping box, or other container by a person who has been
issued a currently valid firearm owner’s identification card; or



         (d)   Are carried or possessed in accordance with the
Firearm Concealed Carry Act by a person who has been issued a currently valid
license under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act;



      (5)   Sets a spring gun;



      (6)   Possesses any device or attachment of any kind designed,
used or intended for use in silencing the report of any firearm; or



      (7)   Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries:



         (a)   A MACHINE GUN, which shall be defined for the
purposes of this division (A)(7)(a) as any weapon, which shoots, is designed
to shoot, or can be readily restored to shoot, automatically more than one
shot without manually reloading by a single function of the trigger,
including the frame or receiver of any such weapon, or sells, manufactures,
purchases, possesses, or carries any combination of parts designed or
intended for use in converting any weapon into a machine gun, or any
combination of parts from which a machine gun can be assembled if such parts
are in the possession or under the control of a person;



         (b)   Any rifle having one or more barrels less than 16
inches in length or a shotgun having one or more barrels less than 18 inches
in length or any weapon made from a rifle or shotgun, whether by alteration,
modification, or otherwise, if such a weapon as modified has an overall
length of less than 26 inches; or



         (c)   Any bomb, bomb- shell, grenade, bottle or other
container containing an explosive substance of over one-quarter ounce for
like purposes, such as, but not limited to, black powder bombs and Molotov
cocktails or artillery projectiles; or



      (8)   Carries or possesses any firearm, stun gun or taser or
other deadly weapon in any place which is licensed to sell intoxicating
beverages, or at any public gathering held pursuant to a license issued by
any governmental body or any public gathering at which an admission is
charged, excluding a place where a showing, demonstration or lecture
involving the exhibition of unloaded firearms is conducted. This division
(A)(8) does not apply to any auction or raffle of a firearm held pursuant to
a license or permit issued by a governmental body, nor does it apply to
persons engaged in firearm safety training courses; or



      (9)   Carries or possesses in a vehicle or on or about his or
her person any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser or firearm or ballistic
knife, when he or she is hooded, robed or masked in such manner as to conceal
his or her identity; or



      (10)   Carries or possesses on or about his or her person,
upon any public street, alley, or other public lands within the corporate
limits of the city, except when an invitee thereon or therein, for the
purpose of the display of such weapon or the lawful commerce in weapons, or
except when on his or her land or in his or her own abode, legal dwelling, or
fixed place of business, or on the land or in the legal dwelling of another
person as an invitee with that person’s permission, any pistol, revolver,
stun gun or taser or other firearm, except that this division (A)(1) does not
apply to or affect transportation of weapons that meet one of the following
conditions:



         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state; or



         (b)   Are not immediately accessible; or



         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm
carrying box, shipping box, or other container by a person who has been
issued a currently valid firearm owner’s identification card; or



         (d)   Are carried or possessed in accordance with the
Firearm Concealed Carry act by a person who has been issued a currently valid
license under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act; or



      (11)   Sells, manufactures or purchases an explosive bullet.
For purposes of this division (A), EXPLOSIVE BULLET means the projectile
portion of an ammunition cartridge which contains or carries and explosive
charge which will explode upon contact with the flesh of a human or an
animal. CARTRIDGE means a tubular metal case having a projectile affixed at
the front thereof and a cap or primer at the rear end thereof, with the
propellant contained in such tube between the projectile and the cap; or



      (12)   Carries or possesses on or about his or her person
while in a building occupied by a unit of government, a billy club, other
weapon of like character, or other instrument of like character intended for
use as a weapon. For the purposes of this division (A), BILLY CLUB means a
short stick or club which is either telescopic or constructed of a solid
piece of wood or other man-made material.



   (B)   A STUN GUN or LASER, as used division (A) above, means:



      (1)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging
units, such as, batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a
length of wire and which, upon hitting a human, can send out a current
capable of disrupting the person’s nervous system in such a manner as to
render him or her incapable of normal functioning; or



      (2)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging
units, such as batteries, and which, upon contact with a human or clothing
worn by a human, can send out current capable of disrupting the person’s
nervous system in such a manner as to render him or her incapable of normal
functioning.



   (C)   The presence in an automobile other than a public omnibus of
any weapon, instrument or substance referred to in division (A)(7) is prima
facie evidence that it is in the possession of, and is being carried by, all
persons occupying such automobile at the time such weapon, instrument or
substance is found, except upon the following circumstances: (i) if such
weapon, instrument or instrumentality is found upon the person of one of the
occupants therein; or (ii) if such weapon, instrument or substance is found
in an automobile operated for hire by a duly licensed driver in the due,
lawful and proper pursuit of his or her trade, then such presumption shall
not apply to the driver.



   (D)   Exemptions; crossbows. Common or compound bows and underwater
spearguns are exempted from the definition of BALLISTIC KNIFE as defined in
division (A)(1) above.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.2)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
135.999



§ 135.056  RESERVED.



§ 135.057  CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS.



   (A)   Upon conviction of a violation of § 135.055, any weapon
seized shall be confiscated by the trial court.



   (B)   Any stolen weapon so confiscated, when no longer needed for
evidentiary purposes, shall be returned to the person entitled to possession
if known. All other confiscated weapons after the disposition of a criminal
case and when no longer needed for evidentiary purposes, and when in due
course no legitimate claim has been made for such weapons, the court may
transfer such weapons to the Sheriff of the county who shall proceed to
destroy them, or may in its discretion order such weapons preserved as
property of the governmental body whose police agency seized the weapon. If,
after the disposition of a criminal case, a need still exists for the use of
said confiscated weapons for evidentiary purposes, the court may transfer
such weapons to the custody of the State Department of Corrections for
preservation.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.4)



§ 135.058  MISSILES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any missile on
any street, alley or public place; and it shall be unlawful to throw or
deposit any glass, nails, tacks or other similar articles on any street,
sidewalk, alley or other public place in the city.



   (B)   MISSILES include, but are not limited to, cans, bottles,
rocks, sticks and stones.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.23)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.059  UNLAWFUL USE OF AIR RIFLES.



   (A)   An AIR RIFLE is any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring
pistol, B-B gun, paint ball gun, pellet gun or any implement that is not a
firearm which impels a breakable paint ball containing washable marking
colors or, a pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard
materials with a force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm.



   (B)   A person commits the offense of unlawful use of air rifle when
he or she knowingly carries or possess in a vehicle or on or about his or her
person any air gun within the corporate limits of the city, except when on
his or her own land or in his or her own abode or fixed place of business.



   (C)   Nothing herein shall apply to the possession or transportation
of an air rifle if the air rifle is broken down in a non-functioning state,
or if carried in a case, or if it is not immediately accessible.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.24)  (Ord. 04-04, passed 1-5-2004; Ord. 2016-30, passed
5-2-2016)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.060  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms, or air gun,
pellet gun, BB gun or similar device, in the city; provided that, this
section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law to
discharge a firearm in the performance of his or her duty, nor any citizen to
discharge a firearm when lawfully defending his or her person or property in
accord with ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, Title II, Art. 7.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge a firearm by a person having
a firearms owners identification card to shoot rodents or to shoot trap or
skeet when done on a property constructed range 1,000 feet from any residence
or public highway, except with the permission of the Chief of Police.



(Prior Code, § 26-9)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
135.999



§ 135.061  WEAPONS; CONCEALED.



   It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapons in the city without
first having a license to carry such concealed weapons, duly issued under the
laws of the state.



(Prior Code, § 26-10)  Penalty, see § 135.999




GAMBLING




§ 135.075  GAMBLING.



   (A)   A person commits the offense of gambling when he or she:



      (1)   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing
of value, unless excepted in division (B) of this section;



      (2)   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest or
any political nomination, appointment or election;



      (3)   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents,
sells, bargains for the sale or tease of, manufactures or distributes any
gambling device;



      (4)   Contracts to have or give himself, herself or another
the option to buy or sell, or contracts to buy or sell,  at a future time,
any grain or other commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of any
company, where it is at the time of making such contract intended by both
parties thereto that the contract to buy or sell, or the option, whenever
exercised, or the contract resulting therefrom, shall be settled, not by the
receipt or delivery of such property, but by the payment only of differences
in prices thereof; however, the issuance, purchase, sale, exercise,
endorsement or guarantee, by or through a person registered with the
Secretary of State pursuant to § 8 of the Illinois Securities Law of 1953,
Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 121-1/2, § 137, or by or through a person exempt from
such registration under said Section 8, of a put, call, or other option to
buy or sell securities which have been registered with the Secretary of State
of which are exempt from such registration under § 3 of the Illinois
Securities Law of 1953, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 121-1/2, § 137, is not gambling
with the meaning of this division (A)(4);



      (5)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or
apparatus by means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or
registered, or knowingly possesses any money which he or she has received in
the course of a bet or wager;



      (6)   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of
skill or chance, political nomination, appointment or election;



      (7)   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell
or transfer any ticket or share for any lottery;



      (8)   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to
sell or knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record,
document or other similar device;



      (9)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game or
drafts, prints or publishes any lottery ticket or share, or any policy
ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, or any advertisement of any
lottery or policy game; or



      (10)   Knowingly transmits information as to waivers, betting
odds or changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or
similar means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the
transmission or receipt of such information; except that, nothing in this
division (A)(10) prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for
use in news reporting of sporting events or contests.



   (B)   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be
convicted of gambling:



      (1)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the
happening of chance including without limitation contracts of indemnity of
guaranty and life or health or accident insurance;



      (2)   Offers of prizes, award or compensation to the actual
contestants in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed,
strength or endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such
contest;



      (3)   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this
state;



      (4)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the
acquisition of essential parts therefor and the assemble thereof, for
transportation in interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this
state when such transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal
law;



      (5)   The game commonly known as “bingo” when conducted in
accordance with an Act Making Lawful the Conducting of Bingo by Certain
Non-profit Organizations, Requiring Licensing and Prescribing Regulations
Therefor, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 120, § 1101.



      (6)   Lotteries when conducted by the State of Illinois in
accordance with the Illinois Lottery Law, enacted by the 78th General
Assembly, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 120.



   (C)   In prosecutions under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(10) above,
circumstantial evidence shall have the same validity and weight as in any
criminal prosecution.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.8)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.076  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other
machines or device for the reception of money or other thing of value on
chance or skill or upon the action or which money or other thing of value is
staked, hazarded, bet, won or lost, including, but not limited to, Any video
gaming terminal, as defined in the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/5; or any
mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment or other device designed primarily
for use in a gambling place. A GAMBLING DEVICE does not include:



      (1)   A coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical device played for
amusement which rewards the player with the right to replay such mechanical
device, which device is so constructed or devised as to make such result of
the operation thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which
returns to the player thereof no money, property or right to receive money or
property.



      (2)   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is
made for the money invested and in which there is no element of chance or
hazard.



   LOTTERY. Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are
distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration
for a chance to win such prizes. Whether such scheme or procedure is called a
LOTTERY, raffle, gift, sale or some other name.



   POLICY GAME. Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or
guarantees by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing token or other
device that any particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall, in
the event of any contingency in the nature of a lottery, entitle the
purchaser of holder to receive money, property or evidence of debt.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.9)  (Ord. 2009-27, passed 9-8-2009; Ord. 2012-12,
passed 4-16-2012)




OFFENSES AND LAW ENFORCEMENT




§ 135.090  RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER.



   A person commits the offense of resisting or obstructing a peace
officer when he or she intentionally or knowingly:



   (A)   Resists or obstructs the performance by one known to the
person to be a peace officer of any authorized act within his or her official
capacity.



   (B)   Furnishes a false or fictitious name, residence address, or
date of birth to one known to the person to be a peace officer who has:



      (1)   Lawfully arrested the person;



      (2)   Lawfully detained the person; or



      (3)   Requested the information from the person that the peace
officer has good cause to believe is a witness to a criminal crime.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.12)  (Ord. 2016-53, passed 9-6-2016)  Penalty, see §
135.999



§ 135.091  REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.



   Whoever upon command refuses or knowingly fails reasonably to aid a
person known by him or her to be a peace officer in:



   (A)   Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to
apprehend; and/or



   (B)   Preventing the commission by another of any offense, commits
an offense.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.13)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.092  OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.



   A person obstructs justice, when, with intent to prevent the
apprehension or obstruct the prosecution or defense of any person, he or she
knowingly destroys, alters, conceals or disguises physical evidence, plants
false evidence or furnishes false information.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.14)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.093  IMPERSONATING A POLICE OFFICER.



   No person, unless authorized by the city or an officer thereof, shall
cause to be exhibited or displayed upon his or her person, or upon any animal
or vehicle, or upon any article or substance or thing, any metal plate or
tag, badge, official star or license issued as a mark of identification.



(Prior Code, § 26-2)  (Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
135.999




NOISE OFFENSES




§ 135.105  VEHICLES WITH MUSIC.



   No person shall use or operate a vehicle using a loud instrument or
appurtenance as means of attracting public attention to any sale, auction,
game, meeting or other public event, any advertising display upon such
vehicle, upon a street or public place.



(Prior Code, § 26-4)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.106  LOUD SPEAKING DEVICES.



   No person shall use any loud speaking device, radio or horn upon the
streets or attached to any building in front of any open window or any
building for the purpose of advertising any sale, goods, event or any other
things, or attracting the attention of the public, and no person shall call
or give direction to, or attempt to attract the attention of any person
driving a car or occupying a vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 26-5)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.107  ADVERTISING BY CALLING OUT.



   Except in amusement grounds, parks, halls or other places, no person
shall make or cause, permit or allow to be made any noise of any kind of
crying, calling or shouting, or by means of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong,
clappers, hammer, drum, horn or similar mechanical device for the purpose of
advertising any goods, wares or merchandise, or of attracting the attention
or inviting the patronage of any person to any business.



(Prior Code, § 26-6)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.108  NOISE; GENERALLY.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to cause or to make unreasonable
loud noise in any depot, store, theater, street, alley, sidewalk, park or
other public place or any place frequented by the public in the city.



      (2)   It shall further be unlawful to cause or make
unreasonable loud noise at any point on or beyond the boundary of any lot,
whether privately owned or public, which such unreasonable noise interferes
with the quiet enjoyment of adjoining lots or lots within 1,000 feet of the
location from which the noise is emanating.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to carry on or conduct any
manufacture, trade or business, engage in any activity, or use a vehicle,
machine or other equipment in said city which, by occasioning loud noises or
sound shall be offensive or prejudicial or dangerous to the health of
individuals or of the public of the city or which shall disturb or break the
rest, sleep or quiet of persons in said city before 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and
8:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays, and after 8:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays, except as
authorized by the City Manager.



      (2)   These restrictions shall not apply to snow removal
equipment, including, but not limited to, snowplows and snowblowers.



   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to cause or make loud noise
through the operation of lawn maintenance equipment including, but not
limited to, lawn mowers, tractors and gasoline-powered leaf blower equipment
before 7:30 a.m. on weekdays, 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays and 10:00 a.m. on
Sundays and holidays after, 7:30 p.m. on all days, except as authorized by
City Manager.



      (2)   This restriction shall not apply to golf course
maintenance operations.



(Prior Code, § 26-7)  (Ord. 625, passed 3-2-1964; Ord. 91-12, passed
4-13-1991; Ord. 94-54, passed 1-3-1995; Ord. 98-4, passed 2-2-1998; Ord.
01-08, passed 3-15-2001; Ord. 2016-30, passed 5-2-2016)  Penalty, see §
135.999




PERMITS, LICENSES OR GRANTS




§ 135.120  FALSE INFORMATION FOR PERMIT, LICENSE OR GRANT.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly falsify any information to
the city to induce the city to issue any permit, license or to grant or to
perform any other act.



(Prior Code, § 26-12)  (Ord. 937, passed 2-3-1975)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.121  ILLEGAL USE OF PERMIT, LICENSE OR GRANT.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to:



   (A)   Give, sell, lend or otherwise furnish any permit, license or
grant to be used by another person not lawfully entitled thereto; and/or



   (B)   Use, display or represent, as his or her own, any permit,
license or grant not lawfully issued to him or her by the city.



(Prior Code, § 26-13)  (Ord. 937, passed 2-3-1975)  Penalty, see § 135.999




TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND MINORS




§ 135.135  DEFINITIONS; PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following
terms, phrases and words shall have the meanings given to them in this
section. All terms, phrases and words used in this section but not defined in
this section shall have the meaning given to them elsewhere in this code of
ordinances.



      MINOR. A person under the age of 18.



      TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product that is made from or derived from
tobacco, or that contains nicotine, and is intended for human consumption or
is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled or ingested by any means, including, but not limited to, a
cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or snus. TOBACCO
PRODUCT includes electronic smoking devices and any component or accessory
used in the consumption of a TOBACCO PRODUCT such as filter, rolling papers,
pipes, liquid, nicotine gels and dissolvable nicotine products used in
electronic smoking devices, whether or not they contain nicotine. TOBACCO
PRODUCT does not include drugs, devices, or combination products authorized
for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, as those terms are defined
in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.



      VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electrical or electronic,
self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form
of payment, dispenses any tobacco product.



   (B)   Sale by minors. It shall be unlawful for any minor to sell,
offer for sale, give, dispense, furnish or otherwise distribute any tobacco
product to any minor within the corporate limits of the city.



   (C)   Sale to minors.  It shall be unlawful for any person or
business to sell, offer for sale, give, dispense, furnish or otherwise
distribute any tobacco product to any minor within the corporate limits of
the city.



   (D)   Purchase by minors. It shall be unlawful for any minor to
purchase or otherwise acquire any tobacco product within the corporate limits
of the city.



   (E)   Possession and use by minors. It shall be unlawful for any
minor to possess or use a tobacco product within the corporate limits of the
city; provided, however, that, the possession or use of any tobacco product
by any minor under the direct supervision and control of the parent or
guardian of any such minor in the privacy of such parent’s or guardian’s
home shall not be unlawful.



(Prior Code, § 26-20)  (Ord. 97-39, passed 1-15-1998; Ord. 2016-30, passed
5-2-2016; Ord. 2017-74, passed 12-18-2017)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.136  VENDING MACHINES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, business or organization,
to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver any tobacco product by means of
self-service, including vending machines.



   (B)   All sales of any tobacco product, as defined by this
subchapter, are to be hand to hand.



   (C)   Tobacco products are to be kept behind a counter, or similar
barrier, and shall not be accessible to the general public, until a business
owner or officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of
such business owner verifies that a sale to such person would be permitted
under the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 26-21)  (Ord. 97-39, passed 1-15-1998)  Penalty, see §
135.999



§ 135.137  NOTICE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or business to engage in
the sale or distribution of tobacco products within the corporate limits of
the city unless such person or business prominently displays, in the area of
the counter or barrier behind which tobacco products are kept for sale, the
following notice:



THE PURCHASE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF 18 IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW



   (B)   Such notice shall be displayed in red letters at least one
inch in height on a white background.



(Prior Code, § 26-22)  (Ord. 97-39, passed 1-15-1998)  Penalty, see §
135.999



§ 135.138  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to
deliver or keep with the intention of selling at retail tobacco products
within the municipal limits without having first obtained a tobacco
dealer’s license therefore pursuant to this subchapter.



   (B)   Upon being issued a tobacco dealer’s license, the licensee
is required to display said license prominently near or in the general
vicinity of the actual point of sale. Such license shall be in addition to
any other license or notice required.



   (C)   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter by an officer,
director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed
and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be
punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or
omitted by the licensee personally.



   (D)   The application form for tobacco dealer’s license issued
under this subchapter shall be obtainable at the office of the City Clerk and
shall contain the following information when completed:



      (1)   Name of applicant;



      (2)   Address of applicant;



      (3)   Date of birth of applicant;



      (4)   Telephone number(s) of applicant;



      (5)   Name of the business, if any;



      (6)   Place of incorporation;



      (7)   Name and address of all owners of business;



      (8)   State sales tax number;



      (9)   Addresses of all business locations where tobacco
products will be sold; and



      (10)   Any  other means of identification necessary to verify
the identity of the applicant.



   (E)   Each license issued under this subchapter shall be printed and
shall be signed by the City Clerk. Such license shall bear the date (day,
month and year) of its issuance, and the date (day, month and year) of its
expiration. Al licenses issued under this subchapter shall expire on April 30
of each year.



   (F)   A license fee as set out in the fee schedule for each location
for sales shall be charged to obtain a license to sell tobacco products in
the municipality.



(Prior Code, § 26-23)  (Ord. 97-39, passed 1-15-1998)  Penalty, see §
135.999



§ 135.139  SUSPENSION OF TOBACCO DEALER’S LICENSE.



   The tobacco dealer’s license shall be suspended by the City Clerk 30
days from the date of the tobacco dealer or employee of the tobacco dealer
being placed on court supervision, conditional discharge, probation or
conviction. If there is an appeal of the court’s order the suspension shall
be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. In computing the days, the date
of the court action shall not be included. The City Clerk shall notify the
licensee of the date or dates of suspension and such notice shall be
personally served upon the licensee or shall be served by certified mail at
least seven days prior to the effective date of the suspension. If the
licensee cannot be located for personal service or notice attempted by
certified mail is returned to the city, then notice may be served upon any
business owner or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or
employee of such business owner found upon the premises for which the license
was issued.



(Prior Code, § 26-25)  (Ord. 97-39, passed 1-15-1998)



§ 135.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 135.001 through
135.009, 135.025 through 135.029, 135.055 through 135.059, 135.075 through
135.076 and 135.090 through 135.092 shall, upon, conviction be fined not less
than $25, nor more than $750, for each offense. In addition, any cost of
collection of fines or other amounts due to the city hereunder may be
assessed in accordance with § 10.99 of this code.



(Prior Code, § 47-7.25)



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 135.010
through 135.013, 135.040 through 135.042, 135.060 and 135.061, 135.093,
135.105 through 135.108 and 135.120 through 135.121, except where another
penalty is specifically provided, shall be punished by a fine of not less
than $10, nor more than $750 for each offense.



(Prior Code, § 26-18)



      (2)   Any person who damages, defaces or otherwise interferes
with public property shall reimburse the city for all costs of repairs to
such public property within 30 days after receipt of invoice therefor from
the city.



      (3)   In addition, any costs of collection of fines, charges
or payments due under §§ 135.010 through 135.013, 135.040 through 135.042,
135.060 and 135.061, 135.093, 135.105 through 135.108, 135.120 and 135.121
may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99(B) of this code.



   (C)   (1)   Any minor who violates any provision of §§ 135.135
through 135.139 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100 for the first
offense, $150 for the second offense and $200 each for the third and
subsequent offenses.



      (2)   Any person, other than a minor, who violates any
provision of  §§ 135.135 through 135.139 shall be punished by a fine not
to exceed $200 for the first offense, $400 for the second offense and $600
each for the third and subsequent offenses.



      (3)   In addition to, or in lieu of, the above penalties, any
minor who violates any provision of  §§ 135.135 through 135.139 may be
required to fulfill a term of community service of not less than ten  hours
for the first offense, 20 hours for the second offense, and 30 hours each for
the third and subsequent offenses. This service may include service in the
pulmonary unit of a community hospital, or the like, or if a minor violates
subsections (D) or (E) of § 135.135 he or she is guilty of a petty offense
and the court may impose a sentence of 25 hours of community service and a
fine of $50 for a first violation, and a sentence of 40 hours of community
service and a fine of not more than $750 for any subsequent violation.



      (4)   Any person, corporation, or other legal entity, whether
public or private, who is determined to be in violation of § 135.135(C) as a
first offense, during a calendar year, shall be subject to suspension of
their license to sell tobacco products for seven consecutive days when said
business is open for business, in addition to the fine as specified in  §§
135.135 through 135.139.



      (5)   Any person, corporation, or other legal entity, whether
public or private, who is determined to be in violation of § 135.135(C) as a
second offense, during a calendar year, shall be subject to suspension of
their license to sell tobacco products for 30 consecutive days, when said
business is open for business, in addition to the fine as specified in §§
135.135 through 135.139.



      (6)   Any person, corporation or other legal entity, whether
public or private, who is determined to be in violation of § 135.135(C)  as
a third offense, during a calendar year, shall be subject to suspension of
their license to sell tobacco products for 180 days when said business is
open for business, in addition to the fine as specified in  §§ 135.135
through 135.139



      (7)   Any person, corporation or other legal entity, whether
public or private, who is determined to be in violation of § 135.135(C) as
more than three offenses, during a calendar year, or any sale or delivery of
tobacco products of any kind whatsoever that is deemed to have taken place
during a term of suspension will result in permanent revocation of the
offender’s license to sell tobacco products.



(Prior Code, § 26-101)



(Ord. 97-39, passed 1-15-1998; Ord. 00-14, passed 4-3-2000; Ord. 03-37,
passed 7-7-2003; Ord. 2017-74, passed 12-18-2017)



TITLE XV:  LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDINGS



      151.   SEDIMENT GRADING, DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL



      152.   PLANNING



      153.   SIGNS



      154.   TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS



      155.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION



      156.   SUBDIVISIONS



      157.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



      158.   INCLUSIONARY HOUSING



      159.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDINGS



Section




Director of Community Development




   150.001   Office created



   150.002   Appointment of Director



   150.003   Duties and authority of Director



   150.004   Right of entry



   150.005   Stoppage of work; stop order




Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning




   150.020   Adoption of Mechanical Code



   150.021   Heating and air conditioning in single- and two-family
residences



   150.022   Inspection and fees



   150.023   Combustible plenums



   150.024   Licenses




Dangerous and Distressed Buildings




   150.035   Term defined



   150.036   Declared to be nuisance



   150.037   Abatement



   150.038   Obligation to register distressed buildings



   150.039   Building conditions; distressed building plan



   150.040   Approval of distressed building plan



   150.041   Implementation and enforcement




House Numbering




   150.055   Divisions



   150.056   Chart



   150.057   Display of house number




Miscellaneous Building Provisions




   150.070   Scaffolds



   150.071   Articles on windows



   150.072   Obstructing exits or stairways




Fair Housing




   150.085   Definitions



   150.086   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
accommodations



   150.087   Discrimination in lending



   150.088   Limitations



   150.089   Exemption



   150.090   Procedures for complaints



   150.091   Limitations of time to file complaints




Construction Codes Commission




   150.105   Creation and appointment



   150.106   Absence of members



   150.107   Commission membership



   150.108   Exemption of members



   150.109   Meetings, rules and records



   150.110   Jurisdiction and powers of the Commission



   150.111   Appeals




Building Code Rules and Definitions




   150.125   Rules and definitions




Building Code and General Provisions




   150.140   Administration



   150.141   Scope



   150.142   Inspections



   150.143   Certificate of occupancy



   150.144   Violations; procedure



   150.145   Permits and fees



   150.146   Sewer and water connection charges



   150.147   Architectural and site design review



   150.148   Building scale and environment



   150.149   Occupation, obstruction or use of streets, sidewalks and
public property



   150.150   Unsafe buildings



   150.151   Violations and penalties



   150.152   Appeals



   150.153   Use and disposition of security funds



   150.154   Job site requirements




Building Code Minimum Planning Requirements; Single-Family Dwelling and
Duplex Dwelling




   150.165   Light and ventilation



   150.166   Space requirements



   150.167   Ingress, egress and access



   150.168   Doors



   150.169   Stairs, landings and railings; design



   150.170   Garage, attached



   150.171   Design criteria, minimum



   150.172   Sound and fire barrier between living units




Building Code Minimum Construction Regulations




   150.185   Adoption of Residential Building Code



   150.186   Excavation



   150.187   Footings; foundations



   150.188   Typical illustration



   150.189   General masonry construction



   150.190   Typical anchorage illustration



   150.191   Hollow unit masonry



   150.192   Solid masonry



   150.193   Cavity wall masonry



   150.194   Masonry chimney construction



   150.195   Masonry fireplaces



   150.196   Prefabricated chimneys and fireplaces



   150.197   Structural steel



   150.198   Wood construction



   150.199   Maximum allowable span for headers supporting wood frame
walls



   150.200   Joist span schedule



   150.201   Interior wall and ceiling covering



   150.202   Roof covering



   150.203   Detached accessory buildings



   150.204   Isometric joist and header illustration



   150.205   Typical wall section illustration



   150.206   Isometric header section illustration



   150.207   Isometric wall section illustration



   150.208   Roof ventilation illustration




Multiple Dwelling and Commercial Building Code Regulations




   150.220   Adoption of Commercial Building Code



   150.221   Regulations of all construction other than single-family
and duplex dwellings



   150.222   Fire separation/exterior wall openings




Electricity




   150.235   Definitions



   150.236   Short title




Electrical Inspection Department




   150.250   Established



   150.251   Duties of the Department




Electrical Inspector




   150.265   Office created




Electrical Commission




   150.280   Creation and appointment




Electrical Code




   150.295   Adoption of Electrical Code



   150.296   Amendments



   150.297   Additional special rules



   150.298   Additional amendments to the National Electric Code




Electrical Contractors




   150.310   Definitions



   150.311   Registration



   150.312   Application for registration



   150.313   Registration fee




Electrical Permits




   150.325   Required



   150.326   Application



   150.327   Fees; wiring



   150.328   Fees; outlets



   150.329   Fees; lighting fixtures



   150.330   Fees; motors



   150.331   Fees; heating units



   150.332   Fees; swimming pools



   150.333   Fees; signs



   150.334   Fees; reinspection



   150.335   Additional fees



   150.336   Fees; minimum fee



   150.337   Fee payment




Electrical Inspection




   150.350   Required: right of entry



   150.351   Notification



   150.352   Final inspection




Electrical Poles and Wires




   150.365   Approval required



   150.366   Typical graphic




Plumbing Code




   150.380   Adoption by reference of Illinois Plumbing Code



   150.381   Amendments



   150.382   Permits



   150.383   Permit fees



   150.384   Sewage and sewage disposal



   150.385   Use of sanitary sewer



   150.386   Sanitary sewer specifications



   150.387   Reserved



   150.388   Reserved



   150.389   Reserved



   150.390   Reserved



   150.391   Storm sewer and surface drainage



   150.392   Water piping and fixtures



   150.393   Gas piping



   150.394   Inspections



   150.395   Health or safety



   150.396   Workmanship



   150.397   Enforcement



   150.398   Validity



   150.399   Applicability; conflicting provisions



   150.400   Graphic illustrations



   150.401   Regulating illicit discharge and stormwater connection




Plumbers




   150.415   Use of plumber’s name




Regulating Swimming Pool Construction, Operation and Use




   150.430   Compliance required



   150.431   Definitions



   150.432   Permit application



   150.433   Permit fees



   150.434   Inspection required



   150.435   Construction



   150.436   Filter



   150.437   Sand pressure filter specifications



   150.438   Diatomite filter specifications



   150.439   Cartridge type fitters



   150.440   Recirculating pumps



   150.441   Pool plumbing



   150.442   Valves



   150.443   Heaters



   150.444   Water supply



   150.445   Electrical requirements



   150.446   Chemical treatment



   150.447   Safety features and devices



   150.448   Violation; procedures




Satellite Antennas




   150.460   Satellite antennas requirements



   150.461   Installation



   150.462   Residential zone



   150.463   Nonresidential zone



   150.464   Procedure



   150.465   Application



   150.466   Fees



   150.467   Compliance




Drive Approaches




   150.480   Definitions



   150.481   Unlawful to operate or move vehicles or equipment over,
across or upon curbs, parkways and sidewalks



   150.482   Permit; required



   150.483   Permit; fee



   150.484   Permit; conditions



   150.485   Guarantee deposit



   150.486   Jurisdiction



   150.487   Construction; specifications



   150.488   Location and corner setback



   150.489   Repair



   150.490   Nonconformance




Fuel Gas Code




   150.505   Adoption of Fuel Gas Code




Impact Fees




   150.520   Findings and purpose



   150.521   Applicability



   150.522   Definitions



   150.523   General procedures for development impact fees



   150.524   Use of development impact fees



   150.525   Effect of development impact fees on zoning and
subdivision regulations



   150.526   Development impact fees as additional and supplemental
requirement



   150.527   Land in lieu of development impact fees



   150.528   Preparation of needs assessments



   150.529   Use and content of needs assessment



   150.530   Source information for population estimate variable in
impact fee formulas



   150.531   Determination of land value and distribution of
development impact fees



   150.532   Criteria for determining school development impact fee



   150.533   Criteria for determining library impact fee



   150.534   Criteria for determining police impact fee



   150.535   Criteria for determining fire and emergency services
impact fee



   150.536   Criteria for determining Public Works Department impact fee



   150.537   Criteria for determining park site improvement fee



   150.538   Size and type of development



   150.539   Credit for net reduction of any or all lots, dwelling
units or bedrooms



   150.540   Reservation of additional land



   150.541   Combining with adjoining development



   150.542   General site standards



   150.543   School site standards



   150.544   Objections; appeals



 



   150.999   Penalty



   Appendix A: Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling



DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT



§ 150.001  OFFICE CREATED.



   There is hereby created the Office of Community Development, an
administrative office of the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-1)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.002  APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR.



   The Office of Community Development functions under the immediate
supervision and direction of a Director of Community Development, who shall
be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 9-2)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.003  DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR.



   It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Development and he or
she shall have the authority to:



   (A)   Enforce all ordinances, rules or regulations pertaining to
buildings or structures, their construction, alteration or repair; all
ordinances, rules or regulations pertaining to the installation, alteration
or repair of any system of drainage, sewerage, sewage disposal and plumbing
in any building or structure, or on any premises, in the city; all
ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to the installation of sanitary
and storm, water sewer connections from any building, structure or premises
to any sewer or drain; all ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to
the installation of heating equipment, oil burners, fuel tanks, oil tanks,
gas and gasoline tanks, ventilating and air conditioning equipment; all
ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to street openings, street
obstructions, driveways and signs; all ordinances, rules and regulations
pertaining to the installation, alteration and use of electrical wiring and
equipment;



   (B)   Enforce all ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to
zoning. The Director of Community Development is hereby designated as
enforcing officer of the city zoning ordinances of 1923, as amended;



   (C)   Enforce all ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to
dangerous buildings or structures;



   (D)   Supervise and direct the activities of such building
inspectors, plumbing inspectors, electrical inspectors and other assistants
who may, from time to time, be employed by the city to assist him or her in
the performance of his or her duties;



   (E)   Inspect, or cause to be inspected, all buildings, structures
or equipment being erected, altered, repaired or installed, as frequently as
may be necessary to ensure compliance with the city ordinances, rules and
regulations;



   (F)   Maintain liaison with the City Surveyor and Engineer in order
that he or she may be informed concerning the installation of improvements
and utilities throughout the city, and that the Engineer may be kept informed
on proposed new developments with reference to building and zoning; and



   (G)   Prepare the necessary documents and exhibits in connection
with hearings before the Plan Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals, and
to be present at all hearings before that Board, unless excused therefrom.



(Prior Code, § 9-3)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.004  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Director of Community Development or his or her designee, shall
have the power to make, or cause to be made, at all reasonable hours, entry
into any building or premises within the city where any work of construction,
altering or repairing is in process, or where he or she has reason to believe
that a violation of ordinances, rules or regulations relating to building,
plumbing, drainage, sewers, sewage, electrical work or zoning exists, for the
purpose of making inspections. He or she shall have the authority, in his or
her discretion, to cause the turning off of any electrical switch or
disconnect any electrical wire where the electrical currents transmitted
thereby present a danger to life and property or may interfere with the work
of the Fire Department. He or she shall have the authority, in his or her
discretion, to cause the closing of any valve, or use such other means as may
be necessary, to shut off the flow of oil, gas, gasoline or similar products
where the continued flow of such products presents a danger to life and
property or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department.



(Prior Code, § 9-4)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.005  STOPPAGE OF WORK; STOP ORDER.



   The Director of Community Development or his or her designee, shall
have the power to order stoppage of all work of construction, alteration,
repair or the use of buildings, structures or premises in the city and the
installation of equipment therein, including the delivery of materials
thereto, when such work, use or installation is in violation of any provision
of any ordinances relating thereto, or where there is a violation of the
zoning ordinance. The work, use or installation shall not be resumed after
the issuance of such a stop order, except on written permission of the
Director of Community Development, or by order of the City Manager, or the
Mayor, provided that, if the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed
by a written stop order within 24 hours thereafter. Such written stop order
may be served by any officer, employee or police officer of the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-5)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



HEATING, VENTILATING AND AIR CONDITIONING



§ 150.020  ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE.



   For the purpose of prescribing the regulations governing the design,
installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical systems
that are permanently installed and utilized to provide control of
environmental conditions and related processes within buildings (except that
the heating, ventilating and air conditioning requirements for detached one-
and two-family dwellings and multi-single-family dwellings not more than
three stories in height with a separate means of egress shall be governed by
§ 150.021), the following code, as modified herein, is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein, and shall constitute and be deemed to be
“The Mechanical Code of the City of Lake Forest:” the International
Mechanical Code, 2003 Edition, International Code Council, Inc. (the
“Mechanical Code”); provided, however, that the adoption of this section
shall not be construed as preventing the enforcement of or repealing the
provision of any ordinance, regulation, standard or code adopted by the city
that is more restrictive than the provisions of this section. In the event
that any provision of this section shall be in conflict with any other
ordinance, regulation, standard or code adopted by the city, the more
restrictive provision (as determined by the Director of Community
Development) shall apply. One copy of the Mechanical Code has been on file in
the office of the City Clerk for use and examination by the public for at
least 30 days prior to the adoption of the Mechanical Code, and such copy
shall continue to be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for use and
examination by the public after adoption of the Mechanical Code.



(Prior Code, § 9-11)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 04-12, passed
1-15-2004)



§ 150.021  HEATING AND AIR CONDITIONING IN SINGLE- AND TWO-FAMILY
RESIDENCES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EXISTING BUILDINGS. Completed buildings which have been or are
inhabited.



      FORCED WARM AIR HEATING PLANT. Consists of one or more warm air
furnaces, enclosed within casings, together with necessary appurtenances
thereto, consisting of warm air pipes and fittings, cold air or recirculating
pipes, ducts, boxes and fittings, smoke pipes and fittings, registers, faces
and grilles, blowers or other mechanical means of moving or forcing warm air,
the same intended for the heating of buildings in which they may be installed.



      NEW BUILDINGS. Buildings which have not been and are not
inhabited.



   (B)   Minimum design requirements.



      (1)   Every gravity or forced warm air heating plant shall be
designed and installed in such a manner that it heats all rooms of the
structure to be heated to a design temperature difference of 80°F (outside
temperature -10°F and inside temperature 70°F).



      (2)   Air conditioning systems shall be designed and installed
in such a manner that they cool all rooms to be cooled to a temperature range
of 72 to 78°F when the outside temperature is 95°F.



   (C)   Installation of equipment.



      (1)   Where air register boxes, heads, pipes or stacks are to
be installed, joists shall be set not less than 12 inches on center and studs
shall be directly under and over joists. When joists occur on 12-inch
centers, they shall be continuous or they shall have butted joints over a
partition. Lap joints will not be permitted except when joists are on 16-inch
centers.



      (2)   All warm air supplied to habitable spaces shall be
conveyed thereto through a system of noncombustible ducts from the furnace to
the register.



      (3)   All return air shall be conveyed from the registers to
the furnace through a system of noncombustible ducts.



      (4)   Top and bottom plates shall be cut to a size large
enough to accept the stack. Any cut exceeding the stack dimension shall be
properly firestopped with noncombustible material.



      (5)   Joints and seams of all ducts and stacks shall be
securely fastened and made substantially airtight. Slip joints shall have a
lap of at least one inch, and be individually fastened on each side and
sealed with tape.



      (6)   All ducts and stacks shall be securely supported by
metal hangers, straps, lugs or brackets. Nails shall not be driven through
the duct walls and no unnecessary holes shall be cut therein.



      (7)   Where warm air ducts pierce floor or ceiling, the space
around the ducts at such points shall be tightly sealed or filled with
noncombustible material to form a firestop.



      (8)   Where the installation of duct or stacks in walls,
floors or partitions requires the removal of any firestopping, the spaces
around the duct at such points where firestopping was removed, shall be
tightly filled or sealed with noncombustible material.



      (9)   Volume dampers of locking type shall be placed in each
forced warm air run as close as possible to the trunk line.



      (10)   Warm air stacks shall, when possible, be run within
inside walls. Where it is absolutely necessary to run warm air stacks into
outside walls, they shall be insulated.



      (11)   The air temperature at a register shall not exceed
175°F and the bonnet air temperature shall not exceed 200°F. All furnaces
shall be equipped with a high temperature limit control.



      (12)   Cooling coils shall be installed on the “leaving
air” side of the heat exchanger only.



      (13)   All furnaces shall be mounted on noncombustible floors.



      (14)   Furnaces installed in attics shall be mounted on a
floor protected with fireproof material which shall extend five feet in all
directions from the furnace. The ceiling above the furnace shall be covered
with a minimum of five-eighths inch Fire Code sheetrock which shall extend
five feet in all directions from the furnace.



      (15)   All ducts and fittings used in or beneath a concrete
slab-on-grade for heating or cooling systems, or for carbon monoxide vent
systems, shall meet the requirements of a Type 5 duct, outlined by the
National Warm Air Heating and Air Conditioning Association, Manual 4, Ninth
Addition, § 7.5. The installation shall also be done according to § 8 of
that Manual. In addition, the type of joint used shall be capable of holding
air pressures up to eight inches of water for ten minutes, with only a 5%
pressure drop, and shall be capable of keeping water out of the duct system
under a two foot head.



   (D)   Heating residential garages.



      (1)   Garages may be heated from the central heating unit, but
cold air returns may not be used in the garage.



      (2)   Garage unit heaters must be equipped with sealed
combustion chambers.



   (E)   Temporary heat. Temporary heating units may be installed in
buildings under construction only when the heater is mounted on a firm
noncombustible base or when hung from joists with metal hangers sufficient to
hold the unit motionless, A Class B or masonry chimney will be provided for
the unit and it shall be properly wired and grounded.



   (F)   Permits.



      (1)   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to alter, to install any warm air heating furnaces, air
conditioning systems or appurtenances thereto, within the city without first
being licensed as provided by ordinance and obtaining a permit for each such
alteration or installation.



         (b)   A permit to alter or install heating or air
conditioning systems shall be secured by the heating contractor prior to
starting work.



         (c)   No permit is required for minor repair work
performed by licensed contractors. Minor repair work shall be interpreted as
the incidental repairs to furnaces or air conditioner systems which shall not
affect the general action of the system, such as renewal of grates or smoke
pipes, resetting old furnaces in the same location, replacing of single warm
air pipe or general cleaning of the system.



      (2)   Installing additional runs or new stacks shall not be
considered minor repairs.



   (G)   Additional provisions. The regulations set forth in the
Residential Building Code, as adopted by reference in § 150.185, shall
govern the heating, ventilating and air conditioning requirements for
detached one- and two-family dwellings and multi-single-family dwellings not
more than three stories in height with a separate means of egress.



(Prior Code, § 9-12)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 04-12, passed
1-15-2004)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.022  INSPECTION AND FEES.



   (A)   Periodic inspections. The fees for all periodic inspections
shall be in accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the
City Council and on file in the office of the Director of Community
Development.



   (B)   Fee schedule. The fees for any mechanical work shall be in
accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council
and on file in the office of the Director of Community Development.



   (C)   Additional fees. An additional fee for each 24-hour period, to
reimburse the city for additional expense incurred, may be added to the
permit fee for any work that has proceeded without first securing a permit in
accordance with the most recent fee schedule approved by the City Council and
on file in the office of the Director of Community Development.



(Prior Code, § 9-13)  (Ord. 90-67, passed - -; Ord. 94-11B, passed
4-21-1994)



§ 150.023  COMBUSTIBLE PLENUMS.



   The plenum shall be constructed with approved materials and shall
remain a dedicated space. Foreign objects such as, but not limited to,
plumbing pipe, electrical conduit, phone wires, intercom wiring, low voltage
wiring of any kind or insulation, shall not be installed within the return
air plenums or ducts.



(Prior Code, § 9-15)  (Ord. 90-67, passed - -; Ord. 94-11B, passed
4-21-1994)



§ 150.024  LICENSES.



   (A)   The term HEATING AND AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION
CONTRACTOR, as used in this section, means any person, firm or corporation
engaged in the business of installing or altering any heating, air
conditioning or refrigeration equipment. Heating, air conditioning and
refrigeration equipment, as used in this subchapter, shall not include room
air conditioners of the portable window or through-the-wall type, nor a
refrigeration unit used for family household purposes.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
engage in the business of heating, air conditioning, or refrigeration
contractor, as herein defined, in the city, without being licensed as a
contractor as provided herein, except for a one-job, temporary license for
first-time work in the city as provided below.



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the
business of heating and air conditioning contractor shall, before engaging in
any such business in the city, exhibit to the Director of Community
Development or his or her designee, a valid license issued by a municipality
which has minimum standards for heating, air conditioning and refrigeration
construction substantially equivalent to those of the city or shall apply to
the Director of Community Development or his or her designee for a license.
Upon filing of such application in proper form and the payment of the license
fee fixed herein, the Director of Community Development or his or her
designee shall determine whether to grant or deny the license based on the
applicants knowledge of the installation, maintenance and repair of air
conditioning, heating and refrigeration equipment, and the contractor’s
business reputation. If the decision is to grant the license, the Director of
Community Development or his or her designee shall keep a suitable record of
such license. If the decision is to deny the license, the Director of
Community Development or his or her designee shall so advise the applicant,
in writing, with the reasons for denial, and a copy of such report provided
to the Construction Codes Commission.



   (D)   If a contractor has never previously been licensed to work in
the city, said contractor shall be given a one-job only, temporary license.
The city inspectors charged with inspection of this type of mechanical work
shall inspect the initial job performed by the contractor under the temporary
license with a heightened level of scrutiny, in order to determine the
contractor’s knowledge of installation, maintenance and repair of air
conditioning, heating and refrigeration equipment, as provided for in
division (C) above. If the work is satisfactory, and in accordance with all
applicable codes, and if the contractor’s business reputation is
satisfactory as above, a license shall be granted. This requirement shall in
no way imply that standards are lessened for those contractors operating in
the city on existing licenses; all contractors shall conform to city codes
and acceptable standards of good workmanship.



   (E)   The fee for the license as a heating, air conditioning and
refrigeration contractor shall be as set out in the fee schedule, per annum,
which sum shall be paid by the applicant to the city, in advance, upon filing
the application for license. Each such license shall terminate on December 31
next following its issuance. Fees to be paid shall be reduced in proportion
to the full calendar months which have expired to the issuance of the license.



   (F)   Any person, firm or corporation that shall engage in the
business of heating, air conditioning or refrigeration contractor without
obtaining license, as herein provided, or that shall violate any of the
provisions of this section, shall be fined.



   (G)   The license of any contractor who fails to comply with the
ordinances of the city may be revoked by the Director of Community
Development upon the written recommendation of the Construction Codes
Commission as provided in §§ 150.105 through 150.111. The license may be
reinstated by action of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 9-21)  (Ord. 1025, passed 9-12-1977; Ord. 1029, passed
9-24-1977; Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003)  Penalty, see § 150.999



DANGEROUS AND DISTRESSED BUILDINGS



§ 150.035  TERM DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DANGEROUS BUILDING.Includes:



      (1)   Any building, fence, wall or other human-made structure
which is dangerous to the public health because of its condition, and which
may cause or aid in the spread of disease or injury to the health of the
occupants of it or of neighboring structures or of the public generally;



      (2)   Any building, fence, wall or other human-made structure
which, because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any
other cause, is especially liable to fire and creates a fire hazard, or is
attractive to malefactors, disorderly persons, or vagrants;



      (3)   Any building, fence, wall or other human-made structure
which, by reason of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any
other cause, is liable to cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a
collapse or fall of any part of such structure;



      (4)   Any building, fence, wall or human-made structure which,
because of its condition or because of unprotected or unsecured openings or
apertures, is available to and frequented by malefactors, disorderly persons
or vagrants who are not lawful occupants of said structure; and/or



      (5)   Any building, fence, wall or other human-made structure
which is incomplete, or, because of its condition, is abandoned, or is
abandoned to such extent that it is dangerous to the public.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of Community Development of the city, or the
Director’s designee.



   DISTRESSED BUILDING.



      (1)   A building or portion of a building which is:



         (a)   Unoccupied and unsecured;



         (b)   Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other
similar means that do not permit ready ingress and egress;



         (c)   Unoccupied and a dangerous structure;



         (d)   Unoccupied and has multiple code violations;



         (e)   Unoccupied and the building or its premises has
been the site of unlawful activity within the previous six months;



         (f)   Unoccupied for over 90 days and during which time
the city has issued an order to correct one or more public nuisance or
property maintenance conditions and one or more of those conditions have not
been corrected in a code compliant manner; or



         (g)   Unoccupied for over one year.



      (2)   But not including:



         (a)   Unoccupied buildings which are undergoing
construction, renovation or rehabilitation and which are in compliance (or in
the process of achieving such compliance) with all applicable ordinances,
codes, legislation and regulations, and for which construction, renovation of
rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to completion; or



         (b)   Unoccupied buildings resulting from an extended,
but temporary, relocation of occupants in which circumstances the building
and property are regularly maintained, monitored and generally looked after
and for which no property maintenance violations exist.



   UNOCCUPIED BUILDING.



      (1)   A building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual
presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises.



      (2)   In determining whether a building is UNOCCUPIED, the
Director may consider these factors, among others:



         (a)   A building at which substantially all lawful
residential or business activity has ceased;



         (b)   The building is substantially devoid of contents.
The condition and value of fixtures or personal property in the building are
relevant to this determination;



         (c)   The building lacks one or more of the following
services: water, sewer, electric or natural gas;



         (d)   The building is the subject of a foreclosure
action;



         (e)   The building is not actively for sale as part of a
contractual agreement to sell the building, the building lacks “for
sale,” “for rent” or similar signage; and/or



         (f)   The presence or recurrence of uncorrected code
violations.



(Prior Code, § 9-26)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 2008-43, passed
12-1-2008)



§ 150.036  DECLARED TO BE NUISANCE.



   (A)   Any dangerous building in the city, as defined in § 150.035
is hereby declared to be a nuisance.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of
any dangerous building in the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-27)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.037  ABATEMENT.



   Whenever any dangerous building, as defined in § 150.035, shall exist
in the city, the city may proceed to remedy such condition and to abate such
nuisance by seeking or taking such remedial action as provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 9-28)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.038  OBLIGATION TO REGISTER DISTRESSED BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Determination. In light of the standards set forth in §
150.035, whenever the Director identifies a building that qualifies as a
distressed building, the Director shall prepare a written determination and
serve notice of such determination upon the property owner; as part of such
notice, the Director or the Director’s designee must set forth the
opportunities and timetable for appealing such determination. Notice may be
effected under this subchapter by personal delivery or by mailing via
certified mail to the address where the last tax bill for the property was
sent.



   (B)   Appeal of determination. Any owner of property that the
Director has determined to contain a distressed building may appeal such
determination by filing a written request for review of the Director’s
determination with the City Manager within 15 days after notice of the
determination. In the event of any such appeal, a date for the appeal shall
be set, at which time the property owner or the owner’s representative may
present such information to the City Manager as may be relevant to the
determination. The Director may also present relevant information to the City
Manager in connection with the determination at the appeal. The City Manager,
after considering all information presented at the appeal, will issue a
written decision regarding the appeal, and the City Manager’s determination
will be conclusive for purposes of this subchapter. During the pendency of an
appeal, no building shall be considered a distressed building for purposes of
this subchapter.



   (C)   Registration requirements for distressed buildings. The owner
of a building who knows, or from all the facts and circumstances should know,
that said building is or has become a distressed building, or the owner of a
building that has been determined to be a distressed building pursuant to
this subchapter, is required to, within 15 days after either the building
becomes distressed or there is a determination that the building is a
distressed building:



      (1)   Register the building with the Community Development
Department on a form provided by the city and pay the applicable registration
fee as established by the City Council and as adjusted on an annual basis.
The form shall include, as a minimum, the name, street address and telephone
number of the owner; the case name and number of any litigation pending
concerning or affecting the building, including bankruptcy cases; and the
name, street address and telephone number of all persons with any legal
interest in the building or the premises. The form shall require the owner to
identify a responsible party 21 years of age or older who maintains a
permanent address in the county to accept service on behalf of the owner with
respect to any notices the Director sends pursuant this subchapter or service
of process in any proceeding commenced to enforce any provision of the city
code, and file with the Director; the registration form must also include the
name, street address and mailing address (if different), telephone number, of
said person. A post office box is not an acceptable street address;



      (2)   Renew the distressed building registration each year on
the anniversary date of the first filing for the time the building remains
distressed and pay the applicable fee as established by the City Council as
adjusted annually; and



      (3)   File an amended registration within 15 days of any
change in the information contained in the initial or annual registration. A
new registration is required for any change in ownership whatsoever.



(Ord. 2008-43, passed 12-1-2008)



§ 150.039  BUILDING CONDITIONS; DISTRESSED BUILDING PLAN.



   (A)   Building conditions. All doors and window openings of any
building must be equipped in a manner adequate for occupancy as prescribed in
the applicable building regulations; provided, however, that such door and
window openings may be otherwise boarded or sealed, for a period of not more
than 45 consecutive days or 60 days in any 12-month period, unless the
Director authorizes in writing a longer period of time. The owner shall
maintain the building in an enclosed and secure state until the building is
reoccupied.



   (B)   Distressed building plan. At the time a distressed building is
registered as required herein and no later than 15 days after a distressed
building is registered or determined to require registration, the owner shall
submit a distressed building plan to the city. The city may prescribe a form
for the plan. If the owner fails to submit the plan as provided for by this
subchapter, the Director may develop the plan. The plan shall contain the
following as a minimum:



      (1)   A plan of action to repair any doors, windows or other
openings which are boarded up or otherwise secured by any means other than
conventional methods used for occupancy in the design of the building or
permitted for new construction or similar type in the applicable building
regulations;



      (2)   For buildings and premises thereof which are found to be
in violation of Chapter 95 of the city code, or in violation of any other
code provision relating to health and safety, the distressed building plan
shall contain a plan of action to remedy such public nuisance(s);



      (3)   A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of
repairs or other corrective action detailed in the plans of action required
by divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above; and



      (4)   A plan of action to maintain the building and premises
thereof on an ongoing and continuous basis in conformance with this
subchapter and with Chapter 95 of this city code.



(Ord. 2008-43, passed 12-1-2008)



§ 150.040  APPROVAL OF DISTRESSED BUILDING PLAN.



   (A)   Review of distressed building plan. The Director shall review
the proposed distressed building plan in accordance with the standards
outlined in division (B) below. The Director shall serve notice to the owner
of the distressed building approving or disapproving said plan.



   (B)   Standards for plan approval. In considering the
appropriateness of a distressed building plan, the Director shall consider
the following and make written findings as to each:



      (1)   The purposes of this subchapter and intent of the City
Council to minimize the time a building is boarded or otherwise distressed;



      (2)   The effect of the condition of the building and premises
on adjoining properties and surrounding neighborhood;



      (3)   The length of time the building has been distressed;



      (4)   The presence of any public nuisances on the property; and



      (5)   The likelihood that the plan will prevent or ameliorate
the condition(s) it is designed to address.



   (C)   Authority to modify plan. The Director shall, upon written
notice to the distressed building owner, have the right to modify the
distressed building plan by modifying the dates of performance, the proposed
methods of action or by imposing additional requirements consistent with the
city code to protect the public health, safety or welfare.



(Ord. 2008-43, passed 12-1-2008)



§ 150.041  IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   It is the responsibility of the Director to implement this
subchapter.



   (B)   Failure to comply with the requirements of this subchapter,
including without limitation the failure to register, material misstatements
in any registration, failure to timely file a distressed building plan or
failure to comply with the approved plan shall constitute a violation of this
subchapter subjecting the owner of the building to penalties as provided in
this chapter and to any remedies the city may avail itself of as provided for
herein and elsewhere in this code, including, but limited to, an action to
compel correction of property maintenance violations.



   (C)   The owner of a building who knows, or from all the facts and
circumstances should know, that said building is or has become a distressed
building and fails to register said building is in violation of this
subchapter. The registration of a distressed building shall not preclude any
enforcement action by the city pursuant to other provisions of this chapter,
this code or other applicable legislation.



   (D)   The city may, on application to the courts, appoint a receiver
to implement the distressed building plan if the owner fails to comply.



   (E)   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the city from taking
other immediate action, as authorized by the city code, upon a determination
that the building is a public nuisance or poses an imminent danger to the
occupants of the building, or the public health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 2008-43, passed 12-1-2008)  Penalty, see § 150.999



HOUSE NUMBERING



§ 150.055  DIVISIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of numbering the buildings in the city, the
city shall be divided into four divisions by a division line, running east
and west along the line between the townships of Deerfield and West Deerfield
and township of Shields, and by a division line running north and south along
the line between Sections 16 and 17, and 8 and 9, and 4 and 5 in West
Deerfield Township, and Sections 32 and 33, and 28 and 29 in Shields Township.



   (B)   That part of the city lying in Shields and Libertyville
Township, being north of the east and west division line, shall be known as
north and all buildings located on streets running in a northerly and
southerly direction in that division, shall bear the additional appellation
of north to denote that section of the city.



   (C)   That part of the city in Deerfield and Vernon Township and in
West Deerfield Township being south of the east and west division line, shall
be known as south and all buildings located on the streets running in a
northerly and southerly direction in that division, shall bear the additional
appellation of south to denote that section of the city.



   (D)   That part of the city lying east of the north and south
division line, shall be known as east and all buildings located on streets
running in an easterly and westerly direction in that division shall bear the
additional appellation of east to denote that section of the city.



   (E)   That part of the city lying west of the north and south
division line, shall be known as west and all buildings located on streets
running in an easterly and westerly direction in that division, shall bear
the additional appellation of west to denote that section of the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-36)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.056  CHART.



   All buildings now existing or which may be hereafter erected or located
on any of the streets or public highways within the city, shall be numbered
by the owner, representative or occupant of such building according to the
numbers designated for the lots, pieces or parcels of land on the “House
Numbering Atlas of the City of Lake Forest, Lake County, Illinois,” drawn
by Neil N. Campbell, City Engineer of Lake Forest in 1927, which house
numbering atlas is now on file in the Municipal Services Building of the
city. It shall be the duty of every owner, representative or occupant in
possession of any building now or hereafter erected in said city, to place a
proper number thereon.



(Prior Code, § 9-37)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.057  DISPLAY OF HOUSE NUMBER.



   Each of the figures of every number shall be at least three inches in
height. Said numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous place, on, above or
immediately to the side of the door, or else they may be placed on a tree,
post or other fixture at the entrance to the property, so as to be easily and
distinctly read from the center of the street on which said property abuts.



(Prior Code, § 9-38)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING PROVISIONS



§ 150.070  SCAFFOLDS.



   Any scaffolds or ladders placed in such a position that they overhang
or can fall onto any public street, alley or other public way in the city
shall be firmly and properly constructed and safeguarded; and it shall be
unlawful to place or leave any articles on any such place, in such a manner
that the same can fall onto such street, sidewalk or other public way from a
greater height than four feet.



(Prior Code, § 9-46)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.071  ARTICLES ON WINDOWS.



   It shall be unlawful to place any movable articles on any window ledge,
or other place abutting on a public street, alley or other public place and
at a height above four feet from the ground, in such a manner that same can
fall or is in danger of falling onto such street, sidewalk or other public
place.



(Prior Code, § 9-47)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.072  OBSTRUCTING EXITS OR STAIRWAYS.



   It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any
stairway, aisle, corridor or exit in any office building, factory, hotel,
school, church, theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall, or any
building used in part or wholly for any such purposes, or in any building
used by two or more tenants or families, in such a manner as to interfere
with the free use of such stairway, aisle or corridor or exit.



(Prior Code, § 9-48)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



FAIR HOUSING



§ 150.085  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COUNCIL COMMITTEE. When mentioned in this subchapter, refers to the
City Council Human Relations Committee, consisting of four aldermen appointed
by the Mayor as regular members and the Mayor as Chairperson. The COUNCIL
COMMITTEE shall advise and consult with the City Council, City Manager and
citizens of the community on implementation of the policy of this subchapter.



   DISCRIMINATE and DISCRIMINATION. Includes any difference in treatment
of persons who are or may be interested in the sale, lease, rental or
financing of housing accommodations, and any difference in the terms of the
sale, lease, rental or financing of housing accommodations.



   HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS. Includes any building, structure or portion
thereof, which is used or occupied, or is maintained, arranged or designed to
be used or occupied, as a home, residence or sleeping place of one or more
human beings, and to vacant land within any of the residence districts or the
duplex district, as delineated in the city zoning ordinance of 1923, as
amended.



   LENDING INSTITUTION. Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan
association, other person in the business of lending money or guaranteeing
loans, any person in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating
loans, or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person in the business of
buying or selling loans, or instruments for the payment of money, which are
secured by title to or a security interest in real estate, but shall not
include any religious institution or organization, nor any charitable or
educational organization, operated, supervised or controlled by a religious
institution or organization.



   PERSON. Includes individuals, associations, partnerships and
corporations.



   REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any real estate broker required to be licensed
under the ordinance of the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-50)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.086  DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS.



   Except as hereinafter exempted by § 150.089, it shall be unlawful for
any owner or other person knowingly:



   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bonafide
offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion or national origin;



   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion or
national origin;



   (C)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or
published, any notice, statements or advertisement, with respect to sale or
rental of a dwelling, that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion or national origin, or an
intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination;



   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion or
national origin, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or
rental, when such dwelling is in fact so available;



   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell
or rent any dwelling, by representations regarding the entry of prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race,
color, religion or national origin;



   (F)   To discriminate or participate in discrimination in connection
with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds, for the purchase, acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing
accommodation in the city because of race, color, religion or national origin
or ancestry;



   (G)   To refuse to show to any person, who has specified his or her
needs, the list or other records identifying all properties reasonably
meeting such needs, which the broker is offering, including those on any
multiple listing of real estate to which he or she has access in the course
of his or her business;



   (H)   To recommend, solicit or encourage, in any manner, any
restrictions upon the listing, showing, sale, leasing or rental of property,
knowingly, or lending money, or in any other activities relative to the
financing for the acquisition, construction or improvement of real estate
because of the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry of the
prospective occupant of the premises;



   (I)   To refuse to negotiate for, enter into or perform any sale or
lease of any housing accommodation, because of the race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry of any member of the family of any such party, or
of any person using or occupying or intending to use or occupy such housing
accommodations, or of any person using or occupying any housing
accommodations in the area in which such housing accommodation is located; and



   (J)   (1)   Nothing in this section shall apply to:



         (a)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an
owner; provided that such private individual owner does not own more than
three such single-family houses in the city at any one time; provided
further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale
or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the
exemption granted by this division (J)(1) shall apply only with respect to
one such sale within 24-month period; provided further, that such bonafide
private individual owner, does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or
reserved on his or her behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement,
title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or
rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any one time.
Further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be
excepted from the application of this subchapter, only if such house is sold
or rented without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities, or
the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson,
or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or
renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent,
salesperson or person and without the publication, posting or mailing, of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of division (C) above; but
nothing in this division (J)(1) shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow
agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance
as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or



         (b)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living
quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families
living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one of such living quarters as his or her residence.



      (2)   For the purpose of this division (J), a person shall be
deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:



         (a)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months,
participated as principal in three or more transactions, involving the sale
or rental of any dwelling or interest therein;



         (b)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months,
participated as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal
residence, in providing sales or rental services in two or more transactions,
involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or



         (c)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling, designed
or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.



(Prior Code, § 9-51)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.087  DISCRIMINATION IN LENDING.



   It shall be unlawful for any lending institution, which maintains an
office or place of doing business within the city, in making, agreeing to
make, arranging or negotiating any loan or guarantee of funds, for the
purpose of financing the purchase or sale, construction, lease,
rehabilitation, improvement, renovation or repair of any dwelling or housing,
to knowingly offer, seek or agree to terms, conditions or privileges that
discriminate between persons, because of race, color, religion or national
origin.



(Prior Code, § 9-52)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.088  LIMITATIONS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall require an owner to offer property to
the public at large, before selling or renting it, nor shall this subchapter
be deemed to prohibit owners from giving preference to prospective tenants or
buyers for any reason other than religion, race, color or national origin.
Nothing in this subchapter shall require an owner or his or her
representative, to offer property for sale or lease, or to negotiate
therefor, or to show his or her property to any person if the owner or his or
her representative have reason to believe that such person is not negotiating
for the purchase or lease of such property in good faith, nor shall this
subchapter be so construed as to prohibit a real estate broker or real estate
agent on behalf of the owner, from inquiring into and reporting upon
qualifications of any prospective buyer or tenant, with respect to
limitations or exclusion other than those of race, color, religion or
national origin.



(Prior Code, § 9-53)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.089  EXEMPTION.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or
occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such
persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race,
color or national origin, nor shall anything in this subchapter prohibit a
private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its
primary purpose or purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or operates, for
other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of
such lodgings, to its members or from giving preference to its members.



(Prior Code, § 9-54)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.090  PROCEDURES FOR COMPLAINTS.



   (A)   (1)   Any person who is the subject of a discriminatory act
under §§ 150.086 or 150.087, may file a verified written complaint with the
City Clerk setting forth the following in his or her complaint.



      (2)   The complaint shall state:



         (a)   The name and address of the complainant;



         (b)   The name and address of the person against who the
complaint is brought;



         (c)   The alleged facts surrounding the alleged
violation of this subchapter; and



         (d)   The name and address of all persons who are known
to have knowledge concerning the alleged facts.



   (B)   After the filing of a complaint, the City Clerk shall serve a
copy of the complaint of the party or parties charged and shall send copies
of the complaint to the City Manager and to each member of the Council
Committee.



   (C)   The Council Committee, upon receipt of a complaint, shall make
a prompt investigation in connection therewith, and if it determines that
probable cause exists for the allegation of the complaint, it shall attempt
to resolve the complaint by all proper methods of conciliation and
persuasion. If at any time within 60 days after the date of filing of the
complaint, the Council Committee shall determine that such attempts at
conciliation are not successful, the Council Committee shall thereupon
proceed promptly to a hearing of the complaint.



   (D)   Such hearing shall be conducted by the Council Committee, upon
due and reasonable notice to all parties. The Council Committee shall have
power to administer oaths and to take sworn testimony. Any party shall be
entitled to be represented by counsel and shall have the right to call
witnesses on his or her own behalf and to cross-examine witnesses.



   (E)   At the conclusion of such hearing, the Council Committee shall
render to the City Council a written report and recommendations, copies of
which shall also be served by mail upon the complainant, and the party or
parties charged.



   (F)   After receipt of the report and recommendation of the Council
Committee, the City Council may by affirmative vote of three-fourths of the
aldermen then holding office, direct such action by the City Attorney as
shall be necessary for the enforcement of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 9-55)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.091  LIMITATIONS OF TIME TO FILE COMPLAINTS.



   Any complaint filed hereunder must be filed within 30 days after the
alleged discriminatory practice occurred, or it shall be barred.



(Prior Code, § 9-56)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



CONSTRUCTION CODES COMMISSION



§ 150.105  CREATION AND APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby established a commission to be called the Construction
Codes Commission and herein referred to as the “Commission,” consisting
of five members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City
Council. Members may serve a maximum of three two-year terms. Vacancies shall
be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments
are made. One of the members of the Commission shall be named Chairperson by
the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The Mayor and City Council shall
have the power to remove any member of the Commission for cause.



(Prior Code, § 9-60)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 06-51, passed
9-5-2006)



§ 150.106  ABSENCE OF MEMBERS.



   During the absence of a member by reason of disability or
disqualification, the Mayor may designate a qualified substitute. Continued
absence of any member for any reason from regular meetings of the Commission
shall, at the discretion of the Mayor and City Council, render any such
member liable to removal from office.



(Prior Code, § 9-61)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 06-51, passed
9-5-2006)



§ 150.107  COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP.



   Each of the members of the Commission should be qualified by training
and experience to pass upon matters falling under the jurisdiction of the
Commission. The members of the Commission should have knowledge and
experience in one or more of the following areas: structural engineering,
building construction, plumbing, building systems and materials, electrical
engineering, lighting and life safety.



(Prior Code, § 9-62)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 06-51, passed
9-5-2006)



§ 150.108  EXEMPTION OF MEMBERS.



   No member of the Commission shall take action on any question in which
the member has either a direct or indirect interest.



(Prior Code, § 9-63)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 06-51, passed
9-5-2006)



§ 150.109  MEETINGS, RULES AND RECORDS.



   The Commission shall adopt rules governing all proceedings before it is
consistent with the provisions of the city code, a copy of which, including
all amendments thereto, shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk.
Meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and
at such other times as the Commission may determine. All meetings of the
Commission shall be open to the public. The Commission shall keep minutes of
its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such facts, and shall also keep records
of its examination and . other official actions. Such minutes and records
shall be public records.



(Prior Code, § 9-64)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.110  JURISDICTION AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.



   The Commission is hereby vested with the following jurisdictions and
powers:



   (A)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirements,
decision, or determination made by the Director of Community Development or
designee, under the provisions of § 150.003(A);



   (B)   To recommend to the City Council adoption of model codes and
periodic updates of those codes and adoption of local amendments to model
codes; and



   (C)   To consider such other matters as the City Council may from
time to time refer to the Commission.



(Prior Code, § 9-65)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 06-51, passed
9-5-2006)



§ 150.111  APPEALS.



   (A)   Scope of appeals. Where provided for under this Chapter 150 or
under Chapter 91 of the city code, an appeal may be taken from any decision
of the Director of Community Development or City Manager by any person
aggrieved. Such appeal shall be taken within ten days of the issuance of
written notice of the action complained of, by filing with the office of the
City Manager, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Director
of Community Development shall forthwith transmit to the Commission all of
the paper constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken.



   (B)   Hearing and notice. The Commission shall fix a reasonable time
and place for the hearing of an appeal and give due notice to the parties
thereof. The date of said hearing shall be no later than 45 days from the
date the appeal is filed with the Office of the City Manager. At the hearing,
the appellant and representatives, the Director of Community Development and
any other person whose interests may be affected by the matter on appeal,
shall be given an opportunity to be heard.



   (C)   Decision of the Commission on appeals. The Commission shall in
every case reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Every
decision of the Commission shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote
upon the decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in the office of
the City Clerk and the Director of Community Development and shall be open to
public inspection. A certified copy shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the
appellant.



   (D)   Enforcement of decision. The City Manager and the Director of
Community Development shall take immediate action in accordance with the
decision of the Commission.



   (E)   Report to the City Council. The Commission shall transmit to
the City Council a written report stating the Commission’s decision on each
appeal from an order, requirements, decision or determination of the City
Manager or the Director of Community Development.



(Prior Code, § 9-66)  (Ord. 861, passed 7-10-1972; Ord. 94-11B, passed
4-21-1994; Ord. 06-51, passed 9-5-2006)



BUILDING CODE RULES AND DEFINITIONS



§ 150.125  RULES AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   In the construction of this subchapter, the rules and
definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except
when the context clearly indicates otherwise. In further amplification and
for clarity of interpretation of the context, the following definitions of
word usage shall apply.



      (1)   Rules.



         (a)   Words used in the present tense shall include the
future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural
number, and the plural the singular.



         (b)   The word “shall” is mandatory and not
discretionary.



         (c)   The word “may” is permissive.



         (d)   ACCEPTED ENGINEERING PRACTICE shall be that which
conforms to accepted principles, tests or standards of nationally recognized
technical or scientific authorities.



      (2)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area or height
of a building or structure.



         BASEMENT. That portion of a building that is partly below
and partly above grade, and having at least one-half of its height above
grade and used for storage, garages for use of occupants of the building, or
other utilities common to the building.



         BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded by open space on
the same zoning lot as the principal building, but separated from the
principal building by not less than ten feet.



         BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from existing grade
to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a
mansard roof, or to the top of gable, hip and gambrel roof, or to the top of
any structure of substance thereupon, excluding required chimneys.



         BUTTRESS. A projecting part of a masonry wall built
integrally therewith to furnish lateral stability which is supported on
proper foundations.



         CELLAR. A story which may have part, but not more than
one-half of its height above grade, and used for storage, garages for use of
occupants of the building or other utilities common to the building.



         CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY. The certificate issued by
the building official which permits the use of a building in accordance with
the approved plans and specifications and which certifies compliance with the
provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the building in its several
parts, together with any special stipulations or conditions of the building
permit.



         CHIMNEY. A primarily vertical enclosure containing one or
more passageways.



            1.   FACTORY-BUILT CHIMNEY. A chimney that is
factory-made, listed by an accredited authoritative testing agency, for
venting gas appliances, gas incinerators and solid or liquid fuel burning
appliances.



            2.   MASONRY CHIMNEY. A field constructed chimney
built in accordance with this code and nationally recognized standards.



         COMBUSTIBLE (MATERIAL). A material which cannot be
classified as noncombustible in accordance with that definition.



         COST OF CONSTRUCTION. For purposes of calculating building
permit fees, the cost of construction shall be the fair market value of a
construction project including labor and material for all trades and
engineering services. Land cost shall not be included in the calculation.



         DWELLING. A building or portion thereof, designed or used
as living quarters including single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings
and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels or motels or rooming
and boarding houses.



         DWELLING, ATTACHED. One which is joined to another dwelling
at one or more sides by a party wall or walls or roof.



         DWELLING, DETACHED. One which is entirely surrounded by
open space on the same lot.



         DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building, or portion thereof,
containing three or more dwelling units.



         DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building containing one dwelling
unit only.



         DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building containing two dwelling
units only.



         DWELLING UNIT. Consists of one or more rooms which are
arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual
bathrooms and complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, shall be
included for each DWELLING UNIT.



         FIRE RESISTANCE RATING. The time in hours or fractions
thereof that materials or their assemblies will resist fire exposure as
determined by fire tests conducted in compliance with recognized standards.



         FLOOR AREA.



            1.   The aggregate square footage of all floors of
all structures, at or above grade, measured from outside exterior dimension,
including attached and detached garage(s), except as provided in the
definition for basement above, pool buildings or cabana buildings, tennis
courts, above ground swimming pools, decks and terraces and all appurtenances
thereto more than five feet above ground, measured from the original grade of
record and play structures more than seven feet in height and with a
footprint larger than 150 square feet.



            2.   All interior spaces with a wall height in
excess 12 feet may be counted twice if the Director of Community Development
determines that the space involved is comparable to two floor areas.



         FLOOR AREA RATIO. The floor area divided by the lot area.



         FLOOR FINISH. The finish placed on top of the floor arch,
slab or other structural floor element.



         GRADE, EXISTING. Established by either:



            1.   The building pad elevation, as shown on a
subdivision grading plan as approved by the City Engineer; or



            2.   Where such plans do not exist, EXISTING GRADE
shall be the average elevation of the ground surface, in its natural state,
measured at the corners of the proposed structure. For structures in excess
of 100 feet in length, additional measurements, at 100 foot intervals,
measured from the lower corner to the higher corner, shall also be included
in establishing the average. This computation must be reviewed and approved
by the City Engineer.



         HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space arranged for
living, eating, and sleeping purposes (not including bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways and other accessory floor
spaces).



         NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. A material which, in the form in
which it is used and under the conditions anticipated, will not ignite, burn,
support combustion or release flammable vapors, when subjected to fire or
heat. Materials reported as noncombustible, when tested in accordance with
the, Standard Method of Test for Noncombustibility of Elementary Materials,
ASTM E 136-73, shall be considered NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS.



         TABLELAND. Land where the slope in any direction does not
exceed 10%.



(Prior Code, § 9-78)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



BUILDING CODE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.140  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Building Code shall be administered and enforced by the Director of
Community Development.



(Prior Code, § 9-79)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.141  SCOPE.



   The provisions of subchapters of this Building Code shall be deemed the
minimum requirements for the remodeling, repair or alteration of existing
buildings or structures, and the construction of new single-family and duplex
dwellings and their accessory buildings.



(Prior Code, § 9-80)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.142  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Director of Community Development shall inspect or cause
to be inspected, all buildings or structures which are being constructed,
repaired, altered, remodeled or razed.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to request
and receive approval of the following work before proceeding to the next
phase of new construction.



   (C)   The contractors shall call for the following inspections and
have a representative at the site during the inspections:



      (1)   Excavation, footing or piers;



      (2)   Foundation, waterproofing and Draintile 1 (before
gravel), tile only;



      (3)   Draintile 2 (after gravel), window riser/grates and
dampproofing;



      (4)   Plumbing ground work;



      (5)   Rough plumbing;



      (6)   Water lines;



      (7)   Rough electrical;



      (8)   Rough heating, duct work;



      (9)   Steel and rough framing;



      (10)   Insulation and draftstopping;



      (11)   Sanitary and storm sewer/water service;



      (12)   Masonry firebox/fireplace;



      (13)   Masonry chimney;



      (14)   Electric service/furnace;



      (15)   Air conditioning unit with disconnect; and



      (16)   Final inspection and bond refund.



   (D)   An original survey prepared by a registered state land
surveyor, shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development for
review and approval, immediately after the installation of the foundation. No
construction activity shall proceed, until said survey has been reviewed and
approved by the Department of Community Development. The survey shall
indicate all property lines, easements, top of foundation and all building
lines of record. The survey shall also indicate the legal description of the
premises, be drawn on paper not smaller than 14 inches by 18 inches, to a
scale of not less than 30 feet to the inch and shall describe to the nearest
one-tenth foot, the size, shape and location of each structure on the
premises.



   (E)   (1)   When a permit is issued for the remodeling, repair or
alteration of any building, the Director of Community Development or his or
her designee, shall advise the contractor in writing of inspections required
for the particular work involved.



      (2)   The contractor shall then be responsible to request
inspections and receive approval of each phase of construction.



(Prior Code, § 9-81)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.143  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to occupy or use, or permit
the occupancy or use of any building or premises or part thereof, hereafter
created, erected, changed or converted wholly or partly, until a certificate
of occupancy has been issued and indicates that the building or premises or
the part thereof so created, erected, changed or converted, and the proposed
use thereof, conform to the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Conditional certificate of occupancy.



      (1)   A conditional certificate of occupancy may be issued:



         (a)   When the structure created, erected, changed or
converted is nearly complete;



         (b)   Use or occupancy of the premises will not, in the
opinion of the Director of Community Development, present a hazard to the
occupant;



         (c)   The owner enters into a written agreement with the
city in a form approved by the City Attorney and containing at least the
terms set forth below in divisions (B)(2)(a) through (B)(2)(f) below; and



         (d)   Posts a cash bond in a sum equal to the cost of
the work remaining to be completed, but in any event no less than an amount
as set by Council.



      (2)   The agreement required pursuant to division (B)(1)(c)
above shall provide:



         (a)   That the owner will make all corrections indicated
on the final inspection check sheet within six months of the issuance of the
conditional certificate of occupancy;



         (b)   That the owner will permit the reinspection of the
subject premises within the six-month period in order to verify the
corrections;



         (c)   That failure to make the corrections within the
six-month period shall be cause for the city to record a notice of the
deficiencies on the final inspection check sheet with the County Recorder of
Deeds;



         (d)   That the owner will defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the city, its officers, designees and employees from any and all
claims, loss or damages which may be incurred by reason of occupancy of the
premises prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy;



         (e)   That the owner, in consideration of the granting
of the conditional certificate of occupancy, agrees to complete or correct
the items listed on the final inspection check sheet; and



         (f)   That, subject to the provisions of § 150.153, the
city shall return the cash bond required pursuant to this division (B) upon
the owner’s full and timely satisfaction of the owner’s obligations under
the agreement.



   (C)   Certificate of use. It shall be unlawful to occupy or use or
permit the occupancy or use of any nonhabitable building or premises or part
thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed or converted wholly or partly,
until a certificate of use, to the effect that the building or premises or
the part thereof so created, erected, changed or converted, and the proposed
use thereof, conform to the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 9-82)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 03-60, passed
11-20-2003)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.144  VIOLATIONS; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   In case of violations of this subchapter, a written notice
shall be immediately served by the Director of Community Development, or his
or her designee, on the owner, contractor or person on the site in charge of
or responsible for the work. The job site shall be posted with a notice of
violation and the Director of Community Development or his or her designee
may immediately stop all work on the entire premises or any portion thereof.



   (B)   If the written notice is respected and immediate steps are
taken to conform with the requirements of this subchapter, then the deviation
observed shall not be considered a willful violation and shall not be subject
to penalty as herein provided.



   (C)   If the written notice has not been respected and the condition
corrected within 24 hours, the Director of Community Development may consider
the deviation a willful violation of this chapter and shall issue a written
order stopping all work on the premises until compliance with all code
requirements have been assured.



(Prior Code, § 9-83)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 03-37, passed
7-7-2003)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.145  PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   Before proceeding with the excavation for or the construction,
alteration, repair or removal of any building or structure, the contractor
shall request and obtain a permit for such work from the Office of the
Director of Community Development.



   (B)   (1)   A permit shall be considered void, if the work
covered by the permit has not been started within 90 days and completed
within one year of the issuance of the permit. A permit may be renewed for
one year for an additional fee of 10% of the original permit fee, but in no
case shall the fee be less than the minimum fee specified on the most recent
fee schedule, approved by the City Council and on file in the Office of the
Director of Community Development. Any request for additional time beyond the
two-year period shall be heard by the Construction Codes Commission.



      (2)   The Director of Community Development may extend a valid
permit for a period not to exceed 90 days beyond the anniversary date of the
permit.



   (C)   Application for a building permit shall be submitted on a form
furnished by the Office of the Director of Community Development. The
application shall be accompanied by architectural plans and plot plans, drawn
to a scale of not less than one-eighth inch to the foot. The Director of
Community Development may, when job conditions or scope of work permits,
accept a written description of the work in lieu of detailed plans.



   (D)   A limited building permit may be issued as a convenience to
the applicant when sufficient plans have been submitted or written assurance
has been given that the construction will conform to all ordinance
requirements. A limited permit shall be restricted to a period not to exceed
30 days.



   (E)   A permit shall not be issued for any construction work unless
the premises is in compliance with the regulations of the zoning ordinance
and other pertinent ordinances of the city.



   (F)   A cash bond in the amount as set from time to time by motion,
resolution or ordinance of the City Council, provided that such amount shall
not be less than $500 shall be required on all new construction projects and
all additions to existing buildings.



      (1)   The bond is to assure payment of the cost of
replacement, repair, cleaning or restoration of public property, damaged or
littered by the Contractor or his or her subcontractors, in the prosecution
of the work for which the permit was issued.



      (2)   If the public property is damaged or littered, the
contractor shall be notified to take necessary action to restore the public
property to its original condition.



      (3)   Failure on the part of the owner, general contractor or
any subcontractor to promptly clean the public property before 2:30 p.m. each
day will result in the clean up work being accomplished by city personnel,
with the cost of said work being deducted from the cash bond.



      (4)   The cash bond shall be maintained until the work for
which the permit was issued is completed. Upon approval by the Director of
Community Development or his or her designee of the completion of such work,
and subject to the provision of § 150.153 of this city code, the cash bond
shall be returned to the depositor.



   (G)   Occupation, obstruction, or use of street, sidewalks and
public property.



      (1)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, or corporation other than an authorized official of the city in the
performance of his or her duties, to make any excavation in any street, alley
or public place, or to tunnel under any street, alley or public place in the
city without first having obtained a permit as herein required or without
complying with the regulations herein contained.



      (2)   Application and fee. Applications for such permits shall
be made to the Director of Community Development or his or her designee and
shall state thereon the location of the intended excavations or tunnel, the
size thereof, the purpose therefor, and the person, firm or corporation doing
the actual excavating, and the name of the person, firm or corporation for
whom the work is being done.



      (3)   Deposit; bond.



         (a)   Every contractor, person, firm or corporation
making any improvement in the city which requires the digging into, taking up
or otherwise disturbing any portion of the paved roadway or parkway of any
street in the city shall deposit with the City Clerk in cash, a sum as set
out in the fee schedule per permit issued.



         (b)   Such deposit shall be returned after the work is
finished, but in the event that such person, firm or corporation shall fail
or neglect to place or maintain any such light or barricade or to restore the
pavement, sidewalk or parkway as herein provided, the Director of Community
Development or his or her designee may proceed to have such light or
barricade lighted, or placed at such obstruction or opening, or to restore
the pavement, sidewalk or parkway as herein provided and the cost of doing so
shall be deducted from the deposit before it is returned.



         (c)   Whenever in the making of any improvement, it
becomes necessary to dig into, excavate or remove any portion of the parkway
of any street lying between the lot lines and gutter lines thereof, the
permit, plans, specifications and contract, therefore shall provide that the
contractor, person, firm or corporation making such improvement, shall
restore such parkway to the condition it was in before such digging or
excavating was commenced, and shall resod the surface where sod has been
taken up, or cover the surface with suitable soil and seed the same with
suitable grass seed, and shall continue to care for the same, until such
parkway is restored to a condition as good in every way as it was in before
such digging or excavation was made.



         (d)   Whenever any portion of the public property is
disturbed that does not abut that private property for the benefit of which
the said public property was disturbed, immediate restoration of the
disturbed property shall be required.



   (H)   High impact traffic.



      (1)   HIGH IMPACT TRAFFIC shall be defined as the passage on
city-maintained streets of any vehicle that is:



         (a)   Carrying heavy construction material loads,
multiple trips in short duration, exerting force that contributes to abnormal
and localized pavement deterioration; and



         (b)   Either:



            1.   Is used in grading, construction or
renovation projects for which a building permit, grading permit; watershed
development permit or similar development permit or authorization is required
under the city code (hereinafter referred to as “building permits” for
purposes of this division (H)); or



            2.   Travels on the streets or roadways of the
city as pass-through traffic when alternative routes are otherwise available
(“through-traffic”).



      (2)   The determination of whether the use of any such vehicle
constitutes high impact traffic shall be made by the City Engineer in
accordance with the



provisions of this division (H).



         (a)   Approval required. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation, other than an authorized official of the city in
the performance of his or her duties, to utilize high impact traffic within
the city without first having obtained a an approval as herein required or
without complying with the regulations herein contained.



         (b)   Application.



            1.   Upon submitting an application for a building
permit under division (C) above (or such other applicable provision of the
city code), any property owner or contractor engaging in any activity for
which a building permit is required (a “development project”) must seek
from the City Engineer, or his or her designee, a determination of whether
such development project will include high impact traffic. (For purposes of
this division (H), through traffic activities shall also be considered a
“development project.”).



            2.   As part of such building permit application
or in connection with any through traffic, the City Engineer may require the
applicant to submit information regarding deliveries and other construction
traffic related to the development project. Any development project that
involves the use of high impact traffic, as determined by the City Engineer,
must obtain approval for high impact traffic prior to start of construction.
The building permits will reflect the approval of high impact traffic, if
applicable.



         (c)   High impact traffic fee.



            1.   The fee for such high impact traffic shall be
determined individually for each development project by the City Engineer
based on various factors, including, but not limited to:



               a.   Number of vehicles required for the
development project;



               b.   Number of trips each vehicle is
estimated to take;



               c.   Vehicle weight class;



               d.   Vehicle load factors;



               e.   Traffic routing;



               f.   Local street classification and average
daily traffic;



               g.   Estimated reduction in pavement life;



               h.   Street length affected;



               i.   Street area affected; and



               j.   Estimated rehabilitation cost.



            2.   The City Engineer may develop from time to
time rules or regulations for considering the foregoing factors in assessing
the amount of the high impact traffic fee.



         (d)   Cranes. Notwithstanding the evaluation factors
outlined in division (H)(2)(c) above, any vehicle transporting a crane shall
be deemed high impact traffic. The high impact traffic fee for the
transportation of a mobile crane shall be as set out in the fee schedule.
Such fee shall be charged in addition to any fee established by the City
Engineer pursuant to division (H)(2)(c) above.



         (e)   Allocation of funds. All high impact traffic fees
remitted to the city shall be deposited into the Capital Fund for general
maintenance and improvements of the city roadway infrastructure.



         (f)   Appeals.



            1.   Prior to the payment for and issuance of any
high impact traffic, an owner or developer may appeal the determination of
the City Engineer to the City Manager regarding:



               a.   Whether such development project will
include traffic which constitutes high impact traffic; or



               b.   The amount of the high impact traffic
fee.



            2.   Any such appeal shall be made in writing
within ten days after the written determination of the City Engineer, and the
appeal shall set forth in detail the bases for the appeal. The City Manager
shall thereafter consider the request for review, determine whether the high
impact traffic fee should be reduced or waived, and provide a written
determination thereof. If such person seeks further review of the imposition
or amount of the high impact traffic fee, such person shall file a request to
appeal the determination of the City Manager with the City Clerk within 15
days after mailing of the determination by the City Manager; such appeal
shall be considered by the City Council based on the relevant facts available
regarding the high impact traffic fee, and materials presented in connection
with the Manager’s review provided under this division (H)(2)(f). The
determination of the City Council shall final. In connection with any review
or appeal under this division (H)(2)(f), a building permit with approval of
high impact traffic may be issued upon paving the high impact traffic fee,
but any such fee payment shall not prevent a person from pursuing such review
or appeal.



         (g)   Violations. Both operators of high impact traffic
and owners or contractors utilizing high impact traffic for a development
protect without an approval for high impact traffic shall be in violation of
this division (H), and subject to a fine.



         (h)   Exemptions. Notwithstanding any provision in this
division (H) (except division (H)(2)(d) above), no high impact traffic
approval shall be required in connection with the construction, alteration,
addition, renovation, or rehabilitation related solely to a single-family
residential building structure in the city.



         (i)   Discrete damage to city streets or infrastructure.
Vehicles that are used in conjunction with a development project, whether
deemed high impact traffic or otherwise, that cause specific, identifiable
damage to streets, sidewalks or other infrastructure shall be required to pay
the cost of repair for such damage without regard to any high impact traffic
approval and in addition to any high impact traffic fee.



   (I)   The following fee schedule shall apply to all new construction
and to all remodeling of all buildings in the city.



      (1)   Building construction or remodeling.



 


Total Cost (Full Market Value) of Construction

 

Permit Fee




$200,000

 
In accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council
and on file in the Office of the Director of Community Development



$200,001 to $500,000

 
In accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council
and on file in the Office of the Director of Community Development



$500,001 or more

 
In accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council
and on file in the Office of the Director of Community Development



 



      (2)   Water system connection charge.



         (a)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any
construction or remodeling, the owner, contractor or representative shall pay
to the city the building permit fee as calculated based upon the schedule. In
addition to the building permit fee, a water system connection charge,
computed in accordance with the schedule, shall also be paid to the city for
all new principal buildings and additions.



 


Water System Connection Charge



Each single-family dwelling building
 

In accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council
and on file in the Office of the Director of Community Development



Each residential unit in a duplex dwelling building
 

Same as above or multi-family dwelling building



Each new nonresidential principal building or major addition
 

Same as above



Each institutional principal building having a federal and state tax exempt
status
 

Same as above



Installation of swimming pool (as defined by §§ 150.430 through 150.448)
 

Same as above



Installation of lawn sprinkling system
 

Same as above




 



         (b)   The funds thus collected shall be used by the city
for its general corporate purposes, with primary application being made the
necessary expansion of the water system to meet the requirements of the new
users thereof. The swimming pool and lawn sprinkler charge shall not apply if
the permit is obtained within one year from the date of occupancy of a new
residence.



         (c)   The above described fees shall be increased or
decreased on an annual basis commencing May 1, 1982 and on May 1 of each
subsequent year in accordance with the ENR index promulgated by the
Engineering News Record. For the purposes of computing increases or decreases
in utilizing this index, the comparison index to be used shall be the ENR
index in effect on the date of passage of this section. In addition, the city
shall have discretionary power where necessary to increase or decrease these
connection fees beyond the base amount provided for by the ENR cost index.
Such discretionary power shall be limited to the extent possible to cover
costs induced by inflation and other factors beyond the control of the city.



      (3)   Plan review fee. To be collected at the time of
application for building permit or submittal of any plan for review and shall
be in accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City
Council and on file in the Office of the Director of Community Development.



      (4)   Connection to the sanitary sewer. Prior to the issuance
of a building permit for any construction activity requiring a connection to
the sanitary sewer, a sanitary sewer connection fee, in addition to any
applicable building permit fee shall be paid in accordance with the fee
schedule as annually adopted by the City Council.



   (J)   A reinspection fee, adequate to reimburse the city for
additional expense incurred, shall be charged on any construction work which
through negligence, incomplete work or poor workmanship on the part of the
contractor, makes it necessary for the Inspector to make more than two
inspections of a single phase of construction.



   (K)   A fee as set out in the fee schedule for each 24-hour period,
to reimburse the city for additional expenses incurred may be added to the
permit fee for any work that has proceeded without first securing a permit.



   (L)   A no fee permit may be issued on a maintenance and repair work
for which not more than a minimum inspection service can be offered by the
Department of Community Development. The no fee permit may be issued on work
costing not more than $1,000. The scope of the maintenance or repair work
shall be limited to the following:



      (1)   Repair of any roof surface;



      (2)   Repair of exterior wood or metal siding;



      (3)   Tuck pointing or exterior stucco repairs;



      (4)   Patching of interior plaster or plaster board;



      (5)   Replacement of doors or window sash in existing openings;



      (6)   Repair or replace existing fence in same location;



      (7)   Replacement of kitchen counter tops not requiring
alteration to plumbing; and



      (8)   Installation of a garden storage building not exceeding
150 square feet and which has no dimension over 12 feet.



(Prior Code, § 9-84)  (Ord. 1245, passed 12-7-1981; Ord. 94-11B, passed
4-21-1994; Ord. 03-14, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 03-20, passed 3-20-2003; Ord.
03-60, passed 11-20-2003; Ord. 2010-30, passed 2-16-2010)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.146  SEWER AND WATER CONNECTION CHARGES.



   (A)   Improvement by owner; proof of cost. Whenever the city shall
have constructed a new public improvement such as a sanitary sewer or a water
main in accordance with city standards and specifications, at any time after
January 1, 1972, other than by special assessment, the City Engineer shall
ascertain and delineate the lots, tracts and parcels of land abutting on the
line of such public improvement which may reasonably be expected to benefit
from such public improvement and shall then establish a formula for assessing
each such lot, tract or parcel of land, an amount which will enable the city
to recover by way of a connection charge, a portion of the cost of such
improvement equivalent to the cost of a normal sewer or water line conforming
to city standards for residential areas. The formula for each such assessment
shall be approved by the City Council.



   (B)   Public improvement. Whenever any property owner shall have
heretofore or shall hereafter at entirely its or his or her own cost,
construct within the city streets or public thoroughfares of the city,
pursuant to a contract and permit from the city, a public improvement such as
a sanitary sewer or water main extension in accordance with city standards
and specifications, inspected and approved by the city and when properties
other than the property of the person constructing such improvement shall
intervene and abut upon that section of the street within such improvement
lies, then when the constructing owner shall furnish certification and
satisfactory evidence of the cost of such improvement, the City Engineer
shall investigate and certify the reasonableness thereof in accordance with
existing prices, and when the corporate authorities shall be satisfied as to
such reasonableness, the City Engineer shall ascertain and delineate the
lots, tracts and parcels of land abutting on the line of such public
improvement which may reasonably be expected to benefit therefrom and shall
then establish a formula for computing the pro-rata contribution from each
abutting property owner. The constructing owner shall further, prior to the
inception of the work upon such improvement, execute a waiver of liability
and right of reimbursement from the city of the cost of such improvement.



   (C)   Notice. The City Engineer shall prepare and file in the Office
of the City Clerk and in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county, a
notice of the area which is subject to the connection charges provided for in
divisions (A) and (B) above which shall serve as notice to persons interested
in such property that there will be a charge in relation to such property for
the connection to and use of said public improvement. A copy of this notice
shall also be filed in the Office of the Director of Community Development of
the city.



   (D)   Contribution by intervening owner. Whenever the owner or
owners of any property or properties other than the owner installing said
improvement shall thereafter apply to the city for right to tap into or make
connection with such sewer or water line extension, or shall be required by
any ordinance to connect or tap into said improvement, then the City Engineer
shall compute and certify to such applicant the pro-rata cost of construction
of that section of such line abutting applicant’s property and shall before
issuing permit to tap into or connect therewith receive such pro-rata
contribution or reimbursement and upon receipt remit the same to the Finance
Officer for distribution in the manner authorized by the City Council. The
determination of the City Engineer as to the amount of such contribution
shall, in the absence of willful fraud or misconduct, be conclusive as
between the city and the person having constructed such line.



   (E)   Connection charge to be in addition to fees. Charges provided
for in this section shall be in addition to and exclusive of fees required
and fixed by ordinance as inspection or permit fees for connection with or
tap into city sewer or water lines.



(Prior Code, § 9-85)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.147  ARCHITECTURAL AND SITE DESIGN REVIEW.



   (A)   Architectural and site plans. Plans for buildings shall be
prepared by or under the direction and supervision of a person registered to
practice architecture in the state, under the provisions of the Illinois
Architectural Practice Act (or any successor act), and shall bear the stamp
of the official seal of such registered architect and certification to the
effect that such plans were prepared by the architect, or under the
architect’s direction and supervision, in conformance with the statutes and
ordinances pertaining thereto; with such exceptions as are provided for under
§ 3 of said Illinois Architectural Practice Act.



      (1)   Architectural drawings shall be explicit and complete,
accurately indicating all distances and dimensions including location of all
sewers, water and other services.



      (2)   All construction shall be in accordance with the plans
and specifications reviewed and approved pursuant to this section. If changes
are desired, architectural drawings or addenda shall be submitted for review
and approval prior to any change being made.



      (3)   Site plans shall be detailed to show all existing
buildings and proposed additions, hardscape areas, existing and proposed
utility and service locations and sizes, existing and proposed easements,
required setbacks, trees and other key features of the site.



      (4)   Two surveys by a registered state land surveyor shall be
submitted to the Community Development Department. The survey shall indicate
all property lines, easements and all building lines of record. The survey
shall indicate the legal description of the premises, be drawn on paper not
smaller than 14 inches by 18 inches to a scale of not less than 30 feet to
the inch. The Director of Community Development may require a title search of
any lot or parcel of land proposed as a construction site.



   (B)   Building Review Board.



      (1)   Creation; composition; term. There is hereby created the
City Building Review Board herein referenced as the Board.



         (a)   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, shall appoint seven residents to serve as Board members with one of
the members appointed as Chairperson. Each member may serve a maximum of
three consecutive two-year terms or until a successor is appointed, with said
terms set to expire on a staggered basis.



         (b)   Members serve at the discretion of the Mayor.



         (c)   In the event of any vacancy on the Board, the
Mayor, with the consent of the Council, shall appoint a resident to fill the
remainder of the term.



         (d)   Four members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum.



         (e)   The Board shall include persons of diverse
background with each member demonstrating various skills, knowledge and
expertise in one or more of the areas of architectural design, engineering,
construction, landscaping, real estate sales or development or related fields
which facilitate the review of matters that come from the Board.



         (f)   One member of the Board may serve concurrently on
the Zoning Board of Appeals with the terms for each body being distinct and
separate.



         (g)   One member of the Board may serve concurrently on
the Historic Preservation Commission with the terms for each body being
distinct and separate.



      (2)   Purpose. The Building Review Board is responsible for
evaluating and making recommendations regarding new construction,
demolitions, additions and alterations to existing buildings and signage for
the purpose of ensuring that the character of the community, the high
standards for development, the quality of life and property values are
maintained. The Building Review Board provides a forum for public input and
deliberation with a focus on architectural design, building massing,
landscaping and overall site design in relation to the individual site and
the neighborhood as a whole.



      (3)   Powers and duties. The Board shall discharge the
following duties under this chapter:



         (a)   Consider and make recommendations regarding
applications for projects requiring architectural review pursuant to this
section except that based on a majority vote of the City Council the required
review of, and recommendations relating to, a city owned project may be
reassigned to another Board, Commission or ad hoc committee, appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council, if said body has purview over
other aspects of said project and if its members are able, in the
determination of the Council, to conduct the required architectural review
and make associated recommendations. In the case of such reassignment, the
selected Board, Commission or ad hoc committee shall receive a staff report
and recommendation and conduct the architectural review, and make
recommendations to the City Council, based on the standards in this chapter
which would otherwise be used for the review of the project by the Building
Review Board;



         (b)   Consider and make recommendations regarding
applications for exceptions from the building scale requirements pursuant to
§ 150.148;



         (c)   Consider and make recommendations regarding
applications for exceptions from the demolition permit regulations pursuant
to § 150.148;



         (d)   Consider and make recommendations regarding
appeals from a denial of a demolition permit § 150.148;



         (e)   Adopt an annual meeting schedule;



         (f)   Cancel or re-schedule regular meetings or hold
special meetings if a reasonable basis for such action exists as determined
by the Chairperson or a majority of the Board;



         (g)   Adopt rules and procedures for public meetings;



         (h)   The Director of Community Development or a
designee shall act as Recording Secretary for the Board;



         (i)   Advise and make recommendations to other city
boards and commissions on matters before those bodies as requested by those
boards and commissions;



         (j)   Consider and make recommendations to the City
Council pertaining to amendments to this section and § 150.148 from time to
time as may be deemed appropriate;



         (k)   Undertake such other tasks as the City Council may
direct from time to time; and



         (l)   Develop recommended guidelines if it deems
appropriate to further explain how the standards set forth in this section
may appropriately be incorporated into a project, which guidelines shall be
available from the Community Development Department.



   (C)   Architectural design review.



      (1)   Purpose and goals. The city, a special charter and home
rule municipality, finds that buildings, landscaping, awnings, signs, fences
and other structures, when designed within the context of the established
surrounding neighborhood, preserve the distinct and unique architectural and
historic character of the city. It is the goal of the regulations in this
section that each building in the city complement and improve upon the
architectural heritage of the city. Specifically, the purposes of the
architectural design review process are:



         (a)   To protect, preserve and enhance the natural and
architectural environment of the city;



         (b)   To protect and enhance property values;



         (c)   To preserve the overall historic and architectural
character of the community;



         (d)   To preserve the character of the neighborhoods
which have a recognizable historic or architectural theme;



         (e)   To protect the unique aspects that distinguish
neighborhoods from each other;



         (f)   To maintain the diversity of housing stock
traditionally found in the city including diversity in style, size and price
point;



         (g)   To avoid development that is unsightly, unsuitable
or not compatible with the property or surrounding neighborhood; and



         (h)   To promote the health, safety and welfare of the
city and its residents.



      (2)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (C), the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         PROJECT. Any activity requiring a building, demolition or
similar development permit from the city that affects the exterior appearance
of the subject property, including without limitation the erection,
remodeling or alteration of a building, landscaping, awning, sign, fence or
other structure, but excluding repairs and maintenance activity that does not
alter the exterior appearance of a building or structure.



         SURROUNDING NEIGHBORHOOD.



            1.   The full block on which the property is
located;



            2.   The block face opposite the street frontage
on which the property is located; on a corner lot, the block face on both
street frontages on which the property is located shall be considered;



            3.   The adjoining block face to the rear of the
property; and



            4.   The general character of the larger
neighborhood, consisting of two blocks in each direction of the property.



      (3)   Procedure.



         (a)   Review by the Director of Community Development.



            1.   Request for waiver of Building Review Board
consideration. An application for waiver of Board review may be submitted for
determination and recommendation on whether the standards set forth in
division (C)(4) below are satisfied. Such application shall be delivered to
the Director of Community Development or the Director’s designee. An
application for waiver of Board review must include the following:



               a.   A completed waiver application form;



               b.   A legal survey of the property showing
existing buildings and conditions on the property;



               c.   A site plan showing all new
construction and any changes proposed for the property including, but not
limited to, changes to buildings, landscaping, driveways, utility locations
and grading;



               d.   Conceptual elevations and information
on proposed exterior materials; and



               e.   A completed building scale calculation
on a calculation sheet provided by the city.



            2.   Review of application for waiver and
recommendation of Director of Community Development on whether Building
Review Board consideration should be waived. Within 35 days following receipt
of a complete application for waiver, the Director may recommend waiver of
the requirement for Building Review Board consideration.



               a.   If the Director recommends a waiver of
Board consideration based on a determination that the project complies with
the standards set forth in division (C)(3)(b) below, then such recommendation
for waiver shall be forwarded to the members of the Building Review Board for
information. Unless a member of the Building Review Board directs that the
waiver be disallowed and requests that the matter be referred for a hearing
before the Building Review Board pursuant to division (C)(3)(b) below within
five business days after the recommendation is forwarded by the Director of
Community Development to the Board, the waiver shall be deemed granted by the
Board and an application for a building permit may be applied for without
further architectural design review; or



               b.   If the Director does not recommend a
waiver of Board consideration based on a determination that the project does
not comply with the standards set forth in division (C)(4) below, then the
Director shall refer the application to the Building Review Board for a
public hearing in accordance with division (C)(3)(b) below. The referral to
the Building Review Board shall include a staff report and recommendation on
the application as part of the packet provided to the Board. In addition, the
Director of Community Development shall deliver a copy of the staff report
and recommendation to the applicant and shall notify the applicant in writing
of the time and place of the public hearing of the Building Review Board and
of the application submittal requirements for Board review in accordance with
division (C)(3)(a)1. above.



            3.   In the event that the Director does not issue
a report and recommendation on an application for waiver within such 35-day
period, the project shall be deemed eligible for submittal of a complete
building permit application (subject to customary building permit review)
without further consideration or action by the Building Review Board. For
purposes of formulating a recommendation on an application for waiver, unless
the Director finds a substantial inconsistency between a project and the
standards in division (C)(4) below, the Director will recommend a waiver for
any project that either: is not visible from a street; increases the gross
floor area of a building by the lesser of 100 square feet or 10%; or is
necessitated by requirements of health or safety.



         (b)   Review by the Building Review Board.



            1.   Application for Building Review Board
consideration and action.



               a.   A complete application shall include
without limitation the following plans and information and shall be submitted
in accordance with the schedule adopted on an annual basis by the Building
Review Board.



                  i.   Completed building scale
calculation form;



                  ii.   Impervious surface calculation;



                  iii.   Application form;



                  iv.   Description of exterior
materials form;



                  v.   Statement of intent;



                  vi.   Legal plat of survey;



                  vii.   Site plan of proposed
improvements;



                  viii.   Grading plan (if any grade
change is proposed);



                  ix.   Site grading cross section (if
any grade change is proposed);



                  x.   Tree survey;



                  xi.   Dimensioned drawings of all new
structures or additions showing exterior materials;



                  xii.   All elevations; at least one
elevation shall be in color;



                  xiii.   Floor plans;



                  xiv.   Roof plan;



                  xv.   Cross sections;



                  xvi.   Streetscape elevation (required
for all new houses and major additions visible from the street);



                  xvii.   Landscape plan;



                  xviii.   Photographs of the site and
existing buildings;



                  xix.   All applicable fees; and



                  xx.   Other materials as required by
the Director of Community Development, including, without limitation, a roof
line mock-up.



               b.   In addition to the above materials, the
following shall be submitted for all applications for demolition:



                  i.   A written statement addressing
the demolition criteria;



                  ii.   Structural evaluation from an
independent structural engineer;



                  iii.   Massing model;



                  iv.   Site plan overlay of existing
and proposed structures and hardscape; and



                  v.   Elevation overlays of existing
and proposed elevations.



               c.   One or more of the required materials
may be waived if the Director of Community Development determines that the
information is not relevant to the project or to the issues that will be
considered by the Board. Detailed information on the required materials shall
be provided in the application packet available from time to time through the
Community Development Department.



            2.   Site staked.



               a.   Staking. No less than 14 days prior to
the Building Review Board meeting at which the application is scheduled to be
considered, the foot print of all new residences and all additions shall be
staked.



               b.   Application for Building Review Board
consideration and action. Unless an application for waiver is granted or
deemed granted by the Building Review Board in accordance with division this
(C)(3), a complete Building Review Board application shall be submitted to
the Community Development Department. Within five days after receipt of the
application, the Director of Community Development shall issue a written
notice to the petitioner identifying deficiencies in the completeness or
correctness of the application.



               c.   Public hearing. After receipt of a
complete Building Review Board application, a public hearing shall be set
within 60 days thereafter, or at the first regularly scheduled Building
Review Board that has not been fully subscribed, but in no event later than
120 days after receipt of a completed application. If a hearing is not
commenced within the period set forth in the preceding sentence, the
application shall be deemed recommended for approval and shall be presented
to the City Council pursuant to division (C)(3)(c) below for final
determination. At the hearing, the applicant and any owner of property within
the surrounding neighborhood shall have the right to submit written and oral
testimony.



            3.   Notice of hearing. Not less than ten days
before the date of the public hearing, the Director shall post notice of the
time and place of the hearing and mail notice of the hearing to the owners of
each property within 1,320 feet of the subject property or within three
properties deep, whichever is less. For purposes of this division
(C)(3)(b)3., an OWNER of a property shall be either: an occupant; a legal or
beneficial owner; or the person to whom the most recent real estate tax bill
has been sent. Failure of any owner of a property to receive notice shall not
affect the validity of any action taken with respect to a petition.



            4.   Recommendation by Building Review Board. At
the conclusion of the public hearing, the Building Review Board shall vote in
public whether to recommend to the City Council approval, disapproval or
conditional approval of the application based upon consideration of the
standards set forth in division (C)(4) below. The Board may continue
consideration of an application if the Board determines that additional
information is required. On behalf of the Board, the Director of Community
Development shall transmit the written findings and determination of the
Board, in the form of a meeting action summary, within ten business days
after the conclusion of the hearing to:



               a.   The applicant;



               b.   Any owner of property in the
surrounding neighborhood who delivers a written request for such
determination to the Director of Community Development within three days
after the close of the public hearing; and



               c.   The City Council.



         (c)   Action by City Council. Following the City
Council’s receipt of the meeting action summary, the City Council shall by
ordinance either approve, approve with conditions or deny the application.
Consideration of such ordinance shall be placed on the agenda of the City
Council no later than 45 days after the City Council’s receipt the meeting
action summary. The City Council may in its discretion, seek further review
on an application prior to action.



      (4)   Standards and considerations for architectural and site
design review.



         (a)   Standards.



            1.   In evaluating applications for architectural
design review, the Director of Community Development, Building Review Board
and the City Council, shall consider and evaluate the propriety of issuing a
building permit in terms of its effect on the stated purposes and goals of
architectural design review. To that end, the Director of Community
Development, Building Review Board and the City Council, shall consider the
appearance of a project in terms of the quality of its design and the
relationship to its surrounding neighborhood. A project should harmonize with
and support the city’s unique character, with special consideration
accorded the preservation and enhancement of landmarks, the preservation and
enhancement of natural features (including without limitation existing trees
and landscaping), and fostering architectural quality that complements the
architectural and historic heritage of the city and the property values
within the community. Furthermore, a project must be consistent with all
applicable ordinances and regulations of the city, including without
limitation the City Zoning Code, Comprehensive Plan and tree preservation
regulations, absent a variance granted consistent with applicable code
requirements.



            2.   In addition to the general standards listed
above, the Director of Community Development, Building Review Board and the
City Council, shall consider, among other factors, the following standards.



               a.   Site plan.



                  i.   All setbacks shall be met or
exceeded and disturbance to the natural landscaping on the site should be
minimized. Further, the project should be designed to preserve and enhance
natural features on the site, including, without limitation, existing trees,
wooded areas and landscaping. In addition, the project should be designed to
minimize changes to the natural grade in order to maintain natural drainage
patterns.



                  ii.   Access to the site and
circulation thereon should be safe and convenient for pedestrians, cyclists
and vehicles.



                  iii.   Driveways should be located to
maintain adequate space between cuts in the streetscape and to provide space
for landscaping and drainage between driveways and neighboring properties.



                  iv.   Driveway and parking areas
should be screened to reduce visual intrusions into surrounding properties
and to maintain the landscape dominant character of the city. Projects that
materially affect the natural features of a neighborhood, or that materially
alter the spaces and spatial relationships that characterize a property or
surrounding neighborhood should be avoided.



                  v.   Screening, fencing, gates and
pillars should be consistent in design and materials with the principal
buildings on the subject property and with properties in the surrounding
neighborhood.



                  vi.   Compatibility with the
surrounding neighborhood should be achieved; however, repetitive duplication
of building designs within the surrounding neighborhood should be avoided.



               b.   Elevations.



                  i.   The scale and height of the
project should be in conformance with the code requirements of the city, and
should be visually compatible with the landscaping and topography of the site
and with buildings on the site and in the surrounding neighborhood.



                  ii.   The relationship of solids to
voids in the front facade of a project should be visually compatible with
buildings, public ways and places to which it is visually related in the
surrounding neighborhood, and they should add interest to the elevations and
relief from building mass.



                  iii.   The visual continuity of roofs
and their contributing elements (such as parapet walls, coping and cornices)
should be maintained in building development or redevelopment.



                  iv.   To the extent applicable, the
project should be consistent throughout with the elements of the chosen
architectural style (e.g., Colonial, English Tudor, Contemporary and the
like) and such architectural style should be maintained for all elevations of
the building or structure. Accessory structures should be architecturally
compatible with the principal structure on the lot.



                  v.   The elevations of the project
should be proportional to the property on which it is located and to the
surrounding neighborhood.



                  vi.   Compatibility with the
surrounding neighborhood should be achieved however, repetitive duplication
of building designs within the surrounding neighborhood should be avoided.



               c.   Landscaping.



                  i.   Landscaping plans should be
consistent with the natural environment of the site, adjacent properties and
the surrounding neighborhood; provided that, when a site is open, suitable
landscaping consistent with the wooded nature of the city should be provided.



                  ii.   Existing natural features should
be appropriately preserved and integrated into the project. Under appropriate
circumstances, a conservation area consisting of landscaping and natural
growth, but excluding lawns and any impervious surface between adjacent
properties or along the streetscape, would promote this objective.



               d.   Type, color and texture of materials.



                  i.   Exterior materials should be of
the highest quality, appropriate for the intended use, and consistent with
the chosen architectural style.



                  ii.   Materials should be selected for
both their durability and usefulness, however, imitation and synthetic
substitutions should be avoided.



                  iii.   Colors of the materials for the
project should be harmonious with compatible accents. Materials, level of
detail and ornamentation should be consistent with the particular
architectural type that is proposed.



                  iv.   Design, material and color
scheme should be compatible with and enhance the character of the property
and the surrounding neighborhood. A project that is obviously incongruous
with its surroundings or unsightly and grotesque should be avoided.



                  v.   A project’s design or color
should not be distracting to vehicular traffic so as to cause a safety hazard.



               e.   Overall site layout.



                  i.   The building layout should
maximize the distance between buildings on the site and buildings on adjacent
properties.



                  ii.   The building layout should
maintain appropriate distances between buildings on the site itself.



                  iii.   The size, scale and nature of a
building or project should be consistent with the existing streetscape and
character of the neighborhood and should not be inconsistent with the planned
character for the surrounding neighborhood as expressed in the Comprehensive
Plan.



                  iv.   The project shall not cause a
substantial depreciation in the property values of adjacent buildings, the
surrounding neighborhood or the city.



                  v.   The project should not unduly
detract from the natural environment of the site, adjacent properties or the
surrounding neighborhood.



               f.   Standards and guidelines. These
standards and the specific residential design guidelines described in
division (C)(4)(b) below are intended to encourage strong design and to
provide direction on how to achieve that goal. These standards are not
intended to limit creativity or restrict imagination, innovations or variety
in architectural styles, but rather seek to preserve and enhance the city’s
unique historic and architectural character and surrounding neighborhoods.



         (b)   Specific residential design guidelines. In
addition to the standards set forth above, in reviewing an application for a
residential project, the Director of Community Development, Building Review
Board and the City Council shall consider whether the project meets the
“City of Lake Forest Residential Design Guidelines,” which guidelines are
set forth and incorporated by reference herein.



      (5)   Plan modifications. It shall be unlawful to alter or in
any way modify plans that have been reviewed and approved by the City
Council. If during the course of construction, it is desired to deviate from
the application and plans as approved, the owner or contractor must obtain a
waiver pursuant to division (C)(3)(a) above or obtain approval from the City
Council for such modifications.



      (6)   Duration of approvals. No approval shall be valid for a
period longer than two years from the date of such approval unless within
such period a building permit is obtained and all fees are paid. If a
building permit is not granted and fees are not paid within such period, the
City Council, in its discretion, may extend the duration of any such approval
upon request.



      (7)   Historic preservation jurisdiction. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in this section, any matters pertaining to changes
to a landmark or a district as designated under the city historic
preservation regulations shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the City
Historic Preservation Commission, and the Building Review Board shall conduct
no proceedings relating to such landmark or district.



(Prior Code, § 9-86)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 01-11, passed
4-19-2001; Ord. 03-41, passed 9-8-2003; Ord. 00-12, passed 4-3-2000; Ord.
2006-57, passed 10-19-2006; Ord. 2009-18, passed 4-20-2009)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.148  BUILDING SCALE AND ENVIRONMENT.



   (A)   Fees. Any required fees shall be in accordance with the most
recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council and on file in the
Community Development Department.



   (B)   Purpose.



      (1)   The city is one of the oldest planned communities in the
state and it has grown in essential accord with its Comprehensive Plan. In
order to preserve and protect the existing developed properties in the city,
to maintain the Comprehensive Plan of the city to regulate development and to
preserve and protect the public health, safety and well-being, it is
necessary to regulate building scale and environment.



      (2)   The city is experiencing unprecedented real estate
development pressures. As a result, there is real concern with the scale of
some of the new residences, additions to existing residences and accessory
structures within the city. In addition, there is concern about the loss of
existing affordable housing stock and the impacts of infill development on
the character and infrastructure in establishing neighborhoods.



      (3)   It has been determined that the construction of large
residences and accessory buildings that may be appropriate in estate settings
are now being constructed on subdivision lots of inadequate area. The
residences are often out of scale with the surrounding environment.



      (4)   It is in the public interest of the city to maintain an
appropriate balance between building scale and the local environmental
setting.



      (5)   The city is dedicated to maintaining the existing
character and ambiance of the community. In the past, the city has encouraged
a development pattern characterized as suburban estate wherein the landscape
is generally dominant over the improvements. Now there is a significant trend
to increase the size of residences in relation to the size of the lot. In
addition, many sites under development are located in open spaces. The
balance between landscaping and building scale in relation to space available
is causing a noticeable change in the character of the community.



      (6)   It is the intent of the city to develop reasonable
performance standards wherein the essential residential character of the city
is maintained and fostered.



   (C)   Development requirements.



      (1)   Maximum building size.



         (a)   The maximum building size is calculated based on
the methodology established in this division (C). The building scale
regulations apply to all single-family homes and duplexes.



         (b)   The maximum allowable square footage may be
disapproved if the Board finds that the proposed residence or addition(s)
violate § 150.147 of the Building Code.



            1.   Maximum square footage allowance.



               a.   For lots of 18,900 square feet in area
or smaller. The maximum square footage of all structures on a zoning lot is
determined by the following formula:



 


Single-Family and Duplex Dwelling




(Lot area x .14) + 1,300 sq. ft.




 



               b.   For lots of 18,901 square feet to
40,000 square feet. The maximum square footage of all structures on a zoning
lot is determined by the following formula:



 


Single-Family Dwelling




(Lot area x .05) + 3,000 sq. ft.




Duplex Dwelling




(Lot area x .125) + 2,500 sq. ft.




 



               c.   For lots larger than 40,000 square
feet. The maximum square footage of all structures on a zoning lot is
determined by the following formula:



 


Single-Family Dwelling




(Lot area x .08) + 1,800 sq. ft.




Duplex Dwelling




(Lot area x .125) + 2,500 sq. ft.




 



            2.   Basement area calculation.



               a.   Basements or portions of basements that
extend above the adjacent ground area to a height of three and one-half feet
or greater as measured from the top of the finished first floor to the lowest
finished grade of the ground adjacent to the building, are included in the
building scale calculation; provided, however, that such basement in
dwellings constructed prior to January 9, 1989 shall be excluded from the
building scale calculation.







               b.   Basements located wholly below grade
and traditional window wells with a maximum width of three feet are not
included in the building scale calculation.







               c.   The portion of the basement included in
the calculation shall be based on the extent of the basement above grade and
shall be calculated as follows:



 


[TOTAL SQUARE FOOTAGE OF BASEMENT]




X




{[PERIMETER OF EXPOSED BASEMENT] / [PERIMETER OF ENTIRE BASEMENT]}




 



            3.   Second floor and attic area calculations. The
amount of second floor and third floor attic square footage included in the
building scale calculation is determined by the second floor plate height and
overall height of the residence. Attic space may be factored into the
calculations whether or not truss construction is used.



               a.   Second floor calculation. Second floor
area is included in the building scale calculations for any selection of the
second floor lying beneath the plane formed by the second floor calculation
line and its intersection with any exterior portions of the building (see
illustration Exhibit C). The second floor calculation line is measured from
the top of first floor in accordance with the following: for all lot sizes,
the second floor calculation line is 19 feet above the top of the first floor.







               b.   Third floor attic calculation. Third
floor attic area is included in the building scale calculations for any
selection of the attic lying beneath the plane formed by the attic
calculation line and its intersection with any exterior portion of the
building (see illustration Exhibit D). The attic calculation line is measured
from the top of first floor in accordance with the following:



                  i.   For lots 40,000 square feet or
smaller, the attic calculation line is 26.5 feet above the top of the first
floor.



                  ii.   For lots 40,001 square feet or
larger, the attic calculation line is 28 feet above the top of the first
floor.







            4.   Elements exempted from the above calculations.



               a.   Garages.



                  i.   In addition to the square footage
permitted by the formulas in division (C)(1)(b) above, each zoning lot shall
be entitled to square footage for a garage in accordance with the following
formulas.



 

For lots of 18,900 sq. ft. in area or smaller
 

Garage allowances

 

576 sq. ft. with a maximum of width of 24 ft.



For lots of 18,901 to 40.000 sq. ft.
 

Garage allowance

 

600 sq. ft.



For lots larger than 40,000 sq. ft.
 

Garage allowances

 

800 sq. ft.




 



                  ii.   Garages that exceed the
allowable square footages may be constructed, but the square footage in
excess of that allowed under the table above shall be deducted from the
maximum square footage permitted for the residence. Prior to approval of a
garage in excess of the allowable size, the project must be found to be
conformance with § 150.147.



               b.   Other exemptions.



                  i.   The following elements shall be
exempted from the building scale calculation if the project is in conformance
with § 150.147 and if the total square footage of these elements does not
exceed 10% above the maximum allowable square footage for the residence:



                     A.   Front or side porch;



                     B.   Covered entry;



                     C.   Portico;



                     D.   Rear or side screen porch;



                     E.   Breezeways;



                     F.   Individual dormers; and



                     G.   Bay windows.



                  ii.   The Director of Community
Development shall be authorized to develop regulations to define further the
foregoing elements, which regulations shall be set forth in a Building Scale
Methodology Document that shall be available to the public from the Community
Development Department.



               c.   Storage sheds. Storage sheds up to a
maximum size of 100 square feet may be permitted if all other applicable
provisions of the city code are satisfied. Storage sheds shall not count
toward 10% overage allowed for the elements listed in division (C)(1)(b)4.b.
above.



      (2)   Lot area calculation.



         (a)   Lot area. Lot area shall be determined by
calculating the total square footage within the boundaries of the property
lines based on as up-to-date official plat of survey. The plat survey must be
prepared or updated by a state registered land surveyor and contain, at a
minimum, the following information:



            1.   Any lot which is not rectangular or which has
easements for ingress and egress, natural and human-made stormwater retention
ponds, or wetlands, shall have the lot area certified by the surveyor,
including a detailed breakdown of square footage of lot area with, and
without such easements, ponds or wetlands; and



            2.   Full exterior dimensions of all existing
structures on the property.



         (b)   Building scale calculation. For purposes of
calculating building scale, the following areas are not included in
determining total lot square footage.



            1.   The access easement for lots-in-depth shall
not be included in the square footage for either the front or rear lot.







            2.   Fifty percent of any non-table land on the
property as defined in § 159.015 of the city code. Certification of the
total square footage by a registered land surveyor may be required by the
Director of Community Development.







         (c)   Building height.



            1.   The maximum height of a single-family
dwelling or two-family dwelling shall not exceed the following:



 

Lot Size
 
Maximum Height, Measured to the Ridge Line


18,900 sq. ft
 
30 ft. or less


18,901 to 40,000 sq. ft.
 
35 ft.


40,001 sq. ft. or greater
 
40 ft.



 



            2.   For new construction, the top of first floor
shall not be more than one foot-six inches above the average finished grade
adjacent to the building unless required under the provisions of the county
watershed development ordinance.



            3.   Maximum height will be measured from the
lowest grade immediately adjacent to the proposed structure, prior to
construction, to the highest roof ridge line.







         (d)   Planned residential development provisions. In any
subdivision involving a nonstandard single-family development, including, but
not limited to, a planned development, as permitted under § 159.045 of the
Zoning Code, or a residential open space subdivision, as permitted under §
159.091 of the Zoning Code, the city shall, during the subdivision review
process, establish a maximum floor area per lot for such development,
consistent with the intent of this section and reflective of the uniqueness
of the particular subdivision.



   (D)   Exceptions granted by Building Review Board. The Building
Review Board shall have the authority to recommend that the City Council
grant exceptions to the maximum floor area requirements set forth in division
(C) above, for a new residence or an addition to an existing residence if
Standard 1 below is satisfied and at least one of the other Standards set
forth in this division (D) is met.



      (1)   Standard 1. The project is consistent with the design
standards in § 150.147 of the city code.



      (2)   Standard 2. Mature trees and other vegetation on the
property effectively mitigate the appearance of excessive height and mass of
the structure and as a result, the proposed development is in keeping with
the streetscape and overall neighborhood.



      (3)   Standard 3. New structures or additions are sited in a
manner that minimizes the appearance of mass from the streetscape. In
addition, the proposed structures or additions will not have a significant
negative impact on the light to and views from neighboring homes.



      (4)   Standard 4. The height and mass of the residence, garage
and accessory structures will generally be compatible with the height and
mass of structures on adjacent lots, buildings on the street and on adjacent
streets, and other residences and garages in the same subdivision.



      (5)   Standard 5. The property is located in a local historic
district or is designated as a local landmark and the addition is consistent
with the standards in the historic preservation regulations and approval of a
variance would further the purpose of the ordinance.



      (6)   Standard 6. The property is adjacent to land used and
zoned as permanent open space, a conservation easement, or a detention pond
and the structures are sited in a manner that allows the open area to
mitigate the appearance of mass of the buildings from the streetscape and
from neighboring properties.



   (E)   Application for demolition permit. To permit adequate time for
consideration of alternatives to demolition of an existing building(s), and
to ensure development consistent with the goals of the city, a demolition
permit shall be issued only after two years following an application for
demolition unless one of the following exceptions shall cause said permit to
be issued earlier.



      (1)   Fire or other casualty damage or structural
deterioration shall have rendered the structure and/or remains, in the
opinion of the Director of Community Development of the city, an immediate
health or safety hazard. (Nothing in this division (E)(1) shall be deemed to
limit the power of such official to condemn, and order the demolition of, any
structure which is hazardous or unsafe.)



      (2)   It is determined upon proper application for an
exception, and following a public hearing by the Building Review Board, in
consideration of the criteria and purpose of this section and § 159.048 of
the Zoning Code, that a delay in demolition would not further the purpose of
this section and § 159.048 of the Zoning Code, because:



         (a)   The structure itself, or in relation to its
environs, has no significant historical, architectural, aesthetic or cultural
value in its present or restored condition;



         (b)   Realistic alternatives (including adaptive uses)
are not likely because of the nature or cost of work necessary to preserve
such structure or realize any appreciable part of such value;



         (c)   The structure in its present or restored condition
is unsuitable for residential, or a residentially compatible use; or



         (d)   The demolition is consistent with, or materially
furthers, the criteria and purpose of this section and § 159.048 of the
Zoning Code.



      (3)   (a)   It is determined by the City Manager that the
issuance of a demolition permit is clearly consistent with the criteria of
this section and § 159.048 of the Zoning Code.



         (b)   In cases where the applicant for demolition permit
intends to construct a replacement building(s), neither the Building Review
Board nor the City Manager shall have authority under division (E)(1) or
(E)(2) above, to exempt any applicant from the two year waiting period
imposed by this division (E)(3), unless the applicant shall have first
obtained approval by the City Council of any such replacement building(s), in
accordance with the criteria set forth in § 150.147. Additionally, any new
building sought to be constructed as a replacement building after demolition,
as permitted under this section, shall require advance approval by the
Building Review Board in accordance with § 150.147, prior to the issuance of
a building permit.



   (F)   Demolition permit ruling. The City Manager may render an
opinion that a demolition permit would be issued for a particular residence,
if he or she finds that such demolition would be clearly consistent with the
purpose and criteria of this section and § 159.048 of the Zoning Code.



      (1)   The City Manager may refer any or all requests for such
decision to the Building Review Board to allow the Board to make such ruling.



      (2)   Any petitioner who receives a decision from the City
Manager that a residence may not be demolished, may appeal such decision to
the Building Review Board and then to the City Council.



      (3)   The final determination in any such ruling either by the
City Manager or the Building Review Board shall be valid for two years from
the date of such ruling.



      (4)   Regardless of the outcome of a ruling request, no
demolition permit shall be issued, except in accordance with the provisions
of division (E) above.



   (G)   Landmarks. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
section, any matters affecting a landmark or a district as designated under
the city historic preservation ordinance shall be subject to the jurisdiction
of the City Historic Preservation Commission, and the Building Review Board
shall conduct no proceedings relating to such landmark or district.



(Prior Code, § 9-87)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 94-52, passed
11-17-1994; Ord. 97-43, passed 12-1-1997; Ord. 98-64, passed 11-19-1998; Ord.
00-12, passed 4-3-2000; Ord. 03-41, passed 9-8-2003; Ord. 2012-02, passed
2-6-2012)



§ 150.149  OCCUPATION, OBSTRUCTION OR USE OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC
PROPERTY.



   (A)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to deposit or store on any sidewalk, street, parkway or other
public property, any building material, fuel, tools or apparatus or other
supplies, or to block any part of the public way for construction purposes,
unless a street obstruction permit is first obtained from the Office of the
Director of Community Development.



   (B)   Application for permit.



      (1)   Applications for street obstruction permits shall be
submitted to the Office of the Director of Community Development. The
application shall describe the location of the public property to be used or
occupied, the reason that makes it necessary to occupy public property and
the length of time of the proposed occupation.



      (2)   The Director of Community Development may issue a street
obstruction permit to the applicant provided said applicant has complied with
all provisions of this chapter. A permit shall not be issued if in the
opinion of the Director of Community Development the use of public property
is not necessary to accomplish the construction project, but merely is a
convenience to the applicant.



   (C)   Fee. The fee for a street obstruction permit shall be in
accordance with the most current fee schedule, approved by the City Council
and on file in the Office of the Director of Community Development. The fee
described is for a period of 14 days or less. An additional fee equal to the
original shall be charged for each additional 14-day period.



   (D)   Street obstruction bond and insurance. Before issuance of a
street obstruction permit, the applicant shall have on file in the Office of
the Director of Community Development a corporate surety bond, as set by
Council, and a certificate of public liability insurance.



      (1)   The bond shall be written on a form supplied by the city
which shall assure the restoration of public property and shall indemnify,
defend and save harmless the city, its officers, designees and employees from
all claims, loss or damages arising in any manner from the execution or
protection of any work he or she may do in or on city property and shall
provide that the applicant will comply with all ordinances, requirements and
regulations of the city pertaining to the use or obstruction of public
property,



      (2)   The public liability insurance shall name the city as an
insured and shall be in the amount of not less than $500,000 for injuries,
including accidental death, to any one person, and in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 on account of any single accident; and property damage insurance
in an amount of not less than $100,000 on account of any single accident.



   (E)   Protection of the public. Whenever a building or structure is
erected, altered, repaired, removed or demolished, the operation shall be
conducted in a safe manner and suitable protection for the general public
shall be provided. Every construction operation located five feet or less
from the street lot line shall be enclosed with a fence not less than four
feet high to prevent entry of unauthorized persons. When located more than
five feet from the street lot line, a fence or other barrier shall be erected
when required by the Director of Community Development. All fences shall be
of adequate strength to resist wind pressure of 15 p.s.i. of net exposed area.



      (1)   Sidewalk bridge. When ground is excavated from under a
sidewalk, a sidewalk bridge shall be constructed at least four feet wide, or
a protected walkway four feet wide shall be erected in the street.



      (2)   Sidewalk shed (within ten feet of street lot line).
Whenever any building or part thereof, is located within ten feet of the
street lot line, the Director of Community Development may require a sidewalk
shed to be erected and maintained for the full length of the building on all
street fronts for the entire time that work is performed on the exterior of
the building.



      (3)   Walkway. An adequately lighted walkway at least four
feet wide and eight feet high in the clear shall be maintained under all
sidewalk sheds for pedestrians. Where ramps are required, they shall conform
to the provisions of the accessibility standards of the state.



      (4)   Thrust-out platforms. The Director of Community
Development may substitute other protections in lieu of sidewalk sheds when
deemed adequate to ensure the public safety.



      (5)   Watchperson or flagger. Whenever a building is being
demolished, erected or altered, a watchperson or flagger may be required by
the Director of Community Development to warn the general public when
intermittent hazardous operations are conducted across the sidewalk or
walkway.



(Prior Code, § 9-89)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.150  UNSAFE BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Proceedings to abate. Whenever it shall come to the attention
of the Director of Community Development that a building or structure is in a
condition that could be considered dangerous, he or she shall forthwith
arrange a meeting with the Construction Codes Commission to inspect the
premises, to determine if the building or structure in question is in fact
dangerous. The owner or representative of the premises shall be notified of
such meeting.



   (B)   Notice of unsafe building. If an unsafe condition is found in
a building or structure, the Director of Community Development shall serve on
the owner, representative or person in control of the building or structure,
a written notice describing the building or structure deemed unsafe and
specifying the required repairs or improvements to be made, to render the
building or structure safe and secure, or requiring the unsafe building or
structure or portion thereof to be demolished within 15 days. Such notice
shall require the person thus notified to immediately declare to the Director
of Community Development his or her acceptance or rejection of the terms of
the order.



   (C)   Posting of unsafe building. If the owner or representative of
an unsafe premises cannot be found within the city after diligent search,
then such notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the last
known address of such person; and a copy of the unsafe notice shall be posted
in a conspicuous place on the premises; and such procedure shall be deemed
the equivalent of personal notice.



   (D)   Disregard of unsafe building notice. Upon refusal or neglect
of the owner or representative served with an unsafe building notice to
comply with the requirements of said notice, the Director of Community
Development shall cause action to be initiated pursuant to the regulations
set forth in 65 ILCS 5/11-31.



(Prior Code, § 9-90)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.151  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any provision of
this subchapter, shall be subject to fines.



(Prior Code, § 9-91)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 03-37, passed
7-7-2003)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.152  APPEALS.



   (A)   Appeals from decisions of the Director of Community
Development regarding regulations of this subchapter, may be made to the
Construction Codes Commission pursuant to the regulations set forth in §
150.111.



      (1)   The Commission may by majority vote, reverse, affirm or
modify any order, requirements or decision of the Director of Community
Development pertaining to the interpretation of this subchapter.



      (2)   Appeals to the Construction Codes Commission shall be
made by written application. The application shall clearly and concisely
state the reason for the appeal. Appropriate drawings, material samples and
technical bulletins shall be submitted with the application.



   (B)   Appeals may be made to the Construction Codes Commission
requesting permission to use construction materials that do not conform to
the specification sections of this subchapter.



      (1)   The Commission may permit variations from specified
material provided that the proposed materials meet or exceed structural
design criteria required by ordinance.



      (2)   Materials previously reviewed and approved for use by
the Commission may be used without additional review.



      (3)   Materials complying with or exceeding the recognized
standards of previously approved materials, may also be used without
additional review.



   (C)   Appeals may be made to the Construction Codes Commission
requesting a variation to permit the construction of a building that does not
strictly comply with a provision, or provisions of this subchapter.



      (1)   The Commission may permit variations from specified
provisions provided that the basic intent of the code provisions are being
met and provided further that the applicant enter into an agreement,
satisfactory to the City Attorney, agreeing to make any required code
compliance adjustments, when directed to do so by the Construction Codes
Commission upon the recommendation of the Director of Community Development,
that conditions have changed to such an extent that strict compliance with
provisions of this subchapter is now necessary.



      (2)   Any person, firm, corporation or representative, who
shall file an application for an appeal to the Construction Codes Commission
for a variation shall pay a fee in accordance with a schedule of fees
established by the City Council in order to defray the approximate cost of
such review procedures.



(Prior Code, § 9-92)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.153  USE AND DISPOSITION OF SECURITY FUNDS.



   (A)   In general. Whenever the city requires or obtains from any
person a cash deposit, security, bond, financial guarantee or other cash
payment (a “deposit”) in connection with an approval, permit, license or
other authorization pursuant to any zoning or subdivision approval, this
chapter or § 31.152 of this city code, such deposit shall be governed by the
terms and provisions of this section, whether or not this section is
referenced in the authorization or any code provision relating to the
authorization. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any surety bond, letter of
credit or other security instrument (“security instrument”) other than
cash, check, money order or other cash-equivalent shall be governed by the
terms and conditions of such security instrument.



   (B)   Time for performance. All activities to be performed pursuant
to an authorization shall be completed within the time period set forth in
the authorization or the code provision governing the performance of such
work. In the absence of a specified time period in the authorization or in
the applicable code provision, such activities shall be completed within one
year after the date of the authorization.



   (C)   Pre-conditions for return of deposit. No deposit shall be
returned to any person unless all activities required to be performed
pursuant to the authorization or any applicable code provision has been
completed in a timely fashion, inspected, and approved by the Director of
Community Development, City Engineer or their designees. In addition, no
deposit shall be returned to any person if there are any violations,
penalties or fines outstanding with respect to the subject premises receiving
the authorization; provided, however, that, to the extent the violation,
penalty or fine can be corrected or satisfied by the payment of funds to the
city, then the person receiving the authorization may agree to the
application of such portion of the deposit as is necessary to satisfy such
outstanding violation, penalty or fine.



   (D)   Return of deposit. Upon satisfaction of the pre-conditions set
forth in division (C) above, the city shall return the deposit the person who
provided the deposit, unless otherwise directed in writing by the person who
provided the deposit. To the extent that funds have been drawn against the
deposit pursuant the terms of the authorization or division (E) below the
city shall return only the remaining balance of the deposit.



   (E)   Untimely completion of authorization activities. In addition
to any violation, penalties or fines that may apply in the event that a
person fails to complete the activities under an authorization in a timely
fashion, the city shall retain the greater of an amount as set by the Council
or 5% of any deposit for each month or fraction thereof after the date that
the activities were to be completed pursuant to an authorization; provided
further that, upon the latter of one year after the date that activities were
to be completed under an authorization or December 1, 2003. The balance of
any such deposit for which the pre-conditions for return have not been
satisfied shall be relinquished to the city and transferred into the city’s
General Fund.



(Ord. 03-60, passed 11-20-2003)



§ 150.154  JOB SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Whenever a building, plumbing, electrical, heating or razing
permit is issued for construction of a new building, remodeling or alteration
of an existing building, sanitary facilities shall be available to all
personnel associated with such activity and maintained in proper operating
condition until a certificate of occupancy or a conditional certificate of
occupancy is issued. For those jobs where certificates of occupancy are not
required to be issued, the sanitary facilities shall be available until a
final inspection is completed and approved.



   (B)   The sanitary facilities shall consist of an operating
permanently installed toilet or a portable toilet available from a city
licensed provider.



      (1)   Toilets shall be completely enclosed for privacy and
shall be weatherproof.



      (2)   Toilets shall not be located on public property.



      (3)   Toilets shall be located within ten feet of the front of
the building and shall not be closer than ten feet from any side lot line.



   (C)   Whenever a building, plumbing, electrical, heating or razing
permit is issued for construction of a new building, remodeling or alteration
of an existing building, a dumpster shall be provided on site and shall be
available to all personnel for disposal of any trash associated with such
activity until a certificate of occupancy or a conditional certificate of
occupancy is issued. For those jobs where certificates of occupancy are not
required to be issued, the dumpster shall be available until a final
inspection is completed and approved.



   (D)   The dumpster shall be obtained from a city licensed scavenger
only.



      (1)   Dumpsters shall not be located on public property.



      (2)   Dumpsters shall not be located closer than five feet
from any lot line.



      (3)   Dumpsters shall be provided with a covering to prevent
the scattering of trash by wind or vandals.



   (E)   The Director of Community Development or his or her authorized
designee shall have the authority to modify the provisions of divisions (A)
through (D) above when existing conditions prevent full compliance with the
foregoing.



(Prior Code, § 9-96)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



BUILDING CODE MINIMUM PLANNING REQUIREMENTS; SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING AND
DUPLEX DWELLING



§ 150.165  LIGHT AND VENTILATION.



   (A)   Provide for natural light and ventilation in all habitable
rooms.



      (1)   The area of glazed portions of doors in outside walls
may be included in the calculation of natural light requirement.



      (2)   The glass area required to provide the minimum natural
light in a habitable room shall be equal to 8% of the floor area of the room.



      (3)   The area required to provide the minimum natural
ventilation in a habitable room shall be openings to the outside equal to 4%
of the floor area of the room.



      (4)   The floor area of two habitable rooms not separately
lighted or ventilated, may be combined in computing required light and
ventilation. The wall separating such rooms, however, shall contain an
opening not smaller than 60% of the wall area.



      (5)   Every sleeping room shall have at least one operable
window or exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue. The units
must be operable from the inside, opening without the use of tools. Where
windows are provided, they shall have a sill height not more than three feet
six inches above the floor. Escape windows from sleeping rooms shall have a
minimum clear opening of six square feet. The minimum clear opening height
dimension shall be 24 inches. The minimum clear opening width dimension shall
be 20 inches.



   (B)   Provide for light and ventilation in water closet
compartments, utility rooms, powder rooms and bathrooms by one of the
following means:



      (1)   Provide a window or skylight in an exterior wall or
ceiling with a light and ventilation area of 4% of the floor area, but not
less than three square feet;



      (2)   Provide a vent in or near the ceiling with a continuous
duct to the outside or to a ventilated attic. Such mechanical exhaust systems
shall be provided with a damper and the fan shall be capable of moving two
cubic feet of air per minute for each square foot of floor area; or



      (3)   Ventilation shall be installed to provide combustion air
in accordance with the International Mechanical Code, 2003 Edition,
International Code Council, Inc. (see § 150.020), for fuel burning
appliances in confined rooms or spaces where natural ventilation is not
provided.



   (C)   Provide for light and ventilation in basements and crawl
spaces.



      (1)   Provide doors or windows in exterior walls of basements.
The total glazed and ventilating area of which shall be not less than
one-fiftieth of the gross floor area of the basement.



      (2)   Crawl spaces shall be ventilated to the outside or
through access openings to the basement. The ventilator or access area shall
be no less than one-third square foot for each 100 square feet of crawl space
area. Adjustable vents to the outside shall be provided with corrosion
resistive insect proof wire mesh screen and be operable from the exterior.
Inaccessible or unventilated crawl spaces shall not be permitted.



   (D)   Provide for ventilation in all attic and roof spaces at the
rate of one-third square feet for each 100 square feet of the ceiling below.



      (1)   Ventilator openings shall be screened.



      (2)   Blocking, bridging and insulation shall be arranged in
flat roof and vaulted ceiling areas so that it will not interfere with the
free movement of air.



      (3)   Ventilation installed in accordance with the graphic
illustration in § 150.208 shall be considered satisfactory compliance with
this section.



(Prior Code, § 9-97)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.166  SPACE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Habitable rooms shall have not less than 100 square feet of
floor area.



   (B)   Utility rooms shall be of such size as to provide not less
than three feet of working space on the service side of the furnace, hot
water heater or other fuel burning appliance.



   (C)   Basement or cellar sleeping room construction shall comply
with the requirements of habitable rooms with respect to ventilation and
floor area. Mechanical ventilation capable of providing two cubic feet of air
per minute per square foot of room area may be provided.



   (D)   Basement or cellar sleeping rooms shall be provided with two
means of egress. The two means of egress shall be as remote as possible from
each other. The means of egress may be by stairs and doorway or may be by
means of stair and doorway and one approved escape window. In no case shall
access to an exit be through another bedroom, utility room or garage.



   (E)   Ceiling heights (minimum).



      (1)   Basement and cellars. The head room under pipes or ducts
shall be not less than six feet six inches unless the pipe or duct is located
within two feet from a wall or when crossing under a beam.



      (2)   Main floor or floors. The head room shall be eight feet
clear for not less than 75% of the total area. Dropped or lowered ceiling
areas shall be not less than seven feet from finished floor.



      (3)   Attic or other than main floor areas. The head room
shall be seven feet six inches clear under flat or sloping ceilings for an
area of not less than 100 square feet in each habitable room; and six feet
eight inches clear in halls and passageways.



      (4)   Crawl space. The head room shall be three feet clear
from floor to bottom of joists above.



      (5)   Bottom of the crawl space. The opening shall be not more
than eight inches above the floor of the crawl space.



(Prior Code, § 9-98)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.167  INGRESS, EGRESS AND ACCESS.



   (A)   Each living unit shall be provided with two means of access.
The access areas shall be as remote as possible from one another and shall
not pass through a sleeping room, bathroom or another living unit.



   (B)   Attics shall be made accessible by means of an access hole.



      (1)   Stairs shall be required for all attics having
mechanical equipment requiring maintenance. These stairs need not comply with
principal stair requirements.



      (2)   Access holes shall be not less than six square feet nor
more than seven and one-half square feet and shall be not less than 20 inches
wide.



   (C)   Crawl spaces shall be provided with unobstructed access area
not less than six square feet. The opening shall be not less than three feet
in width and two feet in height.



   (D)   Basements and cellars shall be provided with egress to the
outside by means of a door or by a window having unobstructed open area of
six square feet. The width of such window shall be not less than two feet
with a sill height of not more than three feet above the finished floor. The
means of egress shall be remote from the interior basement stair. An approved
rectangular escape well with a ladder shall be used at the required escape
window.



   (E)   Bedrooms shall have access to a bathroom without passing
through another bedroom.



   (F)   Each habitable room shall have access to each other habitable
room in the living unit without passing through a bedroom.



   (G)   One window in each sleeping room shall have a sill height of
not more than three feet six inches above the finished floor. (See §
150.165.)



(Prior Code, § 9-99)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.168  DOORS.



   (A)   Minimum height of all doors except in finished basement areas
shall be six feet six inches.



   (B)   Minimum requirements for exterior doors.



      (1)   Exterior doors shall be not less than three feet in
width.



      (2)   Service doors from attached garages shall be not less
than two feet eight inches wide by one and three-fourths inch thick solid
core, flush door or a panel door of similar dimension without glass and metal
clad on the garage side. The metal facing shall be attached with approved
fasteners. All doors shall be installed in rabbeted jambs and be equipped
with closers.



   (C)   Minimum width of interior doors.



 

Habitable rooms
 

2 feet 6 inches wide



Bath or powder rooms
 

2 feet 4 inches wide




 



(Prior Code, § 9-100)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.169  STAIRS, LANDINGS AND RAILINGS; DESIGN.



   (A)   Head room. Minimum six feet eight inches continuous clear head
room shall be maintained. The height shall be measured vertically from the
stair nosing to a line parallel with the run of the stair.



   (B)   Width. All stairs shall be minimum three feet wide. Basement
stairs may be two feet six inches clear of the handrail.



   (C)   Treads. All treads shall be a minimum of ten and one-half
inches in width including nosing and shall be uniform in width.



   (D)   Winding stair treads. Winding stair treads shall be not less
than nine and one-half inches wide at a point 15 inches from the converging
end of the tread when designed as a required means of egress. Metal barrel
stairs and wood stairs with smaller dimensions noted above may be used when
designed as a secondary means of egress.



   (E)   Rise. The rise of each step shall be not more than seven and
three-fourths inches. The height of each riser in a stair run shall be
uniform in height.



   (F)   Landing. A minimum landing, three feet by three feet, shall be
required on each side of an egress door. The floor or landing shall not be
more than one and one-half inches lower than the top of the threshold:



      (1)   Exception. At the top of an interior flight of stairs,
provided the door does not swing over the stairs; and



      (2)   Exception. The landing at the exterior of an exterior
doorway shall not be more than eight and one-half inches below the top of the
threshold.



   (G)   Handrail. Handrails having minimum and maximum heights of 30
inches and 34 inches respectively, measured vertically from the nosing of the
treads shall be provided, on at least one side of stairways of three or more
risers.



      (1)   Opening limitations. In buildings of Use Group R, open
guards shall have balusters or other construction such that a sphere with a
diameter of four inches (102 mm) cannot pass through any opening.



      (2)   Exception. The triangular openings formed by the riser,
tread and bottom rail at the open side of a stairway shall be of such size
that a sphere six inches (152 mm) in diameter cannot pass through the opening.



   (H)   Porches, balconies, floors or platform surfaces. Porches,
balconies, floors or platform surfaces located 24 inches or more above the
floor or grade below shall be provided with railings not less than three feet
high.



   (I)   Underside. The underside of stairs and platforms leading to
habitable rooms shall be protected with one-half inch Type “X” gypsum
board or approved equal.



(Prior Code, § 9-101)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.170  GARAGE, ATTACHED.



   There shall be no unprotected openings from a garage to any habitable
room.



   (A)   (1)   All walls and ceilings of the garage shall be covered
with one-half inch Type “X” gypsum wall board or approved equal.



      (2)   All joints of gypsum wall board shall be taped and the
fasteners covered with approved gypsum material to a rating equal to the
gypsum board.



   (B)   Garage floors shall be of minimum of 3,000 p.s.i. concrete in
28 days and five inches thick. The floor shall be placed on granular fill or
on clay fill adequately compacted to support the slab.



   (C)   Garages may be heated within the restrictions set forth in §
150.021.



   (D)   The sill of the garage door opening into a residence shall be
not less than six inches above the grade of the finished garage floor.



(Prior Code, § 9-102)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.171  DESIGN CRITERIA, MINIMUM.



 



Floor
 
40 lb. per sq. ft.
 
Live load (use joist span schedule, § 150.200)


Foundation
 
3 ft. 6 in.
 
Frost line depth


Insulation (measured in thermal resistance “R”)
 



   Ceilings, adjacent to unheated spaces
 

R-30



   Floors (Above unheated spaces)
 

R-30



   Slab edges of habitable spaces at or within 2 feet below grade
 

R-4



   Walls (frame or brick veneer)
 

R-13



   Walls (masonry cavity wall)
 

R-5.0



Roof (flat)
 
35 lb. per sq. ft.
 

Live load



Roof (pitched)
 
30 lb. per sq. ft.
 

Live load



Wall
 
20 lb. per sq. ft.
 

Wind velocity



Vapor barrier protection not exceeding one perm shall be provided on the warm
side of outside walls and ceilings




 



(Prior Code, § 9-103)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.172  SOUND AND FIRE BARRIER BETWEEN LIVING UNITS.



   In duplex dwellings a vertical or horizontal division between living
units shall be accomplished to create a fire resistance not less than two
hours and a sound transmission of Class 50. A vertical division shall extend
from the lowest level of the building to the roof and a horizontal division
shall extend to all outside walls.



(Prior Code, § 9-104)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



BUILDING CODE MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS



§ 150.185  ADOPTION OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE.



   For the purpose of prescribing the regulations governing the
construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached
one- and two-family dwellings and multi-single-family dwellings not more than
three stories in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory
structures, the following code, as it may be modified herein, is hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated herein, and shall constitute and be
deemed to be “The Residential Building Code of the City of Lake Forest:”
the International Residential Building Code for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings, 2003 Edition, International Code Council, Inc. (the “Residential
Building Code”); provided, however, the adoption of this section shall not
be construed as preventing the enforcement of or repealing of the provision
of any ordinance, regulation, standard or code adopted by the city that is
more restrictive than the provisions of this section. In the event that any
provision of this section shall be in conflict with any other ordinance,
regulation, standard or code adopted by the city, the more restrictive
provision (as determined by the Director of Community Development) shall
apply. One copy of the Residential Building Code has been on file in the
office of the City Clerk for use and examination by the public for at least
30 days prior to the adoption of the Residential Building Code, and such copy
shall continue to be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for use and
examination by the public after adoption of the Residential Building Code.



(Ord. 04-12, passed 1-15-2004)



§ 150.186  EXCAVATION.



   Excavations for foundation walls shall be dug not less than two feet
wider than the outside perimeter of the footing.



(Prior Code, § 9-110)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.187  FOOTINGS; FOUNDATIONS.



   (A)   Footings. All exterior walls shall be supported on continuous
concrete footings of sufficient design to safely support imposed loads.



      (1)   Footings and frost walls at all points shall extend
below the frost line, but not less than three feet six inches below grade.



      (2)   Footings shall be of minimum 3,000 p.s.i. concrete in 28
days, not less than ten inches thick and 20 inches wide and not less than
three feet six inches below grade.



      (3)   Footings shall be reinforced with steel rods when
crossing trenches or other unstable conditions.



      (4)   Footing trenches shall be free of loose dirt and
standing water prior to placing concrete.



      (5)   Provide not less than three #5 rods for cold joints.



      (6)   Footings shall be hand dug a minimum of one-half the
thickness of the footing.



      (7)   Water stop shall be installed in all footings. (See the
graphic illustration in § 150.207.)



   (B)   Foundations.



      (1)   Placed foundation walls shall be of minimum 3,000 p.s.i.
concrete in 28 days, be supported on footings and extend to a point not less
than six inches above finished grade.



      (2)   Placed concrete foundation walls exceeding 12 feet in
length shall be not less than ten inches thick unless backfilled on two sides.



      (3)   One story slab-on-grade frame buildings may be supported
on trenched foundations not less than ten inches thick with flared bottom.



      (4)   Concrete placed over doors, windows or other openings
not exceeding three feet six inches in width shall be provided with two #5
reinforcing rods extended one foot minimum on each side of the opening.



      (5)   Foundations for frame or brick veneer construction shall
be provided with anchor bolts. The anchor bolts shall be not less than eight
inches by one-half inch and shall be located not more than four feet on
center projecting two inches above the top of the foundation.



      (6)   (a)   Anchorage for intersecting concrete walls and
slabs. Provide a four inch shelf in foundation walls or #4 rods 12 inches on
center to support slabs, steps or platforms adjacent to the foundation or
four inches by four inches by five-sixteenths inch angle steel bolted to
foundation wall.



         (b)   Where a change in grade or height of foundation
walls occurs and footings therefore, are not continuous, a minimum of four
hooked one-half inch rods not less than four feet long shall be located where
the walls adjoin.



      (7)   Foundation walls shall be waterproofed from the edge of
the footing to the finished grade line, with membranes. The membrane shall be
two-ply hot mopped felt, six mil. poly vinyl chloride, 55-pound roll roofing
or equivalent material. The laps in the waterproofing membrane shall be
sealed and firmly attached to the wall. Foundation walls may be waterproofed
using materials or methods of construction other than covered in this section
when approved by the Director of Community Development.



      (8)   The typical drawings § 150.188 may be used to
graphically interpret division (B)(6) above.



(Prior Code, § 9-111)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.188  TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION.







(Prior Code, § 9-112)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.189  GENERAL MASONRY CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Corbeling. Corbels may be built only into solid masonry walls
12 inches or more in thickness. The projection for each course in such corbel
shall not exceed one inch, and the maximum projection shall not exceed
one-third the total thickness of the wall when used to support structural
members, and not more than six inches when used to support a chimney built
into the wall. The top course of all corbels shall be a header course.



   (B)   Combined units. In walls or other structural members composed
of different kinds or grades of units, materials or mortars, the maximum
stress shall not exceed the allowable stress for the weakest of the
combinations of units, materials and mortars of which the member is composed.
The net thickness of any facing unit which is used to resist stress shall be
not less than one and one-half inches.



   (C)   Piers. Every structural pier whose width is less than three
times its thickness shall be designed and constructed as required for columns.



   (D)   Chases. Chases and recesses in masonry walls shall be designed
and constructed so as not to reduce the required strength or required fire
resistance of the wall.



   (E)   Stack bond. In unreinforced masonry where masonry units are
laid in stack bond, longitudinal reinforcement consisting of not less than
two continuous wires each with a minimum aggregate cross-sectional area of
0.017 square inch shall be provided in horizontal bed joints spaced not more
than 16 inches on center vertically.



   (F)   Lintels. Masonry walls shall be reinforced over openings in
accordance with the table below. The reinforcement shall be located in spaces
fully grouted to a depth of not less than eight inches and shall extend not
less than eight inches beyond the sides of the opening.



 


Allowable Span for Masonry and Steel Lintels Supporting Masonry Walls



Allowable Span in Feet and Inches


Number of 1/2 in. diameter or equivalent area, reinforcing bars
 
No Floor Above
 
One Floor Above
 
Two Floors Above
 
Structural Steel


1
 
4 ft. 6 in.
 
3 ft. 0 in.
 
2 ft. 6 in.
 
2-1/4 x 2-1/2 x 5/16

3 x 3 x 1/4


2
 
6 ft. 0 in.
 
4 ft. 0 in.
 
3 ft. 6 in.
 
3-1/2 x 3-1/2 x 5/16

ST 5 I


3
 
8 ft. 6 in
 
5 ft. 0 in.
 
4 ft. 0 in.
 
ST 5

ST 6 I


4
 
10 ft. 0 in.
 
6 ft. 0 in.
 
5 ft. 0 in.
 
ST 6

ST 8 B



 



   (G)   Anchorage. Floor and roof systems shall be firmly anchored to
masonry walls. The typical drawing, § 150.190, may be used to graphically
interpret anchorage requirements.



   (H)   Beam supports. Beam, girders or other concentrated loads
supported by a wall or column shall have bearing of at least four inches in
depth measured parallel to the beams and four inches in length upon solid
masonry or upon a metal bearing plate of adequate design and dimensions to
distribute the load safely.



(Prior Code, § 9-113)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.190  TYPICAL ANCHORAGE ILLUSTRATION.



[IAMGE]



   Scale One Inch = One Foot



(Prior Code, § 9-114)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.191  HOLLOW UNIT MASONRY.



   (A)   General. Hollow unit masonry shall be laid with full face
shell mortar beds and head and end joints, shall be solidly filled with
mortar for a distance in from the face of the wall or unit not less than the
thickness of the longitudinal face shells.



   (B)   Bonding. Where two or more hollow units are used to make up
the thickness of a wall, the stretcher courses shall be bonded at vertical
intervals not exceeding 34 inches by lapping at least four inches over the
unit below or by lapping at vertical intervals not exceeding 17 inches with
units which are at least 50% greater in thickness than the units below; or by
bonding with corrosion-resistant metal ties conforming to the requirements
for cavity walls. There shall be one metal tie for not more than each four
and one-half square feet of wail area. Ties in alternate courses shall be
staggered and the maximum vertical distance between ties shall not exceed 18
inches and the maximum horizontal distance shall not exceed 36 inches. Walls
bonded with metal ties shall conform to the requirements for allowable
stress, lateral support, thickness, height and mortar for cavity walls.



(Prior Code, § 9-115)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.192  SOLID MASONRY.



   (A)   General. In each wythe of plain solid masonry, not less than
75% of the units in any vertical plane perpendicular to the wall plane shall
lap the ends of the units above and below a distance not less than one and
one-half inches or one-half the height of the units, whichever is greater or
the masonry shall be reinforced longitudinally.



   (B)   Bonding.



      (1)   Adjacent wythes in bearing and non-bearing walls shall
be bonded by either headers or metal ties.



      (2)   Where headers are used, the facing and backing shall be
bonded so that not less than 4% of the exposed face area is composed of solid
headers extending not less than four inches into the backing. The distance
between adjacent full-length headers shall not exceed 24 inches vertically or
horizontally. Where the backing consists of two or more wythes, the headers
shall extend not less than four inches into the most distant wythe or the
backing wythes shall be bonded together with separate headers whose area and
spacing conform to the foregoing.



      (3)   Where metal ties are used, the facing and backing shall
be bonded with approved corrosion-resistant unit metal ties or cross wires or
masonry joint reinforcement. Unit ties shall be of sufficient length to
engage all wythes, with ends embedded not less than one inch in mortar, or
shall consist of two lengths, the inner embedded ends of which are hooked and
lapped not less than two inches.



(Prior Code, § 9-116)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.193  CAVITY WALL MASONRY.



   (A)   General. Cavity wall masonry is that type of construction made
with brick, structural clay tile or concrete masonry units or any combination
of such units in which facing and backing are completely separated except for
the metal ties which serve as bonding.



   (B)   Construction.



      (1)   (a)   In cavity walls neither the facing nor the
backing shall be less than four inches in thickness and the cavity shall be
not less than one inch net in width nor more than four inches in width. The
backing shall be at least as thick as the facing.



         (b)   Exception: where both the facing and backing are
constructed with clay or shale brick, the facing and backing may be three
inches in thickness.



      (2)   The facing and backing of cavity walls shall be bonded
with three-sixteenths inch diameter steel rods or metal ties of equivalent
strength and stiffness embedded in the horizontal joints. There shall be one
metal tie for not more than each four and one-half square feet of wall area
for cavity widths up to three and one-half inches net in width. Where the
cavity exceeds three and one-half inches net in width, there shall be one
metal tie for not more than three square feet of wall area. Ties in alternate
courses shall be staggered and the maximum vertical distance between ties
shall not exceed 24 inches and the maximum horizontal distance shall not
exceed 36 inches. Rods bent to rectangular shape shall be used with hollow
masonry units laid with the cells vertical; in other walls the ends of ties
shall be bent to 90 degree angles to provide hooks not less than two inches
long. Additional bonding ties shall be provided at all openings, spaced not
more than three feet apart around the perimeter and within 12 inches of the
opening. Ties shall be of corrosion-resistant metal, or shall be coated with
a corrosion-resistant metal or other approved protective coating.



(Prior Code, § 9-117)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.194  MASONRY CHIMNEY CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Chimneys shall extend not less than three feet above the
highest point where they pass through the roof of a building and not less
than two feet above any portion of the building within ten feet horizontal
measurement.



   (B)   Masonry chimneys shall be lined with fire clay flue liners.



   (C)   Flue liners shall extend from the smoke chamber of a fireplace
or eight inches below the lowest inlet of the appliance served to the top of
the chimney.



   (D)   Where more than two flues are located in the same chimney,
masonry wythes shall be built between adjacent flue linings so that there are
not more than two flues grouped together between such wythe separation. The
masonry wythes shall be at least four inches thick and bonded into the walls
of the chimney. Where two flues adjoin each other in the same chimney with
only flue lining separation between them, the joints of the adjacent flue
linings shall be staggered at least seven inches.



   (E)   Chimney flues shall not be smaller in area than that of the
area of the connector from the appliance.



   (F)   Chimney flues for fireplaces shall not be smaller in area than
the following:



      (1)   Round lined flue: one-twelfth of the fireplace opening
area, but not less than 50 square inches; and



      (2)   Square or rectangle lined flue: one-tenth of fireplace
opening area, but not less than 64 square inches.



   (G)   Wood beams, joists, headers and studs shall not be placed
within two inches from the outside face of a masonry chimney.



   (H)   All spaces between masonry chimneys and wood beams, joists or
headers shall be firestopped by placing noncombustible material to a depth of
one inch at the bottom of such spaces.



   (I)   Solid fuel burning fireplaces or appliances shall be provided
with a chimney having a height of not less than 14 feet above the damper of
the fireplace or appliance.



(Prior Code, § 9-118)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.195  MASONRY FIREPLACES.



   (A)   Masonry fireplaces shall be constructed with solid masonry
walls not less than eight inches thick. A minimum two-inch thick liner of
fire brick or other approved lining shall be installed in addition to the
eight inch wall thickness.



   (B)   (1)   Hearths shall extend at least 16 inches in front of,
and at least eight inches beyond each side of fireplace openings. Where the
fireplace opening is ten square feet or larger, the hearth shall extend at
least 20 inches in front of, and at least 12 inches beyond each side of the
fireplace opening.



      (2)   Hearths shall be constructed of approved noncombustible
material properly supported or reinforced to carry its own weight and all
imposed loads.



   (C)   Woodwork or other combustible materials shall not be placed
within six inches of a fireplace opening. Combustible material located six
inches to 12 inches from the fireplace opening shall not project more than
one-eighth of an inch for each inch distance from such opening.



   (D)   Wood or combustible framing shall not be placed within one
inch of outside walls of a masonry fireplace.



   (E)   All fireplaces or solid fuel burning appliances shall be
provided with dampers.



(Prior Code, § 9-119)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.196  PREFABRICATED CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES.



   (A)   Chimneys or vents for gas-fired appliances may be installed to
the minimum regulations set forth in the International Mechanical Code, 2003
Edition, International Code Council, Inc. (see § 150.020).



   (B)   Prefabricated fireplaces and chimneys may be installed if
tested by a nationally recognized testing laboratory and approved by the
Construction Codes Commission of the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-120)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.197  STRUCTURAL STEEL.



   (A)   Structural steel shall bear on concrete, solid masonry or
approved structural members.



   (B)   Beam pockets shall provide a bearing of not less than four
inches in depth. Beams shall be grouted into the beam pockets.



   (C)   Wood shims shall not be used to level structural steel columns
or beams.



   (D)   Lally columns supporting beams shall be firmly attached to the
beam by means of bolts, tightly crimped flanges designed for the purpose or
by welding.



(Prior Code, § 9-121)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.198  WOOD CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   General. The typical drawings, §§ 150.204, 150.205, 150.206
and 150.207 may be used to graphically interpret regulations of this section.



   (B)   Material.



      (1)   All two-inch nominal dimension framing lumber shall be
kiln dried standard grade or better and shall be identified by a grade mark.
The grade shall provide adequate information to determine the “F”
(Extreme fiber in bending) and “E” (Modulus of elasticity). Engineered
systems shall be designed per § 150.171.



      (2)   Minimum sizes of lumber shall be construed to be nominal
or dressed size as established by the American Lumber Standards Committee.



      (3)   Structural engineered wood products may be used in lieu
of two inch nominal dimension framing lumber. The load design shall be as
specified in § 150.171.



      (4)   When structural engineered wood products are used in
floor and ceiling assemblies, they shall not be left exposed. Protection
shall be provided by one of the following methods:



         (a)   A ceiling complying with § 150.201(A);



         (b)   An Underwriter Laboratory (U.L.). listed suspended
ceiling assembly rated a minimum of one hour;



         (c)   An automatic sprinkler system designed per the
current N.F.P.A. #13; Sprinkler Code, and approved by the Director of
Community Development or his or her designee, and installed by an approved
licensed plumber permitted to work in the city; and



         (d)   Other methods of equivalent protection acceptable
to the Director of Community Development or his or her designee.



      (5)   Additionally, the area between the ceiling and the floor
above shall be subdivided into areas of not more than 1,000 square feet with
one-half inch type “X” drywall when utilizing structural engineered wood
products.



   (C)   Framing.



      (1)   Wood framed walls shall be constructed of minimum
two-inch by four-inch studs on 16-inch centers placed directly over and under
floor and ceiling joist. Where air register boxes, heads, pipes or stacks are
to be installed, joists shall not be set less than 12 inches on center and
studs shall be directly over and under joists. When joists occur on 12 inches
on center, they shall be continuous or shall have butted joints over a
partition. Lap joints will not be permitted except where joists are on
16-inch centers.



      (2)   Wolmanized sill plates shall be not less than two inches
by six inches and shall be securely anchored and tightly sealed to the
foundation. Grouting will be required where structural support is necessary.



      (3)   Box sills or solid blocking of the same dimension as the
floor joist height shall be provided at exterior walls.



      (4)   Sway braces shall be provided on each corner of all
exterior walls.



         (a)   The braces may be one inch by four inch, let into
the studs near each end of the wall. Such braces shall extend from the bottom
to top plates at an angle not to exceed 60 degrees from the horizontal.



         (b)   The braces may be single plywood sheets located at
or near each corner of the structure. The plywood shall be not less than
one-half inch thick and four feet wide. The plywood material shall extend
from the top to bottom plate.



      (5)   Headers supporting wood frame walls shall be not smaller
than indicated in § 150.199.



      (6)   (a)   Headers supporting two or more joist tails
shall be doubled.



         (b)   Joist tails shall be connected to headers by means
of metal joist hangers or ledger strip.



      (7)   (a)   Maximum clear spans for wood floor and ceiling
joists shall be in accordance with the joist span schedule in § 150.200.



         (b)   In applying regulations of the joist span
schedule, § 150.200, finished ceilings shall be considered a ceiling covered
with drywall, plaster or other approved material. An attic shall be deemed
accessible when served by means other than a scuttle hole.



      (8)   (a)   Approved draftstopping shall be provided to
close concealed draft openings and shall form an effective fire and smoke
barrier between rooms and stories.



         (b)   Draftstopping shall be provided in pipe chases,
holes for pipes, soffits, dropped or lowered ceilings, concealed roof spaces
and other locations which could induce draft or permit passage of smoke.
Concealed roof spaces shall be draftstopped at maximum intervals of 20 feet
horizontally.



      (9)   Wall sheathing of approved wood, plywood, fiber board or
gypsum shall be installed on exterior walls.



         (a)   Wood sheathing shall be one-inch nominal thickness.



         (b)   Plywood sheathing shall be a minimum of one-half
inch type C.D. exterior grade.



         (c)   Fiber board sheathing shall be not less than
one-half-inch thick moisture resistant material.



         (d)   Gypsum sheathing shall be a minimum of one-half
inch thick.



      (10)   (a)   1.   Roof and floor sheathing shall be of
one inch nominal thickness solid wood or a minimum of one-half inch type C.D.
exterior grade plywood when applied to framing members which are 16 inches on
center or less.



            2.   Boards of one inch nominal thickness or
minimum five-eighths inch type C.D. exterior plywood shall be used when
applied to framing members which are more than 16 inches on center, but not
more than 24 inches on center.



         (b)   1.   When single layer floor sheathing is used
as a base for carpeting, the framing members shall not exceed 24 inches on
center.



            2.   The sheathing shall be not less than
three-fourths inch tongue and groove exterior grade plywood glued and nailed
to the framing members.



            3.   Non-carpeted areas shall be covered with a
minimum one-fourth inch underlayment material.



      (11)   Single bottom plates and double top plates shall be
provided at all bearing walls. Any splice or break in the top or bottom plate
shall occur at a stud.



(Prior Code, § 9-122)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 94-15, passed
4-21-1994)



§ 150.199  MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SPAN FOR HEADERS SUPPORTING WOOD FRAME WALLS.



 


Allowable Span of Headers in Feet for Bearing Walls




Size of Steel Header

 

Size of Wood Header

 

No Story Above

 

One Story Above

 

Two Stories Above

 

Allowable Span of Headers in Garages or in Walls Not Supporting Floors or
Floor






2-1/2 x 2-1/2 x 1/4

 

2–2 in. x 4 in.

 

4 ft.

 



 



 

6 ft.




3-1/2 x 3-1/2 x l/4

 

2–2 in. x 6 in.

 

4 ft. to 6 ft.

 

4 ft.

 



 

6 ft. to 8 ft.




6 x 1-7/8 JR

 

2–2 in. x 8 in.

 

6 ft. to 8 ft.

 

4 ft. to 6 ft.

 



 

8 ft. to 10 ft.




4 x 2-5/8

 

2–2 in. x 10 in.

 

8 ft. to 10 ft.

 

6 ft. to 8 ft.

 

4 ft. to 6 ft.

 

10 ft. to 12 ft.




7 x 2-1/8 JR

 

2–2 in. x 12 in.

 

10 ft. to 12 ft.

 

8 ft. to 10 ft.

 

6 ft. to 8 ft.

 

12 ft. to 14 ft.






 

2–2 in. x 14 in.

 

12 ft. to 14 ft.

 

10 ft. to 12 ft.

 

8 ft. to 10 ft.

 

14 ft. to 16 ft.




Note:   Garage headers carrying roof or ceiling loads may be of 2, 2-inch
by 14-inch with a flitch plate of steel or plywood, bolted between the 2-inch
by 14-inch, if specified by the architect





 



(Prior Code, § 9-123)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.200  JOIST SPAN SCHEDULE.



 

Size
Inches
 
Spacing
Inches
 
Floor Joists
Maximum Spans - In Feet
 
Ceiling Joists Maximum Spans - In Feet Finished Ceiling Below


Finished
Ceiling
Below
 
No Finished
Ceiling Below
 
Accessible
Attic Above
 
Inaccessible
Attic Above




2 x 6
 
12
 
9-0
 
10-6
 
12-0
 
15-0



 
16
 
8-6
 
9-0
 
10-0
 
14-0



 
24
 
7-0
 
7-6
 
8-6
 
12-0


2 x 8
 
12
 
12-0
 
14-0
 
14-6
 
20-0



 
16
 
11-4
 
12-0
 
13-0
 
18-0



 
24
 
9-6
 
10-0
 
11-6
 
16-0


2 x 10
 
12
 
15-0
 
17-6
 
18-0
 
24-0



 
16
 
14-0
 
15-0
 
16-6
 
22-0



 
24
 
12-0
 
12-6
 
14-6
 
20-0


2 x 12
 
12
 
18-6
 
21-0
 
21-6
 
28-0



 
16
 
16-6
 
18-0
 
20-0
 
27-0



 
24
 
14-6
 
15-0
 
17-6
 
25-0


2 x 14
 
12
 
21-6
 
24-0
 
25-0
 
—



 
16
 
19-6
 
21-0
 
23-0
 
—



 
24
 
17-6
 
17-6
 
20-6
 
—


3 x 6
 
12
 
10-0
 
13-0
 
12-6
 
—



 
16
 
9-6
 
11-6
 
11-6
 
—



 
24
 
8-6
 
9-6
 
10-0
 
—


3 x 8
 
12
 
14-0
 
17-0
 
16-6
 
—



 
16
 
12-9
 
15-0
 
15-0
 
—



 
24
 
11-0
 
12-6
 
13-6
 
—


3 x 10
 
12
 
17-6
 
21-6
 
23-0
 
—



 
16
 
16-0
 
19-0
 
19-0
 
—



 
24
 
14-0
 
15-6
 
17-0
 
—


3 x 12
 
12
 
21-0
 
26-0
 
25-0
 
—



 
16
 
19-6
 
22-6
 
21-6
 
—



 
24
 
17-0
 
19-0
 
19-0
 
—


3 x 14
 
12
 
24-6
 
28-0
 
26-0
 
—



 
16
 
22-6
 
26-0
 
23-0
 
—



 
24
 
20-0
 
22-0
 
21-6
 
—




 



(Prior Code, § 9-124)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.201  INTERIOR WALL AND CEILING COVERING.



   All interior wall and ceiling covering shall be installed in accordance
this section.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   Wall and ceilings shall be lath and plaster, minimum
one-half inch Type “X” gypsum wallboard or approved equal.



      (2)   One-half inch Type “X” gypsum board or approved
equal may be installed on ceilings with framing members on 16-inch centers or
less.



      (3)   Ceilings with framing members on greater than 16-inch
centers shall be covered with five-eighths inch gypsum board or approved
equal. One-half inch Type “X” gypsum board may be applied if solid
blocking is installed on four foot centers.



   (B)   Paneling. Wood, plywood or other decorative paneling shall be
applied in accordance with the following table:



 


3/4-inch solid wood or plywood paneling

 
Backer board not required


5/16-inch solid wood or plywood paneling but less than 3/4 inch
 
3/8-inch gypsum backer board


1/4-inch paneling or less
 
1/2-inch Type “X” gypsum backer board



 



   (C)   Vertical assemblies. Lath or gypsum wallboard shall be
supported by studs or furring when installed over solid masonry or placed
concrete walls.



   (D)   Gypsum board.



      (1)   Gypsum board shall be applied with the long dimension
perpendicular to supports, and with end joints staggered in successive
courses.



      (2)   Gypsum board shall be attached to framing members in
accordance with the Gypsum Association Specifications.



   (E)   Interior plaster.



      (1)   Plastering with gypsum plaster or portland cement
plaster shall be not less than three coats when applied over metal lath or
wire lath and shall be not less than two coats when applied over other bases
permitted by this section.



      (2)   (a)   Plaster shall not be applied directly to fiber
insulation board.



         (b)   Portland cement plaster shall not be applied
directly to gypsum lath, gypsum masonry or gypsum plaster.



   (F)   Edges and ends. All edges and ends of gypsum wallboard shall
occur on the framing members, except those edges and ends which are
perpendicular to the framing members.



   (G)   Bathroom tub and shower wall finishes. All bathroom tub and
shower wall finishes shall be applied over a backer board of one-half inch
interior cement board attached per manufacturers specifications.



   (H)   Supporting walls, partitions and ceilings. All supporting
walls, partitions and ceilings shall be finished with a minimum of one-half
inch, Type “X”, gypsum board when installing modular bathroom tub and
shower enclosures.



(Prior Code, § 9-125)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.202  ROOF COVERING.



   (A)   Roof coverings shall be installed in accordance with
manufacturers specifications.



   (B)   Shingles shall not be installed on roofs having less than four
in 12 pitch.



   (C)   Not more than two separate applications of shingles shall be
applied to a roof.



   (D)   Galvanized metal flashing when used, shall be not less than
26-gauge material.



   (E)   (1)   An underlayment of 15 pound felt shall be applied
under all asphalt shingles.



      (2)   Additional layers of underlayment shall be applied if
required in the manufacturers specifications.



   (F)   Built-up roofing.



      (1)   Mineral aggregate surfaced built-up roofing shall
consist of three layers of 15 pound fiber felt installed on roofs having
slopes not greater than three in 12.



      (2)   Built-up roofing shall be applied only to solid surface
roofs.



      (3)   Base sheets shall be cemented to a suitable deck using
not less than 25 pounds of hot asphalt or not less than two gallons of cold
bituminous compound in accordance with manufacturers published specifications
or 30 pounds of hot coal tar pitch per roofing square, or nailed to roof
sheathing using not less than one nail to each one and one-third square feet,
or may be spot-cemented to a non-nailable deck using not less than ten pounds
of hot asphalt per roofing square.



      (4)   Successive layers shall be cemented to the base sheets
using no less cementing material than that specified for solidly cemented
base sheets.



      (5)   Mineral aggregate surfaced roofs shall be surfaced with
not less than 50 pounds of hot asphalt or other cementing material in which
is embedded not less than 300 pounds of gravel or other approved surfacing
materials or 250 pounds of crushed slag per roofing square.



      (6)   Cap sheets shall be cemented to the base sheets using no
less cementing material than that specified for solidly cemented base sheets.



      (7)   Hot asphalt shall be applied at a temperature of not
less than 375°F nor more than 450°F for high melt types. Low melt types
shall not be applied at a temperature of less than 350°F nor more than
400°F.



      (8)   Coal tar pitch shall not be heated to a temperature
above 375°F.



(Prior Code, § 9-126)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.203  DETACHED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.



   (A)   (1)   (a)   Frame detached garage buildings shall be
constructed of two-inch by four-inch studs on 16-inch centers with top and
bottom plates.



         (b)   Let-in one-inch by four-inch sway bracing or
approved equal shall be installed on all walls.



         (c)   Roofs shall be designed for a 20 pound per square
foot live load.



      (2)   (a)   1.   Garage floors shall be of minimum 3,000
p.s.i. concrete in 28 days and five inches thick.



            2.   The slab shall be poured with a thickened
edge not less than 12 inches deep and eight inches wide around its entire
perimeter.



            3.   Remove all organic material and place
concrete over four inches of granular material.



         (b)   Roof ties shall be installed of two inches by six
inches not more than four feet on center.



   (B)   (1)   (a)   Brick detached garage buildings shall be
provided with foundations and footings as required by § 150.187.



         (b)   The Director of Community Development may permit
trenched foundations as described in § 150.187(B).



      (2)   Masonry work shall conform to the regulations of §
150.189.



   (C)   (1)   Prefabricated metal storage buildings not exceeding
100 square feet in area may be installed provided that the building is firmly
attached to the ground in a manner acceptable to the Department of Community
Development.



      (2)   Storage buildings exceeding 150 square feet shall
conform to the regulations of this section for detached garages.



(Prior Code, § 9-127)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.204  ISOMETRIC JOIST AND HEADER ILLUSTRATION.







   Scale One-Half Inch = One Foot



(Prior Code, § 9-128)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.205  TYPICAL WALL SECTION ILLUSTRATION.







   Scale One-Half Inch = One Foot



(Prior Code, § 9-129)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.206  ISOMETRIC HEADER SECTION ILLUSTRATION.







   Scale One-Half Inch = One Foot



(Prior Code, § 9-130)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.207  ISOMETRIC WALL SECTION ILLUSTRATION.







   Scale One-Half Inch = One Foot



(Prior Code, § 9-131)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.208  ROOF VENTILATION ILLUSTRATION.







(Prior Code, § 9-132)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



MULTIPLE DWELLING AND COMMERCIAL BUILDING CODE REGULATIONS



§ 150.220  ADOPTION OF COMMERCIAL BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   For the purpose of prescribing the regulations governing the
construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of every
building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such
buildings or structures (except that detached one- and two-family dwellings
and multi-single-family dwellings not more than three stories in height with
a separate means of egress shall be governed by the Residential Building Code
as adopted by reference in § 150.185), the following code, as modified
herein, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein, and shall
constitute and be deemed to be “The Commercial Building Code of the City of
Lake Forest:” the International Building Code, 2003 Edition, International
Code Council, Inc. (the “Commercial Building Code”); provided, however,
the adoption of this section shall not be construed as preventing the
enforcement of or repealing of the provision of any ordinance, regulation,
standard or code adopted by the city that is more restrictive than the
provisions of this section. In the event that any provision of this section
shall be in conflict with any other ordinance, regulation, standard or code
adopted by the city, the more restrictive provision (as determined by the
Director of Community Development) shall apply. One copy of the Commercial
Building Code has been on file in the office of the City Clerk for use and
examination by the public for at least 30 days prior to the adoption of the
Commercial Building Code, and such copy shall continue to be kept on file in
the office of the City Clerk for use and examination by the public after
adoption of the Commercial Building Code.



   (B)   In furtherance of the provisions of Chapter 30 and other terms
and condition of the Commercial Building Code, the Director of Community
development is hereby authorized to undertake, or cause to be undertaken,
inspections of all elevators within the city.



(Ord. 04-12, passed 1-15-2004)



§ 150.221  REGULATIONS OF ALL CONSTRUCTION OTHER THAN SINGLE-FAMILY AND
DUPLEX DWELLINGS.



   (A)   (1)   All buildings shall be of two-hour noncombustible
protected construction. The following table shall govern the construction,
alteration and repair of all buildings.



      (2)   Exception: that area that lies north of Kennedy Road
(Route 60) and immediately east of the Tri-State Tollway zoned O-R and
commonly known as Conway Park. The codes utilized for this area shall be as
specified in the annexation agreement between Conway Park and the city.



 


Structural Element

 

Fire Resistance





Columns, girders and framing members
 

2



Exterior walls
 

2



Fire walls, fire divisions, exitways, hallways, elevator shafts, stair
enclosures, storage area (See Note 1 and 3)
 

2



Floor construction
 

2



Non-bearing partitions within individual apartments or separate commercial
occupancy
 

1



Roof construction (See Note 2)
 

2



Note 1: Walls shall extend from the floor to the floor or roof above.


Note 2: Roofs of one story buildings may be one hour construction, if the
structure is located 15 feet or more from all property lines and if the
structure is not located within the Fire District.


Note 3: If a building is completely sprinklered when not required by other
sections of this chapter, a reduction of 50% in the fire resistance rating
may be permitted, for all items above except the provisions for exterior
walls.


Note 4: Exterior wall fire resistance may also be reduced when located 30
feet or more from any interior lot lines or when adjacent to a street or
other public way 30 feet wide.


Note 5: Exterior wall opening, protectives:


   a. 0 to 15 feet from interior lot lines, no openings permitted;


   b. 15 to 30 feet from interior lot lines, 1 hour protectives required;


   c. Over 30 feet from interior lot lines, no protection required; and


   d. The drawing, § 150.222, may be used to interpret these provisions.


   The foregoing Note 5 shall not apply in General Residence Zoning
Districts.




 



   (B)   The Fire Prevention Code, 2000 Edition, National Fire
Protection Association, Inc. and the National Fire Protection Act I, 2000
Edition, National Fire Protection Association, Inc. shall be used to
determine exiting and fire protection regulations for various occupancies.



   (C)   At the exterior of every grade floor exitway a hard surfaced
area shall be provided. The minimum width of this area shall be equal to the
width of the egress door and shall extend away from the building a distance
equal to the width of the egress door. The level of this surface shall be at
or no more than two inches below the floor inside the door. In no case shall
it be elevated above the interior floor level.



   (D)   Where applicable, the state accessibility standards shall take
precedence.



   (E)   (1)   Every multi-story, multi-family residential building
shall be served by an elevator.



      (2)   The elevator shall have a 2,500 pound capacity with a
minimum car size of four feet three inches by six feet eight inches, with
three feet six inch side opening access.



   (F)   All commercial buildings required by the accessibility
standards to provide vertical accessibility via an elevator, shall use the
car size specified in division (E)(2) above. Further, all hardware, controls
and amenities shall comply with accessibility standards.



   (G)   A shunt switch electrical service disconnect shall be provided
on all commercial structures. Location shall be as determined by the Director
of Community Development or his or her designee.



   (H)   A knox box shall be provided for every commercial structure.
The location shall be as determined by the Director of Community Development
or his or her designee.



(Prior Code, § 9-136)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.222  FIRE SEPARATION/EXTERIOR WALL OPENINGS.







(Prior Code, § 9-137)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



ELECTRICITY



§ 150.235  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT. As used in this subchapter means conductors and
equipment installed for the utilization of electricity supplied for light,
heat or power, but does not include the following:



      (1)   Radio and television apparatus or equipment for wireless
reception of sounds or signals;



      (2)   Apparatus, conductors and other equipment installed for
or by public utilities, including common carriers, which are under the
jurisdiction of the Interstate Commerce Commission, for use in their
operation as public utilities; or



      (3)   Minor household appliances or equipment such as bulbs,
cords, plugs and the like which may be connected to electrical circuits, but
are not part of the building’s concealed electrical system.



(Prior Code, § 9-138)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.236  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and cited as “The Lake Forest
Electrical Code of 1992.”



(Prior Code, § 9-139)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



ELECTRICAL INSPECTION DEPARTMENT



§ 150.250  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established an electrical inspection division of the
Department of Community Development for the regulation of the installation,
alteration and repair of electrical equipment within the city, as herein
provided. The electrical inspection division shall function as a branch of
the Office of Department of Community Development. It shall consist of the
Chief Electrical Inspector of the city and such Deputy Inspectors and other
employees as may be provided from time to time by approval of the City
Manager within the authority granted by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 9-141)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.251  DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT.



   The electrical inspection division shall issue permits for the
installation, alteration and repair of electrical equipment in all cases
where application is made in accordance with the rules and regulations
applicable thereto; shall inspect all electrical equipment installed, altered
or repaired within this city and shall require that it conform to the
standards and specifications applicable as provided by ordinance. The
electrical inspection division shall function under the immediate supervision
and control of the Chief Electrical Inspector or his or her authorized
designee.



(Prior Code, § 9-142)  (Ord. 587, passed 3-4-1963; Ord. 94-11B, passed
4-21-1994)



ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR



§ 150.265  OFFICE CREATED.



   There is hereby created the Office of Chief Electrical Inspector. The
Director of Community Development shall act ex officio as Chief Electrical
Inspector and shall have all of the authority, shall exercise and perform all
duties, and be subject to all requirements and obligations appertaining to
that Office.



(Prior Code, § 9-146)  (Ord. 587, passed 3-4-1963; Ord. 94-11B, passed
4-21-1994)



ELECTRICAL COMMISSION



§ 150.280  CREATION AND APPOINTMENT.



   The Construction Codes Commission shall serve as the Electrical
Commission as provided in §§ 150.105 and following, herein.



(Prior Code, § 9-148)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



ELECTRICAL CODE



§ 150.295  ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE.



   For the purpose of prescribing the regulations governing the inspection
of electrical systems; the investigation of fires caused by electrical
installations; the review of construction plans, drawings and specifications
for electrical systems; the design, alteration, modification, construction,
maintenance and testing of electrical systems, and equipment; and the
regulation and control of electrical installations at special occupancies,
the following code, as modified herein, is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein, and shall constitute and be deemed to be “The
Electrical Code of the City of Lake Forest:” the National Electrical Code,
2002 Edition, National Fire Protection Association, Inc. (the “Electrical
Code”); provided, however, the adoption of this ordinance shall not be
construed as preventing the enforcement of or repealing of the provision of
any ordinance, regulation, standard or code adopted by the city that is more
restrictive than the provisions of this section. In the event that any
provision of this section shall be in conflict with any other ordinance,
regulation, standard or code adopted by the city, the more restrictive
provision (as determined by the Director of Community Development) shall
apply. One copy of the Electrical Code has been on file in the office of the
City Clerk for use and examination by the public for at least 30 days prior
to the adoption of the Electrical Code, and such copy shall continue to be
kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for use and examination by the
public after adoption of the Electrical Code.



(Prior Code, § 9-150)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 04-12, passed
1-15-2004)



§ 150.296  AMENDMENTS.



   Said National Electrical Code is hereby amended as follows.



   (A)   Section 110-5, “conductor” is amended to read as follows:



      Conductors normally used to carry current shall be of copper.
Where the conductor material is not specified, the sizes given in this code
shall apply to copper conductors.



   (B)   Section 110-16 is amended to read as follows:



      (1)   Working clearances. Except as elsewhere required or
permitted in this code, the dimension of the working space in the direction
of access to live parts operating at 600 volts nominal, or less and likely to
require examination, adjustment, servicing or maintenance shall not be less
than indicated in Table 110-16(1). The work space shall not be less than 36
inches wide on either side of the electric equipment. Distances shall be
measured from the enclosure front (See the typical drawing in § 150.366. May
be used to graphically interpret this requirement.)



 

Table 110-16(1). Working Clearances


Voltage to Ground
 
Minimum Clear Distance (Feet) Condition:


1
 
2
 
3


0—150
 
4
 
4
 
4


151—600
 
4
 
4-1/2
 
5



 



      (2)   Access and entrance to working space. At least one
entrance of sufficient area shall be provided to give access to the working
space about electric equipment. For switchboards and control panels rated
1200 amperes or more and over six feet wide, there shall be one entrance not
less than 36 inches wide at each end.



      (3)   Front working space. In all cases where there are live
parts normally exposed on the front of switchboard or motor control centers,
the working space in front of such equipment shall not be less than four
feet. (See the typical drawing in § 150.366. May be used to graphically
interpret this requirement.)



      (4)   Illumination. Illumination shall be provided for all
working spaces about service equipment, switchboards, panel boards or motor
control centers installed indoors. (See the typical drawing in § 150.366.
May be used to graphically interpret this requirement.) Exception to (e) in
the National Electric Code is hereby deleted.



      (5)   Headroom. The minimum headroom of working spaces about
service equipment, switchboards, panel boards or motor control centers shall
be six feet six inches. (See the typical drawing in § 150.366. May be used
to graphically interpret this requirement.)



   (C)   Section 210-8(a) Dwelling units is amended to read as follows:



      (a)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all new
construction and/or remodeling of commercial, public, institutional buildings
and dwelling units.



   (D)   Section 210-8, paragraph (a) (5) is added and is amended to
read as follows:



      (a)   (5)   All receptacles installed within six feet of
any sink or wet location shall be GFCI protected.



   (E)   Section 210-8 is amended to read as follows;



      (a)   (7)   GFCl protected receptacles with slave
capability shall not be permitted to connect to downstream receptacles or
outlets other than those which are installed in the immediate area where the
lead GFCl receptacle is located.



   (F)   Section 210-52 Dwelling unit receptacle outlets is amended to
read as follows:



      (1)   General provisions. In every kitchen, family room,
dining room, living room, parlor, library, den, sun room, bedroom, recreation
room, screened porch or breezeway or similar room or area of dwelling units,
receptacle outlets shall be installed so that no point along the floor line
in any wall space is more than six feet (1.83 m), measured horizontally, from
an outlet in that space, including any wall space two feet (610 mm) or more
in width and the wall space occupied by fixed panels in exterior walls, but
excluding sliding panels in exterior walls. The wall space afforded by fixed
room dividers, such as freestanding bar-type counters, shall be included in
the six foot (1.83 m) measurement.



      As used in this section a “wall space” shall be considered a
wall unbroken along the floor line by doorways, fireplaces and similar
openings. Each wall space two or more feet (610 mm or more) wide shall be
treated individually and separately from other wall spaces within the room. A
wall space shall be permitted to include two or more walls of a room (around
corners) where unbroken at the floor line.



      (FPN): The purpose of this requirement is to minimize the use of
cords across doorways, fireplaces and similar openings.



      Receptacle outlets shall, insofar as practicable, be spaced equal
distances apart. Receptacle outlets in floors shall not be counted as part of
the required number of receptacle outlets unless located close to the wall.



      The receptacle outlets required by this section shall be in
addition to any receptacle that is part of any lighting fixture or appliance,
located within cabinets or cupboards, or located over five and one-half feet
(1.68 m) above the floor.



      Exception: Permanently installed electric baseboard heaters
equipped with factory-installed receptacle outlets or outlets provided as
separate assembly by the manufacturer shall be permitted as the required
outlet or outlets for the wall space utilized by such permanently installed
heaters. Such receptacle outlets shall not be connected to the heater
circuits.



      (FPN): Listed baseboard heaters include instructions which
may-not permit their installation below receptacle outlets.



   (G)   Section 225-6(b) is amended to read as follows:



      1.   Festoon Lighting. Not permitted.



   (H)   Section 225-13 Festoon supports is amended to read as follows:



      1.   Festoon Supports. Not permitted.



   (I)   Section 230-42(b) Ungrounded Conductors, size and rating is
amended to read as follows:



      (1)   Ungrounded conductors shall not be smaller than:



         a.   200-ampere, three wire, for a new single-family
dwelling; or



         b.   100-ampere, three wire, for an existing
single-family dwelling; or



         c.   60 ampere for other loads, by special permission of
the Chief Electrical Inspector or his or her authorized designee.



      Exception No. 1: For loads consisting of not more than two 2-wire
branch circuits, No. 6 copper.



      Exception No. 2: By special permission for loads limited by
demand or by the source of supply, No. 6 copper.



   (J)   Section 230-43 wiring methods for 600 volts, nominal or less
is amended to read as follows:



      Wiring methods for 600 volts or less. Service entrance conductors
shall be installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of this
code covering the type of wiring method used and limited to the following
methods:



      (1)   Rigid metal conduit; or



      (2)   Intermediate metal conduit; or



      (3)   For other methods by special permission of the Chief
Electrical Inspector or his or her authorized designee.



   (K)   Section 230-50 protection of open conductors and cables
against damage above ground is amended to read as follows:



      Service-entrance cables. Service-entrance cables shall be
protected in any of the following ways:



      (1)   By rigid metal conduit; or



      (2)   By intermediate metal conduit; or



      (3)   For other methods by special permission of the Chief
Electrical Inspector or his or her authorized designee.



   (L)   Section 230-72, Grouping of disconnects, is amended to read as
follows:



      (a)   General. The two to six disconnects as permitted in §
230-71 shall be grouped. Each disconnect shall be marked to indicate the load
served.



         Exception: One of the two to six service disconnecting
means permitted in § 230-71, when used only for a water pump also intended
to provide fire protection, shall be permitted to be located remote from the
other disconnecting means.



      (b)   Additional service disconnecting means. The one or more
additional service disconnecting means for fire pumps or for emergency,
legally required standby, or optional standby services permitted by § 230-2
shall be installed sufficiently remote from the one to six service
disconnecting means for normal service to minimize the possibility of
simultaneous interruption of supply.



      (FPN): See § 700-12(d) and (e) for emergency system services.



      (c)   Access to occupants. In a multiple-occupancy building,
each occupant shall have access to the occupant’s service disconnecting
means.



      Exception: In a multiple-occupancy building where electric
service and electrical maintenance are provided by the building management
and where these are under continuous building management supervision, the
service disconnecting means supplying more than one occupancy shall be
permitted to be accessible to authorized management personnel only.



      (d)   A shunt trip service disconnect shall be provided on the
exterior of every building, except one and two family dwellings.



   (M)   Section 230-84 More than one building or other structure is
amended to read as follows:



      (b)   Suitable for service equipment. The disconnection means
specified in (a) above shall be suitable for use as service equipment.



      Exception: deleted.



   (N)   Section 250-92 is amended to read as follows:



      (a)   Grounding electrode conductor. A grounding electrode
conductor shall be in rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit or
electrical metallic tubing.



      Metal enclosures for grounding conductors shall be electrically
continuous from the point of attachment to cabinets or equipment to the
grounding electrode, and shall be securely fastened to the ground clamp or
fitting. Where intermediate metal conduit is used for protection for a
grounding conductor, the installation shall comply with the requirements of
Article 345. Where rigid metal conduit is used as protection for a grounding
conductor, the installation shall comply with the requirements of Article
346. Where electrical metallic tubing is used, the installation shall comply
with the requirements of Article 348.



      Aluminum or copper-clad aluminum grounding conductors shall not
be used.



   (O)   Reserved.



   (P)   Section 350-2 is amended to read as follows:



      Uses not permitted. Flexible metal conduit shall not be used as
follows:



      (1)   In wet locations.



      (2)   In hoistways, other than provided in § 620-21.



      (3)   In storage-battery rooms.



      (4)   In any hazardous (classified) location other than
permitted in §§ 501-4(b), 504-20.



      (5)   Where rubber-covered conductors are exposed to oil,
gasoline or other materials having a deteriorating effect on rubber.



      (6)   Underground or embedded in poured concrete or aggregate.



   (Q)   Section 410-8(d) Location, is amended to read as follows:



      (d)   Light fixtures shall be installed in all closets as
follows:



         (1)   On the wall above the closet door, provided the
clearance between the fixture and a storage area where combustible material
may be stored within the closet is not less than 18 inches.



         (2)   On the ceiling over an area which is unobstructed
to the floor, containing an 18 inch clearance horizontally between the
fixture and a storage area where combustible material may be stored within
the closet.



         (3)   A flush recessed fixture equipped with a solid
lens shall be considered outside the closet area.



         (4)   If a pull chain fixture is used, the pull chain
shall be within 18 inches of the entrance door. Pendants shall not be
installed in clothes closets.



   (R)   Sec. 680.41, Indoor installations is amended to read as
follows:



      A spa, hot tub, bath tub or shower installed indoors, shall
conform to the requirements of this part, and shall be connected by wiring
methods of Chapter 3.



(Prior Code, § 9-151)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 04-12, passed
1-15-2004)



§ 150.297  ADDITIONAL SPECIAL RULES.



   The following additional special rules and regulations are hereby
adopted as part of the Lake Forest Electrical Code of 1992.



   (A)   All electrical wiring shall be in intermediate metallic
conduit, rigid conduit, electrical metallic tubing as specified in Articles
345, 346, 348 of the National Electrical Code, except that other types of
conduit or wiring protection may be permitted by the Chief Electrical
Inspector or his or her authorized designee.



   (B)   Conduit on or below grade within a structure shall be
galvanized rigid metal conduit. All exterior conduit shall be rigid, (steel
or aluminum) or intermediate metallic.



   (C)   (1)   Circuits wired with AWG #14 wire shall be limited to
eight outlets or receptacles for general lighting connected to a single
circuit.



      (2)   Circuits wired with AWG #12 wire shall be limited to ten
outlets or receptacles for general lighting connected to a single circuit.



   (D)   Cooling/heating equipment shall be provided with a disconnect
on or adjacent to the equipment and an approved convenience receptacle shall
be provided adjacent to such equipment.



   (E)   All floor receptacles shall be of an approved type.



   (F)   When a question arises as to a method or material used, the
ruling of the Chief Electrical Inspector or his or her authorized designee
shall govern.



(Prior Code, § 9-152)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 04-12, passed
1-15-2004)



§ 150.298  ADDITIONAL AMENDMENTS TO THE NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE.



   (A)   Additional rules. Chapter 1 through 8 are subject to these
additional rules and amendments or modifications as set forth herein below.



      (1)   Commercial or other nonresidential service equipment
shall be a minimum of 100 amperes with no less than 20 circuits using bolt-on
circuit breakers.



      (2)   In remodeling, renovating and/or new construction, main
disconnects shall be located in each panel. All sources of power must be able
to be turned off at the panel location.



      (3)   Derating of service conductors is not permitted.



      (4)   All sub panels shall clearly be marked “Sub Panel.”



      (5)   Floor mounted switchgear, panel boards, control centers
and electrical equipment designed for floor mounting, shall be installed on a
four-inch concrete housekeeping pad.



      (6)   The maximum distance from the point of entrance of the
service conductors to a readily accessible location for the installation of
the interior disconnecting means shall be six feet.



      (7)   Minimum wire size requirements for circuit wiring in
commercial buildings shall be AWG #12. Devices and receptacles shall be 20
amp rated.



      (8)   Conductors shall not be installed in any raceway, until
wall finishes are applied or mechanical work has been completed, without the
consent of the Chief Electrical Inspector or his or her authorized designee.



      (9)   Minimum size boxes for general lighting outlets shall be
one and one-half inches deep and three and three-fourths inches in diameter.
Minimum size boxes for switch and receptacles shall be one and one-half
inches deep and four inches square.



      (10)   Back-to-back box installations shall not be permitted
in any case.



      (11)   Circuit breakers commonly referred to as twin,
piggy-back or cheaters are not permitted; only full size circuit breakers
shall be used.



      (12)   Stairways, hallways, passageways, corridors, garages,
rooms or other areas with more than one entry shall have a lighting outlet
switched from all exits and entries.



      (13)   Circuits designated exit signs and/or emergency lights
shall have a lockout device installed on their respective circuit breakers.
Circuits designated, “night lighting” shall have a lockout device
installed on their respective circuit breakers.



      (14)   For final inspection purposes, all light fixtures shall
have at least one bulb or lamp in each fixture.



   (B)   Remodeling. Existing commercial and nonresidential buildings
or structures that are scheduled for remodeling, and/or additions, or have
been vacated and made available to new tenants shall, prior to occupancy
under approved permit, be required to remove existing electrical equipment
and materials that will not be used or are determined not to conform to the
currently adopted code requirements of the city. In some instances, the space
may be required to be completely stripped of existing materials. All
corrections shall be completed before a certificate of occupancy is issued.



   (C)   Remodeling, additions and/or revisions. Existing wiring,
materials and equipment shall be in good condition, without actual or
potential hazards or unsafe conditions. Hazardous or unsafe conditions would
include, but are not limited to, open boxes, unstable raceways, frayed
wiring, dried out/flaking insulation on electrical conductors, improper
connections, burned or defective contacts, overloaded circuits, insufficient
number of circuit breakers/fuses, defective main breaker/bus bars,
insufficient electrical drops for the actual electrical energy demand of the
premises, nonlabeled fixtures and devices and other similar unsafe
conditions, and shall be replaced, removed or repaired as provided for by the
provisions of this code. Useable electrical systems and devices in good
condition, which will provide safe electrical service may remain in place.



   (D)   Temporary wiring.



      (1)   General construction. No portion of the permanent
conduit system nor the permanent wiring installed therein shall be used for
the purpose of temporary lighting or power, except as may be approved, by the
Chief Electrical Inspector or his or her authorized designee.



      (2)   General nonconstruction.TEMPORARY shall be defined as a
use not to exceed 30 calendar days. The provisions of this section shall
apply to all temporary use of electrical current for the purpose of
illuminating, animating, activating or displaying in connection with
temporary exposition exhibits, shows, convention, meetings or assemblies. The
use of this type of wiring is limited to locations which are classified by
the Director of Community Development as suitable for the intended occupancy
and use and which are equipped, if required, with proper emergency lighting
systems.



      (3)   Temporary wiring voltage. Temporary wiring voltage to
ground shall not exceed 150 volts.



   (E)   Low voltage wiring.



      (1)   Residential low voltage wiring for control, signaling or
communication systems which are enclosed in building partitions, walls,
ceilings, and other areas, made inaccessible by building construction, shall
be encased in a raceway wherever they are so enclosed. Such raceway will
protect the conductors during construction and provide ready means for
replacement of conductors after the building is completed. These raceways
need not terminate in a box or fitting as long as normal precautions are
taken to protect the conductors against injury. Raceways shall be terminated
with a bushing of the proper size if a box or fitting is not used.



      (2)   Commercial, nonresidential. Low voltage wiring for
control, signaling or communication systems shall be encased in a raceway
throughout. These raceways need not terminate in a box or fitting as long as
normal precautions are taken to protect the conductors against injury.
Raceways shall be terminated with a bushing of the proper size if a box or
fitting is not used.



   (F)   Identification.



      (1)   Equipment. All equipment, such as panels, cabinets,
switchgear and the like shall be permanently labeled in an approved manner so
as to identify the type of equipment, size, voltage characteristics and
source of supply.



      (2)   Control devices. Label all devices controlling equipment
such as TT switches, disconnects, starters, controls and the like clearly, so
as to identify what they control.



      (3)   Wire and cable. All wire and cable shall be properly
color coded and shall be labeled with tags, tape or markers at each end,
indicating the circuit number and source of supply.



      (4)   Conduit systems and pull or junction boxes. Except
normal branch power and lighting systems under 300 volts, shall be identified
in an approved manner to indicate what system it may be, i.e., emergency,
exit and the like.



      (5)   Special outlets. Special outlets and/or receptacles
shall be clearly labeled to identify their specific use.



      (6)   Overcurrent devices. All overcurrent devices, i.e.,
circuit breakers in panels and the like shall clearly indicate what they
feed. A typewritten I.D. schedule card mounted inside of the front cover,
enclosed in a clear plastic envelope or cover may be used to accomplish this
procedure. The contractor shall also provide his or her name, address and
phone number in the same manner.



   (G)   Swimming pools, fountains, spas, hot tubs and similar
facilities. After an electrical permit has been applied for, as described in
this code, and the electrical equipment has been installed for the swimming
pool, fountain, spa, hot tub or similar facility, it shall not be used for
its intended purpose until an inspection has been completed by the Chief
Electrical Inspector or his or her authorized designee and the equipment has
been approved for the designed use.



   (H)   Smoke detectors. The Electrical Commission of the city hereby
adopts, and makes Pub. Act No. 85-143 of the state, a part of the Electrical
Code of the city. In addition to that which is described in Pub. Act No.
85-143, the following shall become a requirement and made part of this
section.



      (1)   A dedicated circuit shall be provided for smoke
detectors which are to be permanently wired into the dwelling units AC power.



      (2)   A “lock out” shall be installed on the system’s
circuit protection devise, i.e., switch, circuit breaker and the like to
maintain power to the equipment.



      (3)   A separate raceway shall be provided for the system’s
circuit and detector’s control wiring, thereby eliminating the interference
of circuit conductors and raceways which may be installed for other equipment
or outlets.



      (4)   Smoke detectors shall be approved by an accepted testing
laboratory, i.e., Underwriters Laboratories Inc., (U.L.), ETL Testing
Laboratories, Inc. (E.T.L.).



      (5)   Attics and/or closets which contain mechanical
equipment, i.e., heating, ventilating, cooling, shall contain an approved
smoke detector. The location shall be determined by the Chief Electrical
Inspector or his or her authorized designee.



      (6)   An automatic fan shut-down device shall be installed for
all ceiling house fans, attic fans or other air handling equipment. This
shall interconnect with the smoke detector system and de-energize the power
to the fan thereby discontinuing the induced air flow from one area to
another.



(Prior Code, § 9-153)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 04-12, passed
1-15-2004)



ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS



§ 150.310  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of installing, altering or repairing by contract electrical
equipment, as defined herein before; but the term ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR does
not include employees employed by such contractor to do or supervise such
work.



   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR LIMITED. Any person, firm, or corporation engaged
in the business of installing, altering or repairing electric signs or
heating and air conditioning units. The scope of work permitted under this
category shall be limited to one, line voltage circuit and necessary low
voltage wiring required to install, alter or repair signs or heating and air
conditioning units.



(Prior Code, § 9-156)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.311  REGISTRATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in
the business of electrical contractor or electrical contractor limited,
without being registered as a electrical contractor or electrical contractor
limited in the manner hereinafter set forth; provided however, that if such
person, firm or corporation is already registered for the current year in
another city or village which has an active Electrical Commission within the
state such contractor shall not be required to be registered or to pay a
registration fee for such year in this city.



(Prior Code, § 9-157)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.312  APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation, to engage in the business of
electrical contractor or electrical contractor limited shall apply for
registration to the Chief Electrical Inspector.



   (B)   Upon the filing of such application in proper form and the
payment of the registration fee fixed herein, the Chief Electrical Inspector
may register the applicant as an electrical contractor, and shall issue to
the applicant a certificate of registration which will authorize the
applicant to engage in such business for the year in which it is issued.



   (C)   The Chief Electrical Inspector shall keep a suitable record of
such registrations.



(Prior Code, § 9-158)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.313  REGISTRATION FEE.



   The fee for registration as an electrical contractor or electrical
contractor limited shall be as set out in the fee schedule, per annum, which
sum shall be paid by the applicant to the city in advance upon filing the
application. The certificate of registration issued thereunder shall expire
on December 31 of the year in which it is issued. When an initial application
for registration is filed after the beginning of a license year, the fee to
be paid for registration shall be reduced in proportion to the number of full
calendar months which have expired in the license year prior to the issuance
of the license.



(Prior Code, § 9-159)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



ELECTRICAL PERMITS



§ 150.325  REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall install, alter or repair
any electrical equipment as defined hereinbefore, without first obtaining a
permit for each such installation, alteration or repair. Permits for the
installation, alteration and repair of electrical equipment shall be issued
to a registered electrical contractor upon receipt of an application therefor
made out on a form to be furnished by the electrical inspection division, and
upon the payment of the fee in advance, as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   Permits shall not be required for replacement or repair of
minor equipment such as switches or convenience receptacles in existing
openings not involving any replacement of circuit wiring.



(Prior Code, § 9-161)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.326  APPLICATION.



   The application for each such permit shall contain the name of the
owner, or user of the electrical equipment to be installed, altered or
repaired, and the location by street number, and a detailed description of
the proposed installation.



(Prior Code, § 9-162)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.327  FEES; WIRING.



   The fee for permits for all electrical installations except prewired
electric signs and underground wiring installations for swimming pools, but
including all wiring, lighting fixtures, motors of less than one-half horse
power and heating or other units of less than 600 watts shall be in
accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council,
and on file in the Office of the Director of Community Development.



(Prior Code, § 9-163)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.328  FEES; OUTLETS.



   Each device used in an opening such as a switch, receptacle, light,
fixture, motors of less than one-half horse power and heating or other units
of less than 600 watts, shall be considered an outlet. The fee for outlets
shall be in accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the
City Council, and on file in the Office of the Director of Community
Development.



(Prior Code, § 9-164)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.329  FEES; LIGHTING FIXTURES.



   The fee for lighting fixtures shall be in accordance with the most
recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council, and on file in the Office
of the Director of Community Development.



(Prior Code, § 9-165)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.330  FEES; MOTORS.



   The fee for motors of one-half horse power or over shall be in
accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council,
and on file in the Office of the Director of Community Development.



(Prior Code, § 9-166)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.331  FEES; HEATING UNITS.



   The fee for heating or other units over 600 watts shall be in
accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council,
and on file in the Office of the Director of Community Development.



(Prior Code, § 9-167)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.332  FEES; SWIMMING POOLS.



   The fee for underground wiring installations for swimming pools shall
be in accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City
Council, and on file in the Office of the Director of Community Development.



(Prior Code, § 9-168)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.333  FEES; SIGNS.



   The fee for prewired electric signs shall be in accordance with the
most recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council, and on file in the
Office of the Director of Community Development. Permit fees for electrical
installations on other types of signs shall be on the same basis indicated in
§§ 150.327 and 150.329.



(Prior Code, § 9-169)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.334  FEES; REINSPECTION.



   If negligence or poor workmanship on the part of the contractor makes
it necessary for the Inspector to make more than two inspections of an
electrical installation, a fee shall be charged in addition to the fee
schedule for each additional inspection and for administrative time. The
Director of Community Development shall make an estimate of the time required
for reinspection procedures and establish a fee adequate to reimburse the
city for expenses incurred.



(Prior Code, § 9-170)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.335  ADDITIONAL FEES.



   A fee as set out in the fee schedule for each 24-hour period, to
reimburse the city for additional expense incurred may be added to the permit
fee for any work that has proceeded without first securing a permit.



(Prior Code, § 9-171)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.336  FEES; MINIMUM FEE.



   No electrical permit shall be issued for less than the minimum fee.



(Prior Code, § 9-172)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.337  FEE PAYMENT.



   All fees as provided herein shall be paid to the city before a permit
is issued.



(Prior Code, § 9-173)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



ELECTRICAL INSPECTION



§ 150.350  REQUIRED: RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Chief Electrical Inspector or his or her duly authorized designee,
shall make all inspections necessary to ensure compliance with the
ordinances, rules and regulations of this city with respect to the
installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment therein. The Chief
Electrical Inspector, or his or her duly authorized designee, shall have the
right during reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of
official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the
installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment contained therein,
and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of any electrical
switch or the disconnection of any electrical wire or equipment where the
electrical currents transmitted thereby present a danger to life and property
or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department.



(Prior Code, § 9-176)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.351  NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   The electrical contractor shall notify the electrical
inspection division for inspection before any electrical installations are
concealed.



   (B)   No electrical installations are to be concealed until an
inspection has been made and the installation has been approved by the
Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 9-177)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.352  FINAL INSPECTION.



   The electrical contractor shall notify the electrical inspection
division for a final inspection upon completion of any and all electrical
installations.



(Prior Code, § 9-178)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



ELECTRICAL POLES AND WIRES



§ 150.365  APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain nonpublic utility poles or
wires on or over any public street, alley or other public way without having
first secured permission from the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 9-181)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see§
150.999



§ 150.366  TYPICAL GRAPHIC.







(Prior Code, § 9-183)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



PLUMBING CODE



§ 150.380  ADOPTED.



   The city, pursuant to its home rule authority and the authority
conferred under the Illinois Compiled Statutes, hereby adopts the Illinois
State Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890 et seq. (hereinafter the
“Plumbing Code”) as hereinafter amended. At least one copy of the
Plumbing Code has been on file in the office of the City Clerk for a period
of at least 30 days prior to April 6, 2015 and now is and remains on file in
the office of the City Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Ord. 03-08, passed 2-20-2003)



§ 150.381  DEFINITIONS.



   The Plumbing Code is hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as
follows:



   (A)   Interior waste system.



      (1)   Horizontal and vertical interior soil and waste pipes
shall be insulated for sound to a 45 STC (Sound Transmission Class) rating as
tested in accordance with ASTM E 90 and 45 IIC (Impact Insulation Class)
rating as tested in accordance with ASTM E 492.



      (2)   Exceptions.



         (a)   Cast iron soil and waste pipes need not be
insulated.



         (b)   Soil and waste piping not installed above or
adjacent to habitable space; or space that may reasonably be converted to
habitable space in the future, does not need to be insulated.



         (c)   Soil and waste piping encapsulated in not less
than two inches of closed cell polyurethane spray foam with a two-pound
density factor may be accepted as an alternative to the requirements of
division (A)(1) above.



         (d)   Other insulating materials meeting the
requirements of division (A)(1) above may be approved upon submittal of
documentation demonstrating compliance to the satisfaction of the Director of
Community Development or the Director’s designee.



   (B)   Vertical soil pipes. Soil pipe increasers shall not protrude
through the roof at a point closer than five feet from the eave, edge of a
hip or gable roof, or from an outer wall of a flat roof building.



   (C)   Sink, washer wastes.



      (1)   Sink and washer wastes shall not be less than two-inch
pipe.



      (2)   Washer standpipes shall not be less than 36 inches above
the floor with the bottom of the trap not more than six inches above the
floor.



   (D)   Concealed horizontal waste arms. Concealed horizontal waste
arms are prohibited.



   (E)   Vent pipes.



      (1)   In all new work, a two-inch vent pipe shall be brought
below the basement ceiling for the purpose of facilitating future
improvements.



      (2)   Vent pipes shall be capped and readily accessible.



   (F)   Overhead plumbing and conversion required.



      (1)   No new fixture (excluding pumps) which drains into the
public sanitary system by means of gravity drainage shall be permitted below
grade, including floor drains.



      (2)   All such fixtures as described in division (F)(1) above
shall discharge into a proper ejector pit and pumped into an elevated
sanitary main drain or stack.



      (3)   In addition:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (F)(3)(b)
below, any new building or structure and any existing building or structure
that undergoes structural alteration equal to or more than 25% of the value
of the building or structure before such structural alteration, shall be
prohibited from the gravity drainage of any new or existing fixture below
grade, including floor drains, directly into the sanitary system.



         (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division
(F)(3)(a) above, and subject to the requirements of division (F)(3)(c) below,
the City Engineer may, in the City Engineer’s sound professional judgment,
grant an exemption from the prohibition against the use of gravity to drain
fixtures or other plumbing facilities in an existing building or structure
directly into the sanitary sewer system. Such exemption shall be granted only
upon consideration of historic experiences, topography, utility locations and
any other factors that the City Engineer may deem relevant. In addition, the
City Engineer may impose such conditions and limitations on an exemption as
the City Engineer deems necessary or appropriate. No such exemption shall be
valid unless in writing, signed by the City Engineer, and acknowledged by the
owner of the building or structure as provided in division (F)(3)(c) below.
For any building or structure that receives an exemption under this division
(F)(3)(b), no further changes in the plumbing of such building or structure
shall be permitted unless the provisions of this division (F)(3) are
satisfied or a further exemption is granted by the City Engineer pursuant to
this division (F).



         (c)   For any building or structure using gravity to
drain fixtures of other plumbing facilities directly into the sanitary sewer,
no permit shall be granted for any plumbing work on such building or
structure, and no exemption shall be granted pursuant to division (F)(3)(b)
unless the owner of the building or structure shall have executed and
delivered to the city an acknowledgment relating to the risks of such gravity
drainage in a form approved from time to time by the City Attorney.



(Ord. 2015-24, passed 4-6-2015)



§ 150.382  PERMITS.



   (A)   Required. No sanitary sewer, storm sewer, private sewage
treatment system, piping for and connections to fresh water supply,
installation of any trapped fixture or any other item constituting any part
of a plumbing system, may be installed or altered within the corporate limits
of the city, until a permit for such installation or alteration has been
obtained from the Director of Community Development or his or her designee.



   (B)   Void; renewal; extension.



      (1)   If, after a permit has been granted, the operations
covered by said permit have not begun within three months after the date
thereof, or except as hereinafter provided, if such operations are not
completed within one year from said date, then such permit shall be void, and
no operations thereunder shall be started or completed until a renewal of
said permit is obtained. A fee of 10% of the original permit cost shall be
charged for such renewal. The minimum renewal fee shall be in accordance with
the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council and on file in the
Office of the Director of Community Development.



      (2)   If the amount of work to be accomplished under the
permit is of such scope that completion within one year is not possible, the
Director of Community Development may extend the validity of the permit for
such additional period as he or she deems necessary, but not to exceed one
year, without additional fee.



   (C)   Occupation, obstruction or use of streets, sidewalks and
public property; permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation other than an authorized official of the city in the
performance of his or her duties, to make any excavation in any street, alley
or public place, or to tunnel under any street, alley or public place in the
city without first having obtained a permit as herein required or without
complying with the regulations herein contained.



   (D)   Application and fee. Applications for such permits shall be
made to the Director of Community Development or his or her designee and
shall state thereon the location of the intended excavations or tunnel, the
size thereof, the purpose therefor, and the person, firm or corporation doing
the actual excavating, and the name of the person, firm or corporation for
whom the work is being done.



   (E)   Deposit; bond.



      (1)   Every contractor, person, firm or corporation making any
improvement in the city which requires the digging into, taking up or
otherwise disturbing any portion of the paved roadway or parkway of any
street in the city shall deposit with the city, in cash, a sum as set out in
the fee schedule per permit issued.



      (2)   Such deposit shall be returned after the work is
finished; but, in the event that such person, firm or corporation shall fail
or neglect to place or maintain any such light or barricade or to restore the
pavement, sidewalk or parkway as herein provided, the Director of Community
Development may proceed to have such light or barricade lighted, or placed at
such obstruction or opening, or to restore the pavement, sidewalk or parkway
as herein provided and the cost of doing so shall be deducted from the
deposit before it will be returned.



      (3)   In lieu of the $500 cash deposit required above, the
person, firm or corporation may deposit a $1,000 cash bond that shall be
attributable to any street opening permit issued in the name of said person,
firm or corporation. The $1,000 cash bond shall be subject to deductions, for
costs incurred by the city, as stated hereinabove. Whenever the bond is
reduced below the $1,000 minimum, no subsequent street opening permit will be
issued to that person, firm or corporation until sufficient funds are
deposited to restore the bond to the full $1,000 value.



   (F)   Restoring streets and parkways.



      (1)   In the making of any improvement which requires the
digging into, taking up or otherwise disturbing any portion of the paved
roadway of any street in the city, the permit, plans, specifications and
contract for such improvements, shall provide for the restoration of such
pavement to the same condition it was in before work on such improvement was
begun, and whenever in the making of such improvement it is necessary to take
up any draintile used for street drainage or for any public use. The person,
firm or corporation doing such work shall be required to so replace such
draintile as to prevent any future settlement, and the flow line of such
replaced draintile shall be the same as it was before it was taken up.



      (2)   Whenever in the making of any improvement, it becomes
necessary to dig into, excavate or remove any portion of the parkway of any
street lying between the lot lines and gutter lines thereof, the permit,
plans specifications and contract therefor shall provide that the contractor,
person, firm or corporation making such improvement, shall restore such
parkway to the condition it was in before such digging or excavating was
commenced, and shall resod the surface where sod has been taken up, or cover
the surface with suitable soil and seed same with suitable grass seed, and
shall continue to care for the same, until such parkway is restored to a
condition as good in every way as it was in, before such digging or
excavation was made.



      (3)   Whenever any portion of the public property is disturbed
that does not abut that private property for the benefit of which the said
public property was disturbed, immediate restoration of the disturbed
property shall be required.



   (G)   Plans and specifications. Before issuing plumbing or sewer
permits, the Director of Community Development may require the contractor to
submit plot plans of all sewer work and isometric drawings of proposed
interior plumbing.



   (H)   Permit requirements.



      (1)   Permits for installation, repair or alteration of sewer
and plumbing work shall only be issued to a licensed plumbing contractor,
pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Plumbers License Law.



      (2)   Prior to issuing a permit, the contractor shall have on
file in the Office of the Director of Community Development, a plumber’s
license bond in the amount as set out in the fee schedule, on a form supplied
by the city, and certificate of public liability and property damage
insurance. The plumbers license bond shall indemnify and save harmless the
city from all claims, losses or damages caused by negligence or inadequacy in
the execution or protection of any plumbing, sewerage or drainage work that
he or she may do in the city, and that he or she will comply with all
ordinances, requirements and regulations of the city pertaining to the
business of plumbing, sewerage or drainage. All such bonds shall be renewed
each year. The public liability insurance shall be in the amount of not less
than $500,000 for injuries, including accidental death to any one person, and
subject to the same limit for each person in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 on account of any single accident; and property damage insurance
in an amount of not less than $500,000 on account of any single accident; all
of which insurance coverage shall extend to the city to indemnify, save
harmless and defend the city, its officers, designees and employees from any
loss or damage arising from any incident or accident by the permittee, his or
her designees, employees or subcontractors.



   (I)   Standards required. All plumbing, drainage and sewer work
shall conform to the standards hereinafter set forth in this subchapter; and
it shall be unlawful to erect, construct, remodel or repair any such
plumbing, drainage or sewer except in conformity with such standards.



   (J)   Plumbers license. Plumbing work shall be accomplished by
licensed plumbers only. A current state or Chicago journeyman plumber’s
license shall, upon request, be displayed to the Inspector prior to his or
her approval of any plumbing work.



(Prior Code, § 9-185)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.383  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   The fees for permits for the installation of new plumbing or
the alteration of existing plumbing in a building shall be in accordance with
the approved fee schedule. Fixtures shall be construed to mean all openings
for sanitary waste or ventilation, including floor drains, dish washers,
laundry trays, stand pipes, bathroom and kitchen fixtures, sill cocks, sump
pumps, hot water heaters and all trapped fixtures. The minimum fee shall be
in accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council
and on file in the Office of the Director of Community Development.



   (B)   The fee for a permit to install or alter a sanitary or storm
sewer shall be in accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by
the City Council and on file in the Office of the Director of Community
Development.



   (C)   An additional charge for sewer inspection shall be made on
installations of such size as to require the Inspector to make more than two
trips to the job site. The Director of Community Development shall make an
estimate of the time required for the inspections and establish the fee to be
charged at a rate adequate to reimburse the city for expenses incurred.



   (D)   A reinspection fee, in accordance with the rates as described
in division (C) above, shall be charged on any sewer or plumbing installation
which makes it necessary for the Inspector to make more than two inspections
of the plumbing or sewer work.



   (E)   The fee to construct a residential private sewage treatment
system, including a septic tank, shall be in accordance with the most recent
fee schedule, approved by the City Council and on file in the Office of the
Director of Community Development.



   (F)   The fee for the installation of a lawn sprinkler system shall
be in accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City
Council and on file in the Office of the Director of Community Development.



   (G)   Additional fees: a fee as set out in the fee schedule for each
24-hour period, to reimburse the city for additional expense incurred may be
added to the permit fee for any work that has proceeded without first
securing a permit.



(Prior Code, § 9-186)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.384  SEWAGE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   (A)   Sanitary sewer. Each premises requiring sanitary sewer service
shall have a separate and independent connection to a public sanitary sewer
where a public sanitary sewer is accessible. If a sanitary sewer is not
accessible to a property, then a private sanitary sewer and sewage treatment
system may be constructed and maintained within the property limits at the
expense of the owner subject to first obtaining all required approvals from
the Lake County Health Officer. Plans and specifications for private sanitary
sewers and sewage treatment systems shall, in addition to being submitted to
Lake County, be submitted to and are subject to approval by the City Council
or its duly authorized designee before construction is started. For purposes
of this section, a public sewer shall be deemed “accessible” if available
in the public street or alley abutting a property requiring sewer service, or
the public sewer is located within 250 feet from any of the property lines of
a single family dwelling and 1,000 feet from the nearest property boundary of
a non-residential, multi-family or subdivision property boundary. The owner
of any property currently dependent upon the use of private sewers and
freatment systems shall, within six months after the completion of a public
sanitary sewer in a public street, way or easement upon which such property
abuts or after the sanitary sewer becomes accessible as defined above, shall
connect the sanitary sewer from such property into the public sanitary sewer
without expense to the city and in the manner provided by ordinance and
thereupon discontinue the use of any private sewage treatment system unless
the City Council, in its sole discretion, finds that the conditions of §
150.384(B) are satisfied.



   (B)   Existing private sewage system - interim continued use
permitted. Notwithstanding any state; county or local regulatioris to the
contrary, in areas where new sanitary sewers are installed and in areas where
sanitary sewers are currently in place and existing structures are served by
privgte sewage treatment systems, the city will not require existing
buildings to connect immediately to a public sewer if, upon request of the
property owner, the City Council finds that (i) at least one of the following
conditions (1) through (5) are met, and (ii) conditions (6) through (8) are
all met and will continue to be satisfied.



      (1)   The property is within a special service area
established by the city and the assessment period has not yet terminated;



      (2)   The residence to be served would require a sanitary
sewer service of more than 500 lineal feet;



      (3)   Due to the surrounding pattem of development and the
location of the existing public sanitary sewer, the property cannot be served
without practical or financial hardship;



      (4)   A unique lot configuration or the topography of the site
makes the extension of public sanitary sewer service particularly difficult
or complex;



      (5)   The property is in an area likely to experience future
subdivision and development resulting in a more feasible means of extending
the public sanitary sewer service into the area by whieh the property will be
served.



      (6)   Evidence is submitted to the Director of Community
Development that a covenant, approved by the City Attorney, is recorded with
the County Recorder of Deeds documenting that public sanitary sewer is
accessible to the property and that continued use of a private sewage system
is authorized only on an interim basis.



      (7)   The property is in full compliance with the
certification requirements set forth in § 150.384 (D).



      (8)   No unauthorized effluent is being discharged to storm
sewers, streams or other overland water courses and no cross connection
exists between the private sanitary sewer system and any storm sewer; except
that cross connections permitted and approved by Lake County and in full
compliance with the city’s certification requirement as set forth in §
150.384(D) may be maintained (such cross connections hereinafter being
referred to in this section as an “authorized connection”).



   (C)   Sanitary sewer connection required. If, in the determination
of the city, the public sanitary sewer system is accessible as defined in §
1150.384 (A), connection to the public sewer system is required:



      (1)   For any subdivision of property;



      (2)   If all required certifications of maintenance and proper
operation of the private sewage system are not submitted in accordance with
city requirements or if any such certification shows deficiencies in
maintenance or operation of the system;



      (3)   If replacement or significant repair of the system is
required by Lake County or deemed necessary by an authorized inspector;



      (4)   As a condition of the issuance of a permit authorizing
the demolition of 50% or more of the existing dwelling;



      (5)   As a condition of the issuance of a permit authorizing
an expansion of the square footage of the dwelling by 50% or more;



      (6)   As a condition of the issuance of a permit for
improvements on the property that, in the determination of Lake County,
trigger expansion or enhancement of the private sewage system in any form;



      (7)   If a cross connection (other than an authorized
connection) exists and, after notification by the city, the property owner
fails to take corrective action to eliminate said cross connection within 60
days of the date of the notice; or



      (8)   At any time that it is determined by the city or Lake
County that the private sewage system can no longer function in a
satisfactory manner.



   (D)   Certification of maintenance and proper operation required.
The owner of any property within the city limits served by a private sewage
treatment system is required to submit certification to the Director of
Community Development on an annual basis (or, for a private sewage treatment
system with an authorized connection, on a semi-annual basis) in accordance
with the following:



      (l)   Certification must be submitted by a state licensed
private sewage disposal system installation contractor, environmental health
practitioner, Illinois Department of Public Health agent, local health
department agent or a licensed professional engineer.



      (2)   Certification must include dates of inspection of the on
site system and verification that said system is operating in full compliance
with applicable state, county and local regulations; that no cross
connections to a storm sewer exist (excluding authorized connections) and
that the system does not present a health or environmental hazard.



      (3)   Certifications must be submitted in accordance with
deadlines established by the Director of Community Development.



      (4)   In addition to the required Certifications, as a
condition of issuance of any transfer stamp pursuant to §§ 39.155et seq. of
the city code, a certification meeting the requirements of this § 150.384(D)
must be filed with the Director of Community Development that is dated not
more than 120 days prior to the issuance of such transfer stamp.



   (E)   Non-single family residential buildings. No apartment house,
lodging house, hotel, restaurant, hospital, school, clubhouse, convent or
similar building or use shall hereafter be erected or established in the city
unless its plumbing system is connected to a public sanitary sewer before
receiving a final certificate of occupancy.



   (F)   Rain or surface water, including that from roofs, areaways,
pavements and footing drains, shall not be discharged into or through a
private sewage treatment system or a public sanitary sewer. Surface water may
be discharged into an acceptable storm sewer.



   (G)   Rain or surface water may not be discharged into leaching
fields.



   (H)   Private sewage treatment systems. The following shall apply as
minimum technical standards. All private sewage treatment systems must also
be in full conformance with all applicable county and State regulations and
requirements.



      (1)    Any effluent discharged into streams, storm sewers or
other flowing watercourses shall conform to the regulations set forth in the
Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois published by the State Environmental
Protection Agency. Cross connection to the storm sewer shall be remedied in
accordance with applicable Code and legal requirements.



      (2)   Private sewage treatment tanks shall be constructed in
full compliance with Lake County regulations.



      (3)   Private sewage treatment systems shall not be
constructed or installed on any lot or tract where the only means of disposal
of treated effluent is by seepage or leaching into the soil, unless
percolation tests have been made at the site under the supervision of the
County Health Department, and the results of the tests have been approved by
the Health Department. The methods of conducting the tests shall be as
required by the County Health Department.



      (4)   A permit from the County Health Department for the
construction of a sewage disposal field shall be submitted to the Director of
Community Development prior to the issuance of a building permit by the city
authorizing any construction requiring a private sewage system.



(Prior Code, § 9-187)  (Ord. 898, passed 11-5-1973; Ord. 936, passed
1-6-1975; Ord. 974, passed 1-17-1976; Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord.
2017-15, passed 4-3-2017)



§ 150.385  USE OF SANITARY SEWER.



   It shall be unlawful to deposit in any private sanitary sewer system or
in any public sanitary sewer or in a fixture connected to a sanitary sewer,
any industrial waste or chemical not approved by the North Shore Sanitary
District, or oils, grease, flammable or explosive liquid, solids or gases,
surface water, water from roof drains, footing drains or garage floor drains,
substances toxic to bacteriological or biological life active in sewage
treatment processes, unshredded garbage or other liquid or solid waste
detrimental to sewage treatment plants.



(Prior Code, § 9-188)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.386  SANITARY SEWER SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Sanitary sewers installed from the public sewer to
the building drain, shall be constructed of the following materials:



         (a)   Four inch service weight cast iron with joints as
described in § 150.387;



         (b)   Six inch diameter extra strength clay sewer pipe
conforming to the standards set forth under ASTM Designation C-200
(C700/78a). The joints shall conform to ASTM Designation C425-64;



         (c)   Six inch diameter PVC SDR 26, sewer pipe, ASTM
Designation D3034/80; or



         (d)   A three-inch bedding of sand, shall be placed in
the ditch prior to the placement of any sewer pipe.



      (2)   Exception: Cast iron sewer pipe.



   (B)   All sewers shall be run on a straight line from the public
sewer to the waste connection. If conditions are such that it is impossible
to make the straight line connection, a manhole shall be constructed at each
90-degree turn or combination of bends totaling 90 degrees. The Director of
Community Development may, if in his or her opinion, the sewer depth is
inadequate to properly install a manhole, permit the installation of a
T-fitting with extension to grade and terminated with a cleanout ferrule at
each 100 feet. The cleanout fitting shall be of service weight cast iron pipe.



      (1)   Sewer lines exceeding 200 feet in length shall have a
manhole constructed every 200 feet.



      (2)   Transition from clay to cast iron pipe shall be made by
a band seal rubber adapter conforming to the specifications set forth in ASTM
Designation C-594.



      (3)   Bell and spigot sewer pipe shall be installed with the
bell or hub end of the pipe directed upstream.



   (C)   A connection shall be made to the city sewer only at the sewer
stub or wye provided. If a sewer stub or wye is not provided, the Director of
Community Development shall require the connection to be made into an
available manhole or may permit the sewer to be tapped by means of an
approved saddle or collar.



      (1)   An authorized designee of the Director of Community
Development shall be present when a sewer is tapped and shall witness the
installation of the approved saddle or collar.



   (D)   Manholes.



      (1)   Manholes built on private property shall be constructed
of precast reinforced concrete or segmental concrete block with four inch
thick concrete bottom. The joints of segmental block and entire interior and
exterior wall shall be properly plastered so as to make the manhole
water-tight.



      (2)   Manholes shall be not less than three feet inside
diameter with a solid cast iron cover and ring weighing not less than 150
pounds installed at finished grade.



      (3)   Manholes greater than four feet in depth shall be
provided with cast in steps.



      (4)   Manholes in drives or other traffic areas shall be
provided with solid covers and rings weighing not less than 300 pounds.



      (5)   All manhole lids shall be brought up to the finished
grade for ease of servicing and to prevent the infiltration of ground water
into the sanitary sewers.



   (E)   Sewer trenches which have been dug too deep shall be filled
with a bedding of sand to the proper grade.



   (F)   All sewer ditches under driveways shall be backfilled with
granular material.



   (G)   Bell holes shall be provided at each joint of bell and spigot
pipe.



   (H)   All building drains and sanitary sewers shall be installed a
minimum of 42 inches below grade.



   (I)   A soil testing report may be required for any sewer trench
bottom that in the opinion of the Inspector, would not support the
installation of a sanitary or storm sewer.



   (J)   Sanitary sewer line replacement or lining.



      (1)   For purposes of this division (J), the term DEMOLITION
or any variant thereof shall mean any act or process that:



         (a)   Results in the removal or destruction of a
building or structure, in whole or in part, to the extent of either:



            1.   Fifty percent of its floor area;



            2.   Fifty percent of its volume; or



            3.   Fifty percent of its replacement cost value
as existed prior to the commencement of such act or process.



         (b)   Results in the removal or destruction, in whole or
in part, of any foundation, exterior wall, load-bearing wall or roof of a
building or structure (excluding the replacement of roof sheathing); or



         (c)   Renders the building or structure uninhabitable or
unsafe for human occupancy.



      (2)   Whenever any building or structure is demolished and
proposed to be replaced by the property owner with a new building or
structure or an addition to the building or structure remaining after such
demolition, the property owner must, prior to commencement of construction on
any such replacement building or structure:



         (a)   Provide the city with a certification from a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed plumber, and such other
supporting information as



may be requested by the Director of Community Development, that the existing
sanitary sewer line servicing the property is in a satisfactory condition for
reuse; and



         (b)   Obtain the acceptance of the Director of Community
Development of such certification based on the Director’s review of the
certification and supporting information.



      (3)   In the event that the Director of Community Development
does not accept the existing sanitary sewer line as being in a satisfactory
condition for reuse, the property owner shall be required to replace the
sanitary sewer line in its entirety, and in the same location as the existing
sanitary sewer line, unless otherwise directed or permitted by the Director
of Community Development; provided, however, that the property owner may
request, and the Director of Community Development in his or her sole and
absolute discretion may authorize, the lining of the sanitary sewer line.



      (4)   The Director of Community Development shall have the
authority to promulgate appropriate regulations and standards to effectuate
the provisions of this division (J).



(Prior Code, § 9-189)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 03-08, passed
2-20-2003)



§ 150.387  RESERVED.



§ 150.388  RESERVED.



§ 150.389  RESERVED.



§ 150.390  RESERVED.



§ 150.391  STORM SEWER AND SURFACE DRAINAGE.



   (A)   Footing drains. Footing drains shall be installed on the
exterior of all basement footings and around the outside perimeter of crawl
spaces.



      (1)   Footing drains shall be bedded on two inches of washed
gravel and all muck, silt or other materials removed, prior to placing the
gravel.



      (2)   Footing drains shall be placed on the side of the
footing. The top of the drain shall be below the top of the footing.



      (3)   The minimum inside diameter of footing drain conduit
shall be not less than four inches. The conduit shall be rigid plastic
perforated pipe, SDR 38, ASTM F840. Conduits shall be installed using the
approved elbows, couplings and fittings.



      (4)   The draintile shall be covered with a minimum of 12
inches of washed gravel, one- half inch to three-fourths inch diameter, to a
level three inches or more above the top of the footing. Foundation
waterproofing shall not cover the required gravel.



      (5)   Window wells shall be provided with four inch
nonperforated Schedule 40 rigid plastic riser pipe, connected to the footing
drain by means of an approved rigid plastic eighth bend and tee, or be
connected directly to a storm sewer. The bell end of the riser shall
terminate three inches below the bottom of the window frame and shall be
provided with a plastic grate. The riser pipe shall be securely fastened to
the wall with two straps, one at the top of the riser pipe and one near the
bottom. Coarse stone shall be used to fill the window well to a level
adequate to cover the grate. See Graphic 8 in § 150.400.



      (6)   All window well drain pipes shall be plugged with
manufactured plugs or other approved methods prior to backfilling.



   (B)   Storm sewers. Where a public storm sewer or a stub is
available on the same side of the street as the residence, footing drains
shall be connected to the public storm sewer or stub by gravity or through a
sump pump, in the following manner.



      (1)   A six-inch building storm sewer service line shall be
installed from the public storm sewer or stub to within ten feet of the
foundation. This six-inch line shall be rigid, nonperforated PVC, SDR 38 or
six inch vitrified clay pipe with slip seal joints, ASTM Designation C700/78.



      (2)   The storm drain lateral from the storm sewer or stub
shall be bedded on three inches of washed torpedo sand or pea gravel, and
subsequently covered with sand or pea gravel, prior to any backfilling. There
shall be a minimum of three inches of cover over the pipe.



      (3)   Private storm and sanitary sewers are to be in separate
trenches unless the sanitary sewer is of service weight cast iron pipe.



      (4)   Connections to the public storm sewer shall be made to a
stub if provided, or a manhole or basin, or the sewer may be tapped and the
connection made with a manufactured saddle. All area drains shall be provided
with a catch basin before connection to the public sewer. See mud basin,
Graphic 4 in § 150.400.



      (5)   (a)   Footing drains or sump pumps serving footing
drains only may be connected to a road drain if a storm sewer connection is
not available on the same side of the street as the property served. When
footing drains are served by a sump pump two-inch plastic pipe may used from
a point outside the foundation to the road drain. The connection to the road
drain shall be made by removing a section of the road drain pipe and
replacing with a tee, into which the plastic pipe shall be connected.
Two-inch coil plastic pipe shall be placed 42 inches below grade. Rigid
plastic pipe shall be bedded on four inches of compacted sand. Sand shall
also be placed to the spring line of the pipe.



         (b)   All draintile systems shall terminate in a city
storm sewer or road drain when available.



      (6)   (a)   All sump pumps shall be provided with check
valves.



         (b)   All sump pump basins shall be a minimum of three
feet deep with fiberglass construction, with a hub and sealed cover. See
Graphic 7 in § 150.400.



   (C)   Use of storm sewer. It shall be unlawful to deposit sanitary
sewage, industrial waste, oil, grease, flammable liquids or any waste
material into a public or private storm sewer system.



(Prior Code, § 9-194)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.392  WATER PIPING AND FIXTURES.



   (A)   Underground service.



      (1)   Water service to any premises shall not be less than one
inch inside diameter and shall be installed to a depth of not less than five
or more than seven feet. Water services of one-inch, one and one-half-inch or
two-inch diameter shall be Type “K” soft temper copper. Type “K”
services of one and one-half-inch diameter and over shall be installed in 20
foot lengths. Water services of over two inches in diameter may be cement
lined ductile cast iron pipe.



      (2)   All premises intended for human habitation shall be
provided with a potable water supply. The potable water supply shall not be
connected to nonpotable water and shall be protected from backflow and back
siphonage. The required backflow preventer shall be installed immediately
downstream of the water meter.



   (B)   Water meters. Water meters shall be installed in a basement or
crawl space of the premises to be served.



      (1)   From the date of adoption of this amendment, water
meters, MXU boxes and accompanying wiring must be located in a manner that
allows accessibility by city staff or a designated contractor for purposes of
repair, replacement and shut off. An area of two feet surrounding the meter
and MXU box in all directions must remain clear. If concealment of the meter
and MXU box is desired, access may be provided by a standard, full size door.



      (2)   For all meters, including those installed prior to the
adoption of this amendment, the cost of removal or restoration of any
interior materials resulting from the need to gain access to the meters, MXU
boxes, wiring and shut off valves shall be borne in full by the property
owner.



      (3)   A full way ball valve, the same size as the water
service, shall be installed on both the inlet and outlet side of the meter
spread and within six inches of the meter.



   (C)   Interior distribution.



      (1)   (a)   Type “L” hard temper copper water pipe
shall be used for all interior above-grade water distribution.



         (b)   Exception: galvanized water pipe Schedule 40 may
be used for repair of existing galvanized systems.



      (2)   Type “K” copper shall be used for all interior water
distribution cast in or located under concrete slabs.



      (3)   A water or air test of the entire water distribution and
fixture piping shall be conducted by the



plumbing contractor or licensed plumber. All water piping shall remain
exposed until the test has been completed and approved by the Plumbing
Inspector.



   (D)   Transition. Where transition is made from copper to existing
galvanized or other dissimilar metal pipe, a dielectric fitting shall be
installed at the transition point.



   (E)   Used pipe. No piping material that has been used shall be
re-used in the potable water supply system.



   (F)   Stop and waste valves. Stop and waste valves shall be
prohibited in pits or areas of possible immersion.



   (G)   Plumbing fixtures.



      (1)   Every plumbing fixture including tubs and showers shall
be provided with accessible stop valves on both hot and cold water supply
pipes.



      (2)   Each residence shall be provided with not less than two
outside sill cocks. Sill cocks shall be installed on opposite sides of the
building and shall be provided with an anti-freezing device.



   (H)   Air chambers. All building or water supply systems shall be
provided with devices to absorb high pressures at each fixture. The pressure
absorbing device shall be air chambers or an approved mechanical device.



      (1)   Air chambers shall be not less than 12 inches high and
shall be of the same or larger diameter as the fixture supply pipe.



      (2)   Straps and hangers for water piping shall be plastic
lined or coated.



   (I)   Cross-connections. Cross-connections are prohibited.



   (J)   Water connections where protective devices are required and
critical level (C-L) settings for backflow preventers.



 


Fixture or Equipment

 

Method of Installation





Aspirators and ejectors
 
C-L at least 6 inches above flood level of receptacle


Cup beverage vending machines
 
C-L at least 12 inches above flood level of machine


Dental units
 
On models without built-in vacuum breakers, C-L at least 6 inches above flood
level of rim of bowl


Dishwashing machines
 
C-L at least 6 inches above flood level of machine


Flush tanks
 
Equipped with an approved ball cock; in all cases, the ball cock should be
located above the overflow level of the tank and the outlet terminated 1 inch
above the overflow or provided with a backflow preventer located at least 1
inch above the overflow


Flushometers (closet and urinal)
 
C-L at least 6 inches above top of fixture


Garbage can cleaning machine
 
C-L at least 6 inches above flood level of machine


Hose bibs (where aspirators or ejectors could be connected)
 
C-L at least 6 inches above flood level of receptacle served


Hose outlets
 
C-L at least 6 inches above highest point on hose lines


Laundry machines
 
C-L at least 6 inches above flood level of machine


Lawn sprinklers
 
C-L at least 12 inches above highest sprinkler or discharge outlet


Steam tables
 
C-L at least 6 inches above flood level


Tank and vats
 
C-L at least 6 inches above flood level rim or line


Trough urinals
 
C-L at least 30 inches above perforated flush pipe




 



   (K)   Vacuum breakers; devices for the protection of the potable
water supply. Approved backflow preventers or vacuum breakers shall be
installed with any plumbing fixture or equipment, the potable water supply
outlet of which may be submerged and which cannot be protected by a minimum
air gap. Vacuum breakers shall be installed with the critical level at least
six inches above the flood level rim of the fixture they serve and on the
discharge side of the last control valve to the fixture. No shut-off valve or
faucet shall be installed beyond the vacuum breaker.



   (L)   Lawn sprinkler systems.



      (1)   All interior connections to sprinkler systems shall be
Type “K” or “L” copper pipe and shall be protected from back
siphonage by means of vacuum breakers. The size and location of connection to
the potable water supply shall be approved by the Director of Community
Development, or his or her authorized designee.



      (2)   Plans and specifications for lawn sprinkler systems
shall be submitted to and approved by the Director of Community Development
or his or her designee prior to the issuance of a permit.



   (M)   Abandoned service disconnection. When a water service is
abandoned, the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the complete
disconnection or shut-off of the water supply to the premises.



      (1)   If the water service is of Type “K” copper, the
Water Department will shut off the water at the curb box. The copper pipe may
remain connected to the curb box for future use, subject to the approval of
the Superintendent of Water.



      (2)   If the water service is of material other than Type
“K” copper, it shall be disconnected at the water main by a plumbing
contractor.



      (3)   All disconnection work shall be accomplished under the
inspection procedures of the Water Department.



   (N)   Tapping permit. Prior to having a service tap, the contractor
shall obtain a tapping permit.



   (O)   Potable water supply.



      (1)   Every habitable building shall have a separate potable
cold water service connected to the city water distribution system.



      (2)   (a)   Water piping equal to the inlet size of the
water heater shall be provided from the water service to the hot water
heaters.



         (b)   Water distribution piping, not smaller in size
than the water service, shall be installed to the most remote plumbing
fixture in the system.



      (3)   (a)   Water distribution piping for single-family or
duplex dwellings shall be not less than one-inch diameter pipe or tubing.



         (b)   The Director of Community Development or his or
her designee may require that the water distribution system in buildings
other than single-family and duplex dwellings be designed by a professional
engineer licensed to practice in the state.



            1.   Water distribution piping for all bathrooms,
powder rooms, kitchen, laundry room and other areas with more than one
plumbing fixture, shall have gate valves with identification tags on both the
hot and cold risers.



            2.   All hot water distribution piping shall
include a recirculating return line. The recirculating return line shall be
provided with a shut-off valve at the hot water heater.



      (4)   Fixture supply piping of not less than three-eighths
inch diameter may be installed between the distribution pipe and the fixture
stop valve.



      (5)   The typical water piping isometric (Graphic 5 in §
150.400), may be used to graphically interpret the general water service,
distribution and fixture piping requirements.



      (6)   Water piping shall not be installed in outside walls,
overhangs, unheated areas or walls



adjacent to unhealed areas or joist space adjacent to unheated areas.



   (P)   Water supply to boilers. Boilers shall be equipped with an
approved backflow preventer in the water supply to the boiler.



   (Q)   Hot water supply system protection.



      (1)   Pressure-temperature relief valves and energy cut-off
devices shall be required. Equipment used for heating water or storing hot
water shall be protected by approved safety devices in accordance with one of
the following methods:



         (a)   A separate pressure relief valve and a separate
temperature relief valve;



         (b)   A combination pressure and temperature relief
valve;



         (c)   A separate pressure relief valve and an energy
cut-off device; or



         (d)   Temperature and pressure relief valves and
discharge pipes shall not be reduced. Discharge pipes shall extend to within
six inches of the floor.



      (2)   All safety devices shall meet the current requirements
of the American Standards Association, American Society of Mechanical
Engineers or the Underwriters Laboratories. Listing by Underwriters
Laboratories or American Gas Association shall constitute evidence of
conformance with these standards. Where a device is not listed by any of
these, it must have certification by an approved laboratory as having met
these requirements.



         (a)   Drain cocks or valves for hot water storage tanks.
Drain cocks or valves for emptying shall be installed at the lowest point of
each hot water storage tank.



         (b)   Relief-valve location. Temperature relief valves
shall be so located in the tank as to be actuated by the water in the top
one-eighth of the tank served. Pressure-relief valves may be located adjacent



to the equipment they serve. There shall not be a check valve or shut-off
valve between a relief valve and the heater or tank for which it is installed.



         (c)   Relief outlet wastes. The outlet of a pressure,
temperature or other relief valve, shall not be connected to the drainage
system as a direct waste.



   (R)   Fasteners. All pipes shall be firmly supported by use of
fasteners of appropriate material designed for the purpose.



   (S)   Bidets. All bidets shall be equipped with an accessible mixing
valve.



   (T)   Vacuum breakers. All hose bibs, garage faucets, greenhouse
faucets, solarium faucets, reflecting pond faucets or other similar areas
with water supplies, shall have a nonfreezing, nonremovable vacuum breaker or
built-in anti-siphon device.



   (U)   Water supply piping. All dishwashers, ice makers and other
similar equipment shall have water supply piping in compliance with the City
Plumbing Code, not smaller than the minimum size shown in the manufacturers
installation manual.



   (V)   Efficient plumbing fixtures.



      (1)   The installation of the following water efficient
plumbing fixtures is mandatory (based on a pressure at the fixture of 40 to
50 p.s.i.) in all new construction and in all repair and/or replacement of
fixtures or trim:



 


Fixtures Maximum Flow



Lavatory, sink faucets
 

3.0 GPM



Shower heads
 

3.0 GPM



Urinals, flushometer type
 

3.0 gal. per flush



Urinals, tank type
 

3.0 gal. per flush



Water closets, flushometer type
 

3.0 gal. per flush



Water closets, tank type
 

3.5 gal. per flush




 



      (2)   Water cooled air conditioning systems shall be closed
systems in all new construction and in all new remodeling.



      (3)   All lavatories for public use in new construction or
remodeling be equipped with metering or self-closing faucets.



      (4)   All newly constructed or remodeled car wash
installations be equipped with a water recycling system.



      (5)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this
section, wherever available, any new or replacement plumbing fixtures shall
be a labeled WaterSense product, as specified by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.



(Prior Code, § 9-195)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 04-76, passed
11-1-2004; Ord. 2015-55, passed 9-21-2015)



§ 150.393  GAS PIPING.



   Gas piping shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the
International Mechanical Code, 2003 Edition, International Code Council, Inc.



(Prior Code, § 9-196)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.394  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Trenches shall be left open until the completed work has been
inspected and approved by a representative of the Office of the Director of
Community Development. Trenches shall not be left open for more than 48 hours
after excavation. If the job conditions require an open excavation for a
period exceeding 48 hours, the Director of Community Development may, at his
or her discretion, allow the excavation to remain open with day to day
approval, provided that when the trench is unattended, it will be barricaded
and completely covered with plywood, or other suitable materials, and lighted
with torches or flares during the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.



   (B)   All plumbing and sewer work shall be subject to inspection by
the Department of Community Development.



      (1)   Corrections. Corrections of all faulty or defective work
shall be made within 72 hours.



      (2)   Delay in work. Unreasonable delay in the performance of
any plumbing or drainage work shall be deemed sufficient cause for the
cancellation of any permit which may have been issued for such work.



   (C)   (1)   A water test of the entire plumbing system within a
building shall be conducted by the plumbing contractor or a licensed plumber
in the presence of the Plumbing Inspector. All plumbing work shall remain
exposed until the water test has been completed and the work approved by the
Inspector.



      (2)   After inspection and approval, all drain, waste and
water lines shall be capped or plugged with manufactured fittings designed
for the purpose and shall remain in place until the fixtures are installed by
the plumbing contractor.



(Prior Code, § 9-197)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.395  HEALTH OR SAFETY.



   Wherever compliance with all the provisions of this code fails to
eliminate or alleviate a nuisance which may involve health or safety hazards,
the owner or his or her representative, shall install such additional
plumbing or drainage equipment as may be necessary to abate such nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 9-198)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.396  WORKMANSHIP.



   (A)   Generally. Workmanship shall conform to generally accepted
good practice of the plumbing trade.



   (B)   Removal of fixtures. When in the judgement of the Plumbing
Inspector, a plumbing fixture is used so infrequently that there is danger
that the seal of the trap will be lost by evaporation, the Inspector may
order the fixture removed and the outlet securely capped or plugged.



   (C)   Exterior and interior opening. All openings or sleeves
provided for the passage of piping shall be properly sealed by caulking or
patching with material generally accepted for the purpose and installed to
manufacturers specifications.



(Prior Code, § 9-199)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.397  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Development or his or
her authorized designee, to enforce the provisions of this subchapter and to
make such inspections in connection therewith as may be reasonably necessary.



(Prior Code, § 9-200)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.398  VALIDITY.



   If any section, paragraph, division, clause, sentence or provision of
this subchapter shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be invalid, such judgement shall not affect, impair, invalidate or nullify
the remainder of this subchapter, but the effect thereof shall be confined to
the section, paragraph, division, clause, sentence or provision immediately
involved in the controversy in which such judgement or decree shall be
rendered.



(Prior Code, § 9-202)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.399  APPLICABILITY; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   Adoption of the Plumbing Code and its amendments in §§ 150.380 and
150.381 shall not be construed as preventing the enforcement of or repealing
of the provision of any ordinance, regulation, standard, or code adopted by
the city that is more restrictive than the provisions of the Plumbing Code as
so amended (including without limitation §§ 150.382 through 150.386,
150.391 through 150.398, 150.400 and 150.401). In the event of any such
conflict between the Plumbing Code and any other ordinances, regulation,
standard, or code adopted by the city, the more restrictive provision (as
determined by the Director of Community Development) shall apply.



(Prior Code, § 9-203)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 2015-24, passed
4-6-2015)



§ 150.400  GRAPHIC ILLUSTRATIONS.



   (A)   Graphic 1: loop vent.







 



   (B)   Graphic 2: grease trap.







 



   (C)   Graphic 3: isometric, waste and vent.







 



   (D)   Graphic 4: mud basin.







 



   (E)   Graphic 5: isometric, water piping.







 



   (F)   Graphic 6: aerobic sewage treatment.







 



   (G)   Graphic 7: sealed sump pump.







 



   (H)   Graphic 8: window well riser.







 



   (I)   Graphic 9: draintile and waterstop.







 



(Prior Code, § 9-204)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.401  REGULATING ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND STORMWATER CONNECTION.



   (A)   Purp ose/intent.



      (1)    The purpose of this section is to provide for the
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the
regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the
maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law.



      (2)    This section establishes methods for controlling the
introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.



      (3)   The objectives of this section are:



         (a)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the
city’s municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges
by any user;



         (b)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to
the municipal separate storm sewer system; and



         (c)   To establish legal authority to carry out all
inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this section.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Employees or designees of the
Director of the Public Works Department, designated to enforce this section.



      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.



      CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



      CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of five acres or more. NPDES stormwater phase II permits will be
required for construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre
or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.



      HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated,



stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.



      ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater
discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in division (G) below.



      ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Either of the following:



         (a)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the
storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency; or



         (b)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a
commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not
been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by an
authorized enforcement agency.



      INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial
permits as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14), or any successor provision.



      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group or general area-wide basis.



      NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system
that is not composed entirely of stormwater.



      PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership,
firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the
owner or as the owner’s agent.



      POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
POLLUTANTS may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances and accumulations, so that same may cause or
contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.



      PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.



      STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly-owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage
structures.



      STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation.



      STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A document which describes
the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the
actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater
conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.



      WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.



   (C)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all water entering
the storm drain system generated on



any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.



   (D)   Responsibility for administration. The Public Works Department
shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this section. Any
powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may
be delegated in writing by the Director of the authorized enforcement agency
to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ
of the agency.



   (E)   Severability. The provisions of this section are hereby
declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of
this section or the application thereof to any person, establishment or
circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the
other provisions or application of this section.



   (F)   Ultimate responsibility. The standards set forth herein and
promulgated pursuant to this section are minimum standards; therefore this
section does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure
that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of
pollutants.



   (G)   Discharge prohibitions.



      (1)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.



         (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any
materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water
quality standards, other than stormwater.



         (b)   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any
illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described
as follows:



            1.   The following discharges are exempt from
discharge prohibitions established by this section: water line flushing or
other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated



pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active
groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning
condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian
habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less
than one PPM chlorine), firefighting activities and any other water source
not containing pollutants;



            2.   Discharges specified in writing by the
authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and
safety;



            3.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but
requires a written notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to
the time of the test;



            4.   The prohibition shall not apply to any
non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority
of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver,
or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.



      (2)   Prohibition of illicit connections.



         (a)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.



         (b)   This prohibition expressly includes, without
limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.



         (c)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
section if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows
such a connection to continue.



   (H)   Suspension of MS4 access.



      (1)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency
situations. The Public Works Department may, without prior notice, suspend
MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails
to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized
enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize
danger to persons.



      (2)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.



         (a)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of
this section may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would
abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will
notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator
may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and
hearing.



         (b)   A person commits an offense if the person
reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section,
without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency.



   (I)   Industrial or construction activity discharges. Any person
subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge
permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance
with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Public Works
Department prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.



   (J)   Monitoring of discharges.



      (1)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities
that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity,
including construction activity.



      (2)   Access to facilities.



         (a)   The Public Works Department shall be permitted to
enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this section as
often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this section. If a
discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification
and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency.



         (b)   Facility operators shall allow the Public Works
Department ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.



         (c)   The Public Works Department shall have the right
to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the
opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility’s stormwater discharge, it is a violation of this
section to tamper with any such device.



         (d)   The Public Works Department has the right to
require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own
expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy. It is a violation of this section to
tamper with any such device.



         (e)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and
easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Public Works
Department and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall
be borne by the operator.



         (f)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Public Works
Department access to a permitted



facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this section.
A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the
person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the
permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this section.



         (g)   If the Public Works Department has been refused
access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and
he or she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be
a violation of this section, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample
as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with this section or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the
authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any
court of competent jurisdiction.



   (K)   Requirement to prevent, control and reduce stormwater
pollutants by the use of best management practices. The Public Works
Department shall have the authority to adopt requirements identifying best
management practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation or facility which may
cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm
drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at his or her own
expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or
watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said
person’s expense, additional structural and non- structural BMPs to prevent
the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity,
to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMPs shall be



part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for
compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.



   (L)   Watercourse protection. Every person owning property through
which a watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee, shall keep and
maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash,
debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such
structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.



   (M)   Notification of spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of
law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or
responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has
information of any known or suspected release of materials which are
resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into
stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the United States, said
person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment
and cleanup of such release, in the event of such a release of hazardous
materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies
of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release
of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized
enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next
business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the Public Works Department within
three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited
materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner
or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record
of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such
records shall be retained for at least three years.



   (N)   Enforcement.



      (1)   Notice of violation.



         (a)   Whenever the Public Works Department finds that a
person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this
section, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written
notice of violation to the responsible person.



         (b)   Such notice may require without limitation:



            1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses and
reporting;



            2.   The elimination of illicit connections or
discharges;



            3.   That violating discharges, practices or
operations shall cease and desist;



            4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater
pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;



            5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and/or



            6.   The implementation of source control or
treatment BMPs.



         (c)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of
affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within
which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within
the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental
agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
violator and any charges shall become a special assessment against the
property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the
assessment.



      (2)   Enforcement of violation notice. In the event that a
person fails to take corrective action pursuant to a notice of violation,
such failure shall subject such person to any or all of the remedies set
forth in divisions (Q) through (T) below.



   (O)   Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice
of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement
agency. The notice of appeal must be received within five days from the date
of the notice of violation by the City Clerk. The City Manager (or the
Manager’s designee) shall conduct the hearing on the appeal within 21 days
from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the City
Manager or the Manager’s designee, which shall be issued in writing, shall
be final.



   (P)   Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not
been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of
violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of
the City Manager (or the Manager’s designee) upholding the decision of the
authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency shall have the right to enter upon the subject private
property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate
the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any
person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to
allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the
premises for the purposes set forth above.



   (Q)   Cost of abatement of the violation.



      (1)   Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the
owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest with the
City Clerk objecting to the amount of the assessment within 15 days. The City
Manager (or the Manager’s designee) shall review such objection within 15
days and thereafter issue a written decision with respect to such ejection.
The decision of the City Manager or the Manager’s designee shall be final.



      (2)   If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as
determined by the decision of the City Manager or the Manager’s designee or
by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien
on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of
the provisions of this section shall become liable to the city by reason of
such violation.



   (R)   Fines and penalties; injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful
for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this section. If a person has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of this section, the authorized enforcement agency may
levy fines and penalties in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per day for each
such violation; each day that a violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate violation, in addition, the enforcement agency may petition for a
preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.



   (S)   Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the
enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section is a
threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a
public nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator’s
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken.



   (T)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this section
are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable
federal, state or local law, and it is within the discretion of the
authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.



   (U)   Other regulations and requirements. Compliance with the terms
and provisions of this section shall not excuse or be deemed in lieu of
compliance with other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations. In the
event that any provision of this section conflicts with any provision of any
other



ordinance or regulation of the city, the more restrictive provision (as
determined by the enforcement agency) shall control.



(Ord. 2014-34, passed 9-2-2014)



PLUMBERS



§ 150.415  USE OF PLUMBER’S NAME.



   No plumber shall allow his or her name to be used by any other party or
person not in his or her employ directly or indirectly for the purpose of
doing or obtaining any work under his or her license.



(Prior Code, § 9-209)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



REGULATING SWIMMING POOL CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND USE



§ 150.430  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   Every swimming pool constructed, installed or maintained shall
hereafter comply with all applicable provisions of this code and this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 9-212)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.431  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BACKWASH PIPING. The piping which extends from the backwash outlet of
the filters to its terminus at the point of disposal.



   CARTRIDGE FILTER. A filter using filter cartridges.



   DESIGN RATE. The average flow rate over the filtration cycle.



   DIATOMITE TYPE FILTER. A filter designed to be used with filter aid.



   FACE PIPING. The piping with all valves and fittings which is used to
connect the filter system together as a unit.



   FILTER. Any material or apparatus by which water is clarified.



   FILTER CARTRIDGE. A disposable or renewable filter element which
employs a filter aid.



   INLET. The fitting or opening through which the filtered water enters
the pool.



   MAIN DRAIN. The outlet(s) at the deep portion of the pool through which
the main flow of water leaves the pool when being drained or circulated.



   MAIN SUCTION. The line connecting the main drain to the pump.



   OTHER POOLS OF WATER. Includes whirlpools, spas, hot tubs, therapy
pools, soakers and other similar structures that have a water surface area
over 50 square feet measured at normal operating levels.



   POOL DEPTHS. The distance between the floor of the pool and the maximum
operating level when the pool is in use.



   POOL FLOOR. That portion of the pool that is horizontal or inclined
less than 45 degrees to the vertical from the horizontal.



   POOL WALKS/DECKS. The surfaced area around the pool.



   POOL WALL. That portion of the pool that is vertical or inclined more
than 45 degrees to the vertical from the horizontal.



   PRIVATE POOL. One used in conjunction with a single-family residence
and constructed on the same zoning lot as the principle building, used and
intended to be used solely by the owner or occupant and his or her family and
friends.



   PUBLIC POOL. All other pools other than private swimming pools as
defined herein.



   RECIRCULATING PIPING. The piping from the pool to the filter and return
to the pool, through which the water circulates.



   RETURN PIPING. The piping which carries the filtered water from the
filter to the pool.



   SAFETY ROPE ANCHORS. Anchors at the transition point.



   SAND FILTER. A filter that employs sand as the filter media.



   SKIMMER BASKET. An easily removable and cleanable basket located in the
recirculating piping system through which all overflow water must pass.



   SKIMMER FILTER. A recirculating skimmer with a filter forming an
integral part of the device.



   SWIMMING POOL. A receptacle for water, or an artificial basin of water,
either above-ground or subsurface, indoor or outdoors, having a depth at any
point in excess of two feet and a surface area exceeding 150 square feet,
intended for the use of persons with the purpose of emersion, partial
emersion or swimming and including all appurtenant equipment.



   TRANSITION POINT. A point where floor slope changes between shallow and
deep area.



   UNDERDRAIN. An appurtenance at the bottom of the filter to assure equal
distribution of water through the filter media.



   VACUUM FITTING. The fitting in the wall of the pool which is used as a
convenient outlet for connecting the underwater suction cleaning equipment,
or a recirculating skimmer.



   VACUUM PIPING. The piping which connects the vacuum fitting to the pump
suction.



(Prior Code, § 9-213)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.432  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   (1)   Before proceeding with the erection, construction,
alteration or repair of any swimming pool, whirlpool, spa, hot tub, therapy
pool, soaker and other similar structures, a building permit application for
such erection, construction, alteration or repair shall be filed with the
Director of Community Development.



      (2)   Applications for permits shall be filed by the owner or
representative, and shall set forth the location of the proposed work, legal
description of the land and shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing the
location of the proposed improvements, in accordance with the current Zoning
Code of the city, and all other existing buildings, structures and utilities
on the premises.



   (B)   Along with said application and plot plan, the owner or
representative shall submit two sets of drawings and specifications, prepared
and certified by an architect or structural engineer registered in the state.



   (C)   Such plans shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Pool dimensions, depths and volume in gallons;



      (2)   Type and size of filter systems, filtration and backwash
capacities;



      (3)   Pool piping layout, with all pipe sizes and valves shown
and types of materials to be used;



      (4)   The rated capacity and head at filtration and backwash
flows of the pool pump in gallons per minute with the size and type of motor;



      (5)   Location and type of waste disposal system;



      (6)   Structural, design and details; and



      (7)   Each application for permit to construct a public pool
shall be accompanied by an approved permit for the construction issued by the
State Department of Public Health in accordance with provisions of the laws
of the state.



(Prior Code, § 9-214)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.433  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   The plan review and building permit fee for residential
swimming pool construction shall be in accordance with the most recent fee
schedule, approved by the City Council, on file in the Office of the Director
of Community Development.



   (B)   The plan review and building permit fee for public pool
construction shall be in accordance with the most recent fee schedule,
approved by the City Council, on file in the Office of the Director of
Community Development.



   (C)   The plan review and building permit fee for whirlpools, spas,
hot tubs, therapy pools, soakers and similar structures shall be in
accordance with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council,
on file in the Office of the Director of Community Development.



   (D)   The plumbing permit fee for pool piping shall be in accordance
with the most recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council, on file in
the Office of the Director of Community Development.



   (E)   The electrical permit fee shall be in accordance with the most
recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council, on file in the Office of
the Director of Community Development.



   (F)   The fence permit fee shall be in accordance with the most
recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council, on file in the Office of
the Director of Community Development.



(Prior Code, § 9-215)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.434  INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   The owner or representative shall follow the policy procedures
established by the Director of Community Development in calling for the
following inspections.



   (A)   After excavation, but before any concrete is placed.



      (1)   Reinforcement steel;



      (2)   Electrical and electrical grounding; and



      (3)   Skimmers, inlets, hydrostatic relief valve, main drain
and other pool piping.



   (B)   Deck and trench inspection.



      (1)   Deck reinforcement and grounding of ladders, handrails,
diving board, slides, lights and other items that require grounding by the
City Electrical Code;



      (2)   Underground pool piping for skimmers, main drain, inlets
and pool fill piping;



      (3)   Underground sanitary sewer piping; and



      (4)   Underground electric and gas piping.



   (C)   Final inspection. After completion of the pool and before use,
the following items shall be inspected and approved:



      (1)   General clean up;



      (2)   Final grading;



      (3)   Test kit and cleaning equipment;



      (4)   Face and backwash piping;



      (5)   Filter air release;



      (6)   Influent and/or effluent gauges;



      (7)   Reclamation system or sewer connection;



      (8)   Heater relief valve;



      (9)   Heater breaching;



      (10)   Gas supply piping;



      (11)   Fresh water supply piping;



      (12)   The following valves shall be identified with all
weather tags and indexed; the main, drain, skimmer(s) and inlet(s);



      (13)   GFI transformer and equipment installed and circuit
breakers identified;



      (14)   Safety rope and floats on-site;



      (15)   Four-foot non-climbable fence and self-latching,
self-closing gates installed;



      (16)   Ladders, stairs and handrails installed;



      (17)   No overhead electrical wires within ten feet or pool
area;



      (18)   Diving board and/or slide installed per specifications;



      (19)   Non-slip deck surface installed per code;



      (20)   Flood lights, spot lights, yard lights per city code
and ordinances; and



      (21)   House system ground and meter jumper.



(Prior Code, § 9-216)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.435  CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Structural design.



      (1)   STRUCTURAL DESIGN is that portion of the pool structure
below grade which shall be engineered and designed to withstand the expected
forces to which it may be subjected and shall be constructed of reinforced
concrete.



      (2)   Inground pools constructed of materials other than
reinforced concrete shall be subject to review by the Construction Codes
Commission pursuant to § 150.152(B).



   (B)   Wall slopes. Wall slopes shall be constructed not to exceed
more than one foot horizontal in five feet vertical.



   (C)   Floor slopes.



      (1)   The slope of the floor on the shallow side of transition
point shall not exceed one foot vertical to seven feet horizontal.



      (2)   The transition point between shallow and deep water
shall not be more than five feet deep.



   (D)   Diving pools.



      (1)   When a pool is intended to be equipped with a diving
board, the wall and floor slopes and other physical configurations of the
diving bowl shall conform to the recommended design of the National Spa and
Pool Institute.



      (2)   See Graphics A and B below for minimum water surface
shape.



   (E)   Swimming pool decks.



      (1)   A swimming pool deck or walk not less than four feet
wide shall be required for 66% of the pool perimeter.



      (2)   Where a deck is not provided, safety rope, gutter or
handhold shall be constructed not more than two inches below the normal
operating level of the water.



   Graphic A: Minimum Water Surface Shape



 



   Graphic B: Minimum Water Surface Shape



 



(Prior Code, § 9-217)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.436  FILTER.



   (A)   Every swimming pool shall be equipped with a recirculating
system capable of filtering the entire contents of the pool within 12 hours.



   (B)   All filters shall be approved by the National Sanitation
Foundation and the National Spa and Pool Institute.



      (1)   Filters shall be capable of maintaining the clarity of
the water to permit the ready identification, through an eight foot depth of
water, of a disc two inches in diameter which is divided into four quadrants
in alternate colors of red and white.



      (2)   Filter capacity shall be such that it need not be
cleaned more frequently than once every four days under proper conditions of
water, pool and filter operation.



      (3)   All pressure filters shall be equipped with an influent
pressure gauge to determine the pressure and frequency of cleaning.



      (4)   All pressure filter systems shall be equipped with an
air release at the high point in the system. Each sand filter shall be
provided with a visual means of determining when the filter has been restored
to original cleanliness.



      (5)   Operating instructions shall be posted on every filter
system. All valves shall be property designated, indicating their purpose.



(Prior Code, § 9-218)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.437  SAND PRESSURE FILTER SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Sand filters shall be used for all residential swimming pools
installed on property served by the public sanitary sewer system.



   (B)   The main swimming pool drain shall connect to the sanitary
sewer through an indirect waste or other approved means.



(Prior Code, § 9-219)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.438  DIATOMITE FILTER SPECIFICATIONS.



   Diatomite filters equipped with a separator shall be used for
commercial hot tubs, whirlpools, spas, therapy pools, soakers and other
similar structures.



(Prior Code, § 9-220)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.439  CARTRIDGE TYPE FITTERS.



   Cartridge type filters shall be used for residential whirlpools, hot
tubs, spas, therapy pools, soakers and other similar structures.



(Prior Code, § 9-221)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.440  RECIRCULATING PUMPS.



   (A)   Recirculating pumps shall have sufficient capacity to provide
the rated flows of the filter system, without exceeding the head loss at
which the pumps will deliver such flows.



   (B)   Pump motors shall not be operated at an overload which exceeds
the service factor.



      (1)   Pool pumps shall be equipped on the inlet side with
approved type hair and lint strainers, except for vacuum type filters where
water passes through a filter before reaching pumps.



      (2)   The strainer baskets shall be noncorrosive and have an
open screen surface of at least four times the cross sectional area of the
inlet pipe.



(Prior Code, § 9-222)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.441  POOL PLUMBING.



   (A)   Pool piping shall be sized to permit the rated flows for
filtering and cleaning, without exceeding the maximum head at which the pump
will provide such flows.



   (B)   The water velocity in the pool piping shall not exceed ten
feet per second for pressure pipe and six feet per second for suction pipe.



   (C)   The recirculating piping and fittings shall meet the following
requirements.



      (1)   A main drain connected with two-inch pipe shall be
placed at the deepest point in every swimming pool, whirlpool, spa, hot tub,
therapy pool soaker and other similar structures.



      (2)   Pool recirculation piping shall be of corrosive
resistant material capable of withstanding 100 p.s.i.



      (3)   Filter water inlet(s) shall be provided in sufficient
quantity and properly spaced to provide a maximum circulation of the main
body and surface of the pool water.



      (4)   (a)   In every swimming pool, at least one skimming
device shall be provided for each 500 square feet of surface area or fraction
thereof.



         (b)   Skimming devices shall be built into the pool wall
and shall develop sufficient velocity on the water surface to induce floating
oils and waste into the skimmer from the total pool area.



         (c)   Piping and other parts of the skimming system
shall be designed for a total capacity of at least 50% of the required filter
flow of the recirculation system.



         (d)   Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow through
rate of at least 30 gallons of water per minute.



         (e)   The skimmer water line shall be run separate and
direct to related valve or pump equipment.



         (f)   An easily removable and cleanable basket or screen
through which all overflow water must pass, shall be provided to trap solids.



         (g)   The skimmer weir shall be automatically self
adjustable and shall operate freely with continuous action to variations and
water levels over a range of not less than four inches.



         (h)   The skimmers shall meet National Sanitation
Foundation Standards,



      (5)   (a)   A two-inch hydrostatic relief valve and main
drain shall be provided for pools over 800 square feet in area at the deepest
point of the pool.



         (b)   The hydrostatic relief valve shall be of brass
material only.



         (c)   The hydrostatic valve shall be installed per the
manufacturers specifications or recognized standard installations.



      (6)   Swimming pool drainage shall be only through the
recirculating system and shall discharge into the sanitary sewer system by
means of an indirect waste.



      (7)   Swimming pool piping manifolds shall not be installed
under the deck area or other inaccessible locations.



      (8)   (a)   A plumbing permit is required for that portion
of a piping installation that requires an indirect waste or fill spout and
shall be accomplished by a licensed and bonded plumbing contractor registered
in the city in accordance with the provisions of § 150.382.



         (b)   All other matters, not covered by this subchapter
and the City Building Code shall comply with the most current State Plumbing
Code.



(Prior Code, § 9-223)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.442  VALVES.



   Fullway valves shall be installed throughout, to ensure proper
functioning of the filtration and piping system.



   (A)   A valve shall be installed on the main suction line located in
an accessible place outside the walls of the pool when the pump is below
overflow rim of the pool.



   (B)   (1)   Valves up to and including two inches in size shall
be brass.



      (2)   Sizes over two inches may have cast iron or brass bodies.



      (3)   All working parts of valves shall be noncorrosive
material.



   (C)   Combination valves may be installed if the materials and
design comply with the intent of these standards.



(Prior Code, § 9-224)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.443  HEATERS.



   Pool boilers shall comply with all applicable American Standard
approved requirements, including ASME Standards.



   (A)   Propane tanks shall be installed in accord with the most
current edition of NFPA Pamphlet #58, Liquified Petroleum Gases.



   (B)   Gas fired boiler installations shall comply with the BOCA
National Mechanical Code/1990 Edition and be AGA listed.



   (C)   Oil fired boiler installations shall comply with the BOCA
National Mechanical Code/1990 Edition, and the manufacturer’s installation
specifications.



   (D)   Electric boiler installation shall comply with the city
electrical requirements herein and the National Electric Code.



   (E)   Solar boilers and heaters installation shall be designed by a
registered architect or engineer.



   (F)   Solar panels, propane tanks, cabanas, fences and/or equipment
or structures may be subject to review pursuant to § 150.147(B) of the
Building Code which states, “Architectural Design: The City Council hereby
finds that excessive similarity, dissimilarity or inappropriateness in
exterior design and appearance of buildings, awnings, signs, fences and other
structures, in relation to the prevailing appearance of property in the
vicinity thereof adversely affects the desirability of immediate and
neighboring areas and impairs the benefits of occupancy of existing property
in such areas, impairs the stability and taxable value of land and buildings
in such areas, prevents the most appropriate use of real estate and the most
appropriate development of such areas, produces degeneration of property in
such areas with attendant deterioration conditions affecting the public
health, safety, comfort, morals and well being of the citizens thereof,
deprives the city of tax revenue which it otherwise could receive and
destroys a proper balance in relationship between the taxable value of real
property in such areas and the cost of the municipal services provided
therefor.”



(Prior Code, § 9-225)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.444  WATER SUPPLY.



   No source of water other than metered water secured from the city
municipal water production and distribution system shall be used to fill
swimming pools. Fresh water supply shall be copper, galvanized or plastic
pipe as permitted by the State Plumbing Code.



(Prior Code, § 9-226)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.445  ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Conformance with City Electrical Code. All pool and equipment
wiring shall conform to the current City Electrical Code and shall be
installed in accordance with the graphic illustration. See graphic below.



   (B)   Conformance with National Electric Code. Pool lighting shall
comply with the National Electric Code.



   Pool Electric Grounding System



   (Diagram in accordance with the National Electrical Code)







   (C)   Pool electrical grounding system general notes.



      (1)   All grounding wire shall be No. 8 copper grounding
cable, except as indicated for power supply conduits.



      (2)   Install No. 8 AWG (minimum) unbroken copper wire from
ground loop to eight foot driven ground rod or other means of grounding
permitted in the National Electric Code 1990 Edition, 250-81.



      (3)   Where grounding clamps are used, they shall be of the
approved type.



      (4)   Locate deck box in well drained area four feet from pool
perimeter.



      (5)   All metal fittings such as inlets, vacuum fittings and
the like, must be grounded to reinforcing steel independently when plastic
pipe is used. See Detail G.



      (6)   Metal base to ground pump and motor to filter, if
plastic pipe or dielectric fittings are used in face piping.



      (7)   All electrical fixtures shall be U.L. approved.



      (8)   Detail D is required for grounding only when copper or
galvanized piping is installed.



      (9)   Detail F illustrates a typical method for grounding grab
rails, handrails, ladders and the like.



      (10)   When metal main drain frame and grate is installed,
ground frame to reinforcing steel.



 


Legend




Circled Number

 

Number Required

 

Description






12

 

1

 
8 ft.-driven ground



11

 

1

 
Steel trusses



10

 

As required

 
Adjustable inlet fitting



9

 

1

 
Diving stand with board



8

 

1

 
Junction deck box (brass)



7

 

2

 
Wall anchors



6

 

1

 
Fill line



5

 

1

 
Underwater light and niche



4

 

1

 
Main drain sump and grate



3

 

1

 
Surface skimmer



2

 

1

 
Set of grab rails or ladder



1

 

1

 
Filter unit with pump and motor




 



(Prior Code, § 9-227)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.446  CHEMICAL TREATMENT.



   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any swimming pool to
properly treat pool water with approved chemicals. A test kit with permanent
color standard shall be provided for all pools.



(Prior Code, § 9-228)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.447  SAFETY FEATURES AND DEVICES.



   (A)   Steps or ladders. Two or more means of egress by steps or
ladders shall be provided for all swimming pools. At least one such means of
egress shall be located at the deep end and one at the shallow end of the
pool. Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of nonslip materials.
Ladders or step holds shall have handrails on both sides.



   (B)   Stairs. When stairs are designed and installed in any swimming
pool, they shall meet the following requirements:



      (1)   Maximum raise of nine inches;



      (2)   Minimum tread width of 12 inches;



      (3)   The extreme limits of the stair shall be defined by
handrails or other permanent structures; and



      (4)   Stairs designed and installed wider than seven feet
shall be visibly defined.



   (C)   Safety rope anchors. Safety rope anchors shall be installed at
the transition point, except when the maximum water depth does not exceed
five feet.



   (D)   Fence. A fence shall be erected around the swimming pool area
or around the entire property on which the pool is contained. Such
nonclimbable fence shall be not less than four feet in height and shall be
equipped with gates having a self-latching, self-closing device. The
self-latching, self-closing device shall be installed on the interior without
an exterior release.



   (E)   Variation. For variation, see § 150.152(B).



(Prior Code, § 9-229)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.448  VIOLATION; PROCEDURES.



   See § 150.999



(Prior Code, § 9-230)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



SATELLITE ANTENNAS



§ 150.460  SATELLITE ANTENNAS REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It is the determination of the city that receive-only
satellite antennas of all sizes, shapes, varieties and uses, constitute
physical additions to the city of such a character and degree of
unsightliness that their construction, placement, installation and use
require close examination and constant review by the city.



   (B)   The apparent demand for installation of commercial and private
television receive-only antennas (TVROs) in the city has been cause for
concern since the industry supplying the antenna has not developed recognized
standards. The structures required are quite different in appearance from
typical structures anticipated by the codes of the city, and the structures
can be unsightly nuisances not compatible with existing structures and land
uses in the city.



   (C)   Adequate receptions by a TVRO requires a “dish” of
approximately ten-foot diameter positioned for clear line of sight to a band
of video broadcast satellites. The appearance of this “dish” from
neighboring properties and the removal of vegetation blocking line of sight
are major undesirable consequences of such “dishes.”



   (D)   That in view of the foregoing and to provide for reasonable
regulation, all satellite antennas, including all forms of receivers of
satellite transmissions, should be considered structures subject to the terms
of the city code and shall be subject to all ordinances relating to
structures.



   (E)   That to minimize the impact of the installation of satellite
dishes, particularly in residential zones, consideration should be given by
residents and by the appropriate authorities to the combining of service to
two or more residences by a single satellite dish.



(Prior Code, § 9-233)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.461  INSTALLATION.



   All installations of satellite antennas shall be considered
extraordinary structures and may only be installed after such structure has
been approved by the Director of Community Development, or if deemed
necessary, by the Building Review Board, and a building permit has been
obtained prior to commencing installation.



(Prior Code, § 9-234)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.462  RESIDENTIAL ZONE.



   No building permit shall be granted for satellite antennas in a
residential zone unless:



   (A)   The applicant demonstrates that the intended use is authorized
under applicable federal law;



   (B)   The smallest practical size shall be used for any dish and any
enclosing fence or shed. Such dish shall be of a size no greater than 11 feet
in its maximum dimension. Any such dish shall be mounted as close to the
ground as possible and shall not rise from the ground in excess of 15 feet in
height at its maximum point. Elevated installations on poles or roofs are
prohibited;



   (C)   The construction and installation of satellite antennas shall
strictly conform to all city ordinances;



   (D)   The applicant demonstrates that the proposed location is such
that during the winter season, no part of the dish structure will be visible
to neighbors and the general public, from a point that is between the ground
level and ten feet above ground level on surrounding property;



   (E)   Not more than one such satellite antenna may be installed on a
single zoning lot;



   (F)   In every case, the installation shall be located in the rear
or side yards. The location shall not be in the required setback areas unless
encroachment in the required side or rear setback areas provides an
acceptable location if otherwise in conformity with all of the other
provisions of this subchapter. In such case, a variation is required and the
applicant shall file a petition with the Zoning Board of Appeals; and



   (G)   All installations shall exhibit architectural quality,
coloration to blend with surroundings and structural integrity. Experimental
or temporary installations, inferior materials and questionable stability are
not permitted. In every case, the entire installation including any sheds,
fences or other housing used to cause compliance with division (D) above,
must be compatible with the character of the surrounding area of the city,
and shall have no adverse impact on the property, the neighborhood or general
public; and to the extent possible, screening by planting shall be preferred.
Permanent foundations shall be adequate for anticipated wind loads.
Electrical connections shall be low voltage direct or pulsed current, except
where the device connected is Underwriters Laboratory approved, in which case
alternating current will be allowed to Code requirements. Consideration shall
be given to protection of children, as in the case of an attractive nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 9-235)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.463  NONRESIDENTIAL ZONE.



   No building permit shall be granted for satellite antennas in a
nonresidential zone unless:



   (A)   The applicant demonstrates that the intended use is authorized
under applicable federal law;



   (B)   The smallest practical size shall be used for any dish. Such
dish shall be of a size no greater than 11 feet in its maximum dimension. Any
such dish to be mounted on a roof top shall be reviewed by a licensed
engineer or architect. No installation shall exceed the height of any
existing structure on the building or surrounding buildings, provided that
the overall height of the satellite antenna does not exceed 35 feet from
ground to the top of the antenna;



   (C)   The construction and installation of satellite antennas shall
strictly conform to all city ordinances;



   (D)   Not more than one such satellite antenna may be installed on a
single zoning lot;



   (E)   Where nonresidential property abuts residential property, the
antenna location shall comply with the requirements of division (F) below on
the abutting side; and



   (F)   All installations shall exhibit architectural quality,
coloration to blend with surroundings and structural integrity. Experimental
or temporary installations, inferior materials and questionable stability are
not permitted. In every case, the entire installation must be compatible with
the character of the surrounding area of the city. Permanent foundations
shall be adequate for anticipated wind loads. Electrical connections shall be
low voltage direct or pulsed current, except where the device connected is
Underwriters Laboratory approved, in which case alternating current will be
allowed to code requirements. Consideration shall be given to protection of
children as in the case of an attractive nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 9-236)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.464  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   If the staff refers an application for permit to the Building
Review Board, application forms may be obtained from the Office of the
Director of Community Development.



   (B)   In such cases, applications shall be reviewed by the Building
Review Board, and if applicable, the City Council, in accordance with the
rules and regulations as shall be established by the Building Review Board
from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 9-237)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.465  APPLICATION.



   Whether approved by the Director of Community Development or the
Building Review Board, requests for permits shall include as part of the
application, all items generally required for Building Review Board approval
plus the following:



   (A)   Plot plan showing proposed location and dish projection at
extremes of the satellite band to be viewed:



      (1)   This requirement will be satisfied by drawing radial
lines from a point representing the pivot point of the dish, to each end of
the satellite band, drawing a line perpendicular to each radial at a
distance, scaled to the distance between the rim of the dish to the pivot
point;



      (2)   Each perpendicular line should be scaled to the diameter
of the dish, to show its maximum projection on the plan at the extremes of
its satellite scan;



      (3)   Compass directions will be adequate for this
requirement; and



      (4)   Note: The typical drawings, Exhibit 1 and Exhibit 2, at
the end of this section, may be used to graphically interpret regulations of
this section.



   (B)   Plans and specifications for the installation, including
elevations, dish configuration, mount, foundation and any motorization,
fencing, shed or other proposed housing;



   (C)   Complete description of any vegetation on the property;



   (D)   Landscape plan for completely screening the installation from
neighboring and street view pursuant to, and as required by §§ 150.462(D),
and 150.463(E); and



   (E)   Location of principal structures on adjacent lots.



   Exhibit 1







   Exhibit 2







(Prior Code, § 9-238)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.466  FEES.



   Fees for the installation of satellite antennas shall be as established
by the City Council from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 9-239)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.467  COMPLIANCE.



   Any antenna in place on the effective date of this subchapter which has
been installed pursuant to a city building permit, issued prior to May 3,
1982, is deemed to be in compliance with this subchapter. All other antennas
shall immediately comply with this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 9-240)  (Ord. 1312, passed 6-7-1982; Ord. 94-11B, passed
4-21-1994)



DRIVE APPROACHES



§ 150.480  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVE APPROACH. A way or means of vehicular access from that portion of
a street or highway used for vehicular travel (roadway) to the adjacent
property, including the portion of a sidewalk lying within said way or means
of access.



   DWELLING UNIT. Consists of one or more rooms which are arranged,
designed or used as living quarters for one family only.



   PARKWAY. The part of a street or highway, on each side of the pavement
or roadway thereof, lying between the outer edge of the pavement or roadway
and the property lines bounding the street.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   ROADWAY. The portion of a street, improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.



   SIDEWALK. The improved portion of a street between the curb lines, or
the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for
the use of pedestrians.



   STREET or HIGHWAY. Public land improved or unimproved, which affords a
primary means of access to abutting property whether designated as a street,
avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, throughway, right-of-way or
otherwise, but does not include private roads and driveways to buildings.



(Prior Code, § 9-245)  (Ord. 940, passed 3-3-1975; Ord. 94-11B, passed
4-21-1994)



§ 150.481  UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE OR MOVE VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT OVER, ACROSS
OR UPON CURBS, PARKWAYS AND SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall operate or move any vehicle, or equipment intended for
the purpose of construction, excavation, grading or clearing from the roadway
to private property over, across or upon any curb, parkway or sidewalk of the
city, except by way of duly authorized drive approach, except when permitted
to do otherwise by an authorized representative of the city. This prohibition
shall not apply to the equipment of the city, such as grass mowers and snow
plows or to equipment of that type privately owned and operated for
maintenance purposes.



(Prior Code, § 9-246)  (Ord. 940, passed 3-3-1975; Ord. 94-11B, passed
4-21-1994)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.482  PERMIT; REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall hereafter construct, reconstruct, build,
establish or maintain any drive approach over, across or upon any portion of
a public curb, parkway or sidewalk without first having obtained a permit for
the drive approach from the Office of the Director of Community Development.



   (B)   In cases where a drive approach permit is requested for other
than residence or general residence zoned districts, authorization for
issuance of a permit and stipulation as to specifications for drive approach
construction shall be approved by the City Council.



   (C)   A plot plan showing the grade and location of the proposed
drive approach shall be submitted to the Office of the Director of Community
Development with an application for a permit.



   (D)   The Director of Community Development shall have the authority
to issue temporary drive approach permits for construction purposes if the
use of the existing drive approach would create excessive damage to private
property, endanger underground utilities, or make a difficult circuitous
route for the purpose of delivering material or equipment to the job
location. The temporary drive approach permit may be issued upon payment of
the required fee and deposit to assure restoration of the public property.
The cash bond shall be returned to the depositor upon restoration of the
public property to its original condition.



(Prior Code, § 9-247)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.483  PERMIT; FEE.



   Drive approach permit fees shall be as follows:



 

For all new drive approaches in the residential zoned districts
 
Shall be in accordance with the most recent fee schedule approved by the City
Council and on file in the Office of the Director of Community Development


For drive approaches in general residence zoned districts
 
Same as above


For new drive approaches in office and business zoned districts
 
Same as above


For all resurfacing work or reconstruction of an existing drive approach
 
Shall be 1/2 of the applicable fee for new construction



 



(Prior Code, § 9-248)  (Ord. 940, passed 3-3-1975; Ord. 1296, passed
4-5-1982; Ord. 1498, passed 4-13-1985; Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.484  PERMIT; CONDITIONS.



   Every permit for the construction of a drive approach shall be subject
to the condition that the owner of the property served by such drive approach
will, at his or her own expense, remove such drive approach and construct or
restore the curb, parkway, sidewalk and street gradient upon a change from
the use which necessitated the existence of such drive approach, or the
abandonment of the use of such drive approach.



(Prior Code, § 9-249)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.485  GUARANTEE DEPOSIT.



   (A)   (1)   Before issuance of a permit as provided in §
150.482, a guarantee deposit shall be submitted in accordance with the most
recent fee schedule, approved by the City Council, on file in the Office of
the Director of Community Development to guarantee the proper completion of
the drive approach and proper restoration of pavement, curb, parkway,
sidewalk or other improvement. If any such pavement, curb, parkway, sidewalk
or other improvement is damaged and not repaired upon completion of the drive
approach, the Director of Community Development shall cause the repairs to be
made, the cost of which plus all expenses incurred by the city as a result of
noncompliance with this subchapter shall be deducted from the guarantee
deposit.



      (2)   The guarantee deposit or the residuum of such shall be
returned to the depositor upon completion of the work and final inspection of
the premises.



   (B)   In those cases where extensive modifications of existing
public improvements are required, the guarantee deposit shall be increased to
an amount equal to an estimated cost of the project.



   (C)   If a drive approach for which a permit has been issued is not
completed in accordance with this subchapter within six calendar months from
the date of such permit, or prior to occupancy of the building served by the
drive approach, the Director of Community Development may declare the
applicant in default, the permit void and proceed to have the incomplete
drive approach removed and the site restored to the condition existing prior
to the issuance of such permit, or, in the alternative, may proceed to have
the drive approach completed. The cost of such removal or completion work
shall be deducted from the guarantee deposit.



   (D)   The Director of Community Development may grant an extension
of time for completion of such drive approach if weather conditions are such
that it is impractical to apply finishing materials. The extension of time
however, shall not exceed 12-calendar months from the date of issuance of the
original permit.



(Prior Code, § 9-250)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.486  JURISDICTION.



   All work of construction, reconstruction, resurfacing and maintenance
of drive approaches shall be done under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Community Development in accordance with pertinent ordinances of the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-251)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.487  CONSTRUCTION; SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Size and shape. The width at the property line shall be a
minimum of nine feet and a maximum of 16 feet. Driveway approaches shall be
no wider than 16 feet beginning at the property line up to the required front
yard setback. The maximum width at the edge of the roadway shall be 32 feet.
The edge of the drive approach shall be a two-foot minimum radius at the
roadway and follow a curved line of ever increasing radius to the property
line.



   (B)   Curb and gutter. Where a curb and gutter exist, each shall be
saw-cut, removed and replaced with a gutter section of portland cement
concrete.



   (C)   Materials and construction. The drive approach shall be paved
by use of one of the following:



      (1)   Six inch water bound macadam base course with one and
one and one-half inch hot mix bituminous concrete surface course;



      (2)   Seven inch crushed stone base course with one and
one-half inch hot mix bituminous concrete surface course;



      (3)   Six inch portland cement concrete; or



      (4)   Paving brick or other durable surface approved by the
City Surveyor and Engineer.



   (D)   Sidewalks.



      (1)   Where new or reconstructed drive approaches cross
defective sidewalks, said sidewalks shall be replaced with seven-inch thick
portland cement concrete.



      (2)   Where drive approaches require a change in gradient of a
public sidewalk, such changes shall be shown and delineated on plans
submitted by a registered professional engineer of the state and approved by
the City Surveyor and Engineer.



   (E)   Trees. Where new or reconstructed drive approaches require the
removal of parkway trees, approval for such removal shall be obtained from
the City Arborist. Replacement of the tree or trees shall be required where
deemed necessary by the City Arborist. Removal of parkway trees and the
replacement thereof shall be at the expense of the owner of the property
served. The species and specification of parkway trees shall be determined by
the City Arborist.



   (F)   Exception; variations. The Director of Community Development
may vary the provisions of division (A) above, if the drive approach enters a
cul-de-sac, if the distance from the curb to the property line is less than
the normal 21.5 feet or some unusual condition or circumstances exist which
make strict compliance impractical, or not in the public interest.



   (G)   Drainage. On those streets that are not city standard and
where street drainage is not carried in a combination of pavement gutters and
storm sewers, the drainage requirement for the drive approach shall be
determined by the City Surveyor and Engineer.



   (H)   The typical residential drive approach drawing. The graphics
below shall be used to graphically interpret construction specifications of
this subchapter.



   Residential Drive Approach Sketch







   Residential Drive Approach Sketch on Concrete Streets







(Prior Code, § 9-252)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.488  LOCATION AND CORNER SETBACK.



   (A)   (1)   Drive approaches shall be so located as to make the
least possible adjustment to existing grade and improvements on the public
way.



      (2)   Materials used in making changes in public improvements
shall be approved by the City Surveyor and Engineer.



         (a)   Not more than two curb cuts may be constructed for
any residential lot.



         (b)   Only one curb cut is permitted for an interior or
through lot which has less than 120 feet frontage measured along the curb.



         (c)   A corner lot must have a frontage of at least 120
feet measured along the curb on each street in order to have two curb cuts.



   (B)   Drive approaches on residential corner lots shall be not less
than 20 feet from the extended property line to the nearest point of the
drive approach measured along the curb.



   (C)   The centerline of the drive approaches shall be at right
angles to the longitudinal axis of the street.



   (D)   The drive approach shall at no point project beyond an
extended side yard line projected at right angles to the street.



(Prior Code, § 9-253)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.489  REPAIR.



   It shall be the duty of the owner of a property served by a drive
approach, to keep the same in good repair, free from obstructions and
openings, including the portions of the public parkway and public sidewalk
which such drive approach crosses.



(Prior Code, § 9-254)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



§ 150.490  NONCONFORMANCE.



   Existing drive approaches shall be considered to be in compliance with
this subchapter and need not be brought into compliance with the several
provisions of the this subchapter except in cases where such drive approaches
are replaced, significantly altered or reconstructed, and in such cases which
create a public nuisance or interfere with public drainage facilities.



(Prior Code, § 9-255)  (Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994)



FUEL GAS CODE



§ 150.505  ADOPTION OF FUEL GAS CODE.



   For the purpose of prescribing the regulations governing the design and
installation of fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances, the following
code, as it may be modified herein, is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein, and shall constitute and be deemed to be “The Fuel Gas
Code of the City of Lake Forest:” the International Fuel Gas Code, 2003
Edition, International Code Council, Inc. (the “Fuel Gas Code”);
provided, however, the adoption of this section shall not be construed as
preventing the enforcement of or repealing of the provision of any ordinance,
regulation, standard or code adopted by the city that is more restrictive
than the provisions of this section. In the event that any provision of this
section shall be in conflict with any other ordinance, regulation, standard
or code adopted by the city, the more restrictive provision (as determined by
the Director of Community Development) shall apply. One copy of the Fuel Gas
Code has been on file in the office of the City Clerk for use and examination
by the public for at least 30 days prior to the adoption of the Fuel Gas
Code, and such copy shall continue to be kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk for use and examination by the public after adoption of the Fuel
Gas Code.



(Ord. 04-12, passed 1-15-2004)



IMPACT FEES



§ 150.520  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is declared to be the policy of the city that the provision
of various public facilities required to serve new residential development is
subject to the control of the city in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan
of the city for the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development
of the city.



   (B)   New residential developments cause and impose increased and
excessive demands upon public facilities and services that are specifically
and uniquely attributable to those new residential developments. Affected
facilities and services include public schools, libraries, parks and
playgrounds, open space, police services, fire and emergency services and
public works services.



   (C)   Planning projections indicate that new residential development
shall continue and shall place ever-increasing demands on the school
districts, the city and other governmental bodies to provide necessary public
facilities.



   (D)   Development potential and property values are influenced and
affected by city policy as expressed in the Comprehensive Plan and as
implemented by the City Zoning Code and other city regulations.



   (E)   To the extent that new residential developments place demands
upon public facilities that are specifically and uniquely attributable to
such developments, those demands should be satisfied by requiring that the
new residential developments creating the demands pay the cost of meeting the
demands.



   (F)   The amount of the development impact fees to be required of
new residential developments shall reflect the proportionate share of the
cost of the additional public facilities needed to support such developments
and shall be calculated to ensure that new residential developments pay only
that portion of the costs of acquiring needed lands and, to the extent
permitted by law, the needed facilities and services specifically and
uniquely attributable to the new residential developments.



   (G)   The City Council, after careful consideration, hereby finds
and declares that imposition of development impact fees upon new residential
developments to finance the acquisition of certain land and public
facilities, the demand for which is created by such developments within the
city, is in the best interests of the general welfare of the city and its
residents, is equitable, and does not impose an unfair burden on such
developments. Therefore, the City Council deems it necessary and desirable to
adopt this subchapter as herein set forth.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.521  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter requires payment of development impact fees, ordinarily
payable at the earlier of final plat approval, final development plan
approval, building permit issuance, or issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, in an amount equal to the proportionate share of the cost of the
various public facilities required to serve certain developments. The fees
for school, library, park and open space, police, fire and public work
services and facilities shall be uniformly applicable to all residential
development, as defined herein.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.522  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   The language in the text of this subchapter shall be
interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:



      (1)   The singular number includes the plural number, and the
plural the singular;



      (2)   The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is
permissive; and



      (3)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.



   (B)   The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of
this subchapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
division (B), except when the context otherwise indicates.



      BEDROOM.



         (a)   Any room in a dwelling unit that is designed and
intended for sleeping purposes.



         (b)   In the absence of other means of determining the
status of a room in a dwelling unit, a BEDROOM is a room that:



            1.   Is suitable for sleeping purposes;



            2.   Is greater than 100 square feet in floor
area; and



            3.   Is not a living room, dining room, kitchen or
bathroom.



      BUILDING PERMIT. The permit issued by the city for the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, addition, repair, placement,
removal or demolition of or to a building or structure within the corporate
limits of the city.



      BUILDING SITE. An area of land designed, intended or used as a
location for a structure.



      CODE. The Lake Forest City Code.



      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The official plan for the development of the
city adopted by the City Council.



      DEVELOPER. The person undertaking a residential development,
which may, for purposes of this subchapter, include without limitation the
owner as well as the subdivider of the land on which the development is to
take place.



      DEVELOPMENT. Any of the following activities occurring, or
receiving required final approvals, on or after July 20, 2006:



         (a)   Any subdivision of land;



         (b)   Any re-subdivision or modification of an existing
subdivision;



         (c)   Any planned unit development;



         (d)   Any modification of an existing planned unit
development; or



         (e)   Any construction, reconstruction, alteration,
addition, repair or placement of or to a building that requires issuance of a
building permit.



      DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE. A special and additional fee imposed
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.



      DWELLING UNIT. Has the meaning ascribed to it in the Zoning Code.



      GROSS ACREAGE. The entire area of a parcel of real property or a
building site expressed in acres or portions thereof.



      INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT. An agreement to be entered into
between the city and each public body, individually, that affirms each public
body’s acknowledgment that this subchapter shall control the collection and
distribution of development impact fees, or land in lieu of development
impact fees relating to developments, and that creates the responsibility for
each public body to fully indemnify the city in connection with its
administration of this subchapter.



      LIBRARY. The Lake Forest Library.



      LOT. Has the meaning ascribed to it in the Zoning Code.



      MAI. The professional designation MEMBER, APPRAISAL INSTITUTE as
conferred by the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers.



      PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT. The city’s Parks and
Recreation Department.



      PARK SITE. Land used for active and passive recreation, including
without limitation: parks; playgrounds; recreation centers, systems and
facilities; pleasure driveways; scenic ways; pathways; conservancy areas;
open space or land; and natural areas.



      PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, organization or business or charitable trust.



      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. Has the same meaning ascribed to it in
the Zoning Code.



      PROPORTIONATE SHARE. The cost of a public facility specifically
and uniquely attributable to a development, after consideration of the
generation of additional demand from the development, and any appropriate
credits for contribution of money, dedication of land or taxes dedicated for
such projects.



      PUBLIC BODY. Collectively, the school districts and library
having territory that is co-extensive, in whole or in part, with the city.



      PUBLIC FACILITY. Sites and facilities for providing school,
library, park and open space, police, fire and emergency and public works
services that may be financed in whole or in part by the requirement of, or
funds generated from, a development impact fee, as well as any other use of
such development impact fee funds (including the provision of such services)
as may be permitted by law.



      PUBLIC SERVICE PROVIDER. The Parks and Recreation Department, the
Police Department, the Fire Department and the Public Works Department of the
city.



      RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. Any development, as defined in this
subchapter, that is:



         (a)   Used, or is designed or intended to be used,
entirely or in part, for residential purposes; and



         (b)   Contemplates, or results in, a net increase in the
number of lots or dwelling units over that which previously existed on the
property on which the development is, or is to be, located.



      SCHOOL DISTRICT. The following public school districts which are
situated wholly or partially within the corporate limits of the city:



         (a)   Lake Forest School District #67; and



         (b)   Lake Forest Community High School District #115.



      SERVICE AREA. Any classification, whether geographic, functional
or otherwise, described in a public body’s or public service provider’s
needs assessment that is used to quantify and identify public facilities
required by such public body or public service provider to meet an existing
or projected service standard.



      SERVICE STANDARD. The existing level of service delivery
associated with a public facility for which a development impact fee shall be
required.



      SITES. Lands that are:



         (a)   Leased or owned, or to be leased or owned, by a
public body or public service provider: and



         (b)   Used, to be used or capable of being used for any
purposes of the public body or public service provider.



      SUBDIVISION. Has the meaning ascribed to it in the subdivision
regulations.



      SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT. An agreement, entered into between a
developer and the city, approving and governing the subdivision of land
pursuant to the subdivision regulations.



      SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.Chapter 156 of this code, regulating the
processes and design standards applicable to the division of land within the
city, as the same has been, and may from time to time hereafter be, amended.



      TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT. The
table included as Appendix A to this chapter.



      ZONING CODE.Chapter 159 of the city code, regulating the use of
land within the city, as the same has been, and may from time to time
hereafter be, amended.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.523  GENERAL PROCEDURES FOR DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.



   (A)   Calculation of development impact fees. The City Manager shall
calculate development impact fees due from any particular residential
development pursuant to and in accordance with this subchapter, and the City
Manager shall present such calculations in writing to the developer and to
each public body and public service provider eligible to receive development
impact fees due from any particular residential development. Development
impact fees due from any particular residential development shall be
collected prior to the recordation of a final plat of subdivision or final
development plan for any particular residential development, unless otherwise
set forth in a development agreement approved by the city; in the event that
a residential development does not involve or require the recordation of a
final plat of subdivision or final development plan, the development impact
fee shall be paid prior to the earlier of the issuance of a building permit
or certificate of occupancy for the residential development.



   (B)   Collection of development impact fees.



      (1)   Public bodies with intergovernmental agreements. Any
development impact fees due to a public body pursuant to an intergovernmental
agreement and the provisions of this subchapter shall be collected by such
public body, and the developer shall be required to deliver to the City Clerk
a receipt from each affected public body evidencing delivery of such
development impact fees. Unless expressly provided otherwise in a development
agreement approved by the city, the developer shall not be entitled to any
further permits, approvals or authorizations relating to the development
until the developer delivers such receipt of payments to the city.



      (2)   Public bodies without intergovernmental agreements. Any
development impact fees relating to public facilities for public bodies that
have not entered into intergovernmental agreements with the city pursuant to
this subchapter shall be paid to the city and collected by the City Manager,
who shall hold such development impact fees in trust for the affected public
body or bodies. Unless expressly provided otherwise in a development
agreement approved by the city, the developer shall not be entitled to any
further permits, approvals or authorizations relating to the development
until the developer delivers such payments to the city.



      (3)   Public service providers. Any development impact fees
relating to public facilities for public services providers shall be paid to
the city and collected by the City Manager. Unless expressly provided
otherwise in a development agreement approved by the city, the developer
shall not be entitled to any further permits, approvals or authorizations
relating to the development until the developer delivers such payments to the
city.



   (C)   Transfer of funds to accounts.



      (1)   Upon receipt of development impact fees, the City
Manager shall forward such fees to the Finance Director.



      (2)   (a)   Additionally, the Finance Director shall
establish an account in a bank authorized to receive deposits of city funds.



         (b)   The development impact fees deposited in the
account shall be used solely for the purposes of and in accordance with this
subchapter.



         (c)   The Finance Director shall maintain and keep
adequate financial records for the account, which shall show the source and
disbursement of all revenues, and which shall account for all moneys
received. Such records shall account for moneys received as being funds
allocable to the particular public body or public service provider to which
the funds are allocable under this subchapter. Whenever the City Manager
receives development impact fees in trust pursuant to division (B)(2) above,
the Finance Director shall separately account for such fees held in trust.



   (D)   Disbursement of funds.



      (1)   In order to ensure that each distribution of development
impact fees from the account shall be used solely and exclusively for the
provision of projects consistent with the applicable needs assessment on file
with the city, prior to the City Council authorizing disbursement of any such
funds in accord with this subchapter, the City Clerk shall be in receipt of
one of the following:



         (a)   A fully executed intergovernmental agreement
between the city and the public body receiving such funds governing certain
aspects of the implementation of this subchapter by the city and the public
body; or



         (b)   With respect to development impact fees for any
authorized public facilities relating to a public service provider, a fully
executed statement of disbursement from the affected public service provider.



      (2)   No impact fees shall be disbursed until the City Clerk
has received the fully executed intergovernmental agreement or statement of
disbursement required pursuant to divisions (D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b) above, as
applicable.



   (E)   Previously approved developments. For any residential
development for which a final plat or final development plan has been
approved before July 20, 2006, the development impact fee shall be as set
forth in any applicable development, subdivision, annexation or other
agreement relating to such development. If there is no such agreement, the
terms and provisions of this subchapter shall apply, but:



      (1)   The development impact fee shall be due prior to the
issuance of any initial building permit or initial certificate of occupancy
for each dwelling unit in such residential development; and



      (2)   The development impact fees due shall be at the amount
due prior July 20, 2006.



   (F)   Alternative arrangements in lieu of impact fees. The city may,
in consultation with any affected public bodies, enter into an agreement with
a developer for an alternative arrangement in lieu of impact fees reflecting
the impact of a development; provided, however, that any such agreement for
an alternative arrangement shall provide a financial benefit that is
generally equivalent to what would otherwise be received from the strict
application of this subchapter as determined by the City Council.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.524  USE OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.



   Development impact fees paid pursuant to this subchapter shall be
restricted to use solely and exclusively for paying the cost of public
facilities, whether payment is made directly therefor, or as a pledge against
bonds, revenue certificates or other obligations of indebtedness.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.525  EFFECT OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES ON ZONING AND SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS.



   This subchapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of
property, density of development, design and improvement standards and
requirements; or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of
public improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or
other applicable regulations of the city, which shall be operative and remain
in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such
development.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.526  DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL
REQUIREMENT.



   Development impact fees are additional and supplemental to, and not in
substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the city on the
development or subdivision of land or the issuance of building permits. In no
event shall a property owner be obligated to pay for public facilities in an
amount in excess of the amount calculated pursuant to this subchapter; but a
property owner may be required to pay, pursuant to city ordinances,
regulations or policies, for other public facilities in addition to the
development impact fees for public facilities as specified herein.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.527  LAND IN LIEU OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.



   (A)   Prior to any preliminary plat or preliminary planned
development approval (or such later time as the City Council may, in its
discretion, allow), a public body or public service provider may make a
request in writing to the City Council to allow for a donation of land in
lieu of development impact fees related to any development. Such a request
shall specifically itemize the public body’s or public service provider’s
reasons for requesting land in lieu of development impact fees.



   (B)   (1)   Upon receipt of a request from a public body or
public service provider for land in lieu of development impact fees, the City
Council shall consider and perform an analysis of such request, and make a
determination thereon by resolution duly adopted.



      (2)   The resolution shall be based upon a review of the needs
assessment on file with the City Clerk for the public body or public service
provider making the request, as well as the following factors:



         (a)   Other developments occurring in the prior year
within the surrounding area of the development;



         (b)   Public facilities actually constructed and
servicing the surrounding area of the development;



         (c)   Changing public facility needs and capacity at
existing public facilities servicing the surrounding area of the development;
and



         (d)   Such other factors as the City Council may deem to
be relevant.



   (C)   Requests of land in lieu of development impact fees shall be
made specifically for the construction of public facilities or expansion of
public facilities on adjacent parcels.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.528  PREPARATION OF NEEDS ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   Each public body and public service provider shall
periodically prepare a study to assess the need for additional public
facilities. The study may consist of a detailed examination or analysis of
existing public facilities, service standards and/or research regarding sites.



   (B)   Such study should also reflect:



      (1)   Development occurring in the prior years;



      (2)   Public facilities actually constructed or provided;



      (3)   Changing public facility needs;



      (4)   Inflation;



      (5)   Revised cost estimates for public facilities;



      (6)   Changes in the availability of other funding sources
applicable to public facility projects or activities; and



      (7)   Such other factors as may be relevant.



   (C)   Each public body or public service provider shall maintain on
file with the City Clerk its most recent needs assessment study. In addition,
the city may request, as a condition of calculating or disbursing any
development impact fees from any particular residential development, that the
public body or public service provider certify that the needs assessment
study on file with the City Clerk reasonably reflects such public body’s or
public service provider’s need for public facilities. Two or more public
bodies or public service providers may join together in the preparation of a
needs assessment provided the assessment ultimately contains the information
required under this subchapter for each service area served by each such
public body and/or public service provider.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.529  USE AND CONTENT OF NEEDS ASSESSMENT.



   (A)   A needs assessment shall contain relevant information for each
service area described in the assessment, which information may include:



      (1)   An inventory of existing lands and buildings utilized by
the public body or public service provider to provide services within the
service area;



      (2)   An identification of the area of each building within a
service area and, in the case of schools, the number of students then
enrolled in each school building;



      (3)   A projection of the character of development that is
expected to occur during the succeeding ten-year period that will be
affecting any service area;



      (4)   An identification of the amount of lands that will be
necessary for each service area in order to accommodate the demands of the
projected development;



      (5)   A general description of the total building area and, in
the case of schools, temporary classrooms, if any, that will be necessary for
each service area in order to provide capacity for the projected development;



      (6)   An identification of additional public facilities
required to meet the demands of the projected development; and



      (7)   An analysis of the extent that existing public
facilities are impacted by additional population demands and the annual cost
for such public facilities.



   (B)   Public bodies and public service providers that complete needs
assessments for the acquisition of lands shall periodically update those
needs assessments and shall amend their adopted lands acquisition plan based
on those updated needs assessments.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.530  SOURCE INFORMATION FOR POPULATION ESTIMATE VARIABLE IN IMPACT
FEE FORMULAS.



   (A)   Where applicable, calculation of required development impact
fees or land dedication, as set forth in this subchapter, shall be made in
accordance with the population density projections contained in the Table of
Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit, as defined in this
subchapter.



   (B)   In the event a developer files a written appeal of the use of
the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit pursuant to §
150.544, as part of such appeal the developer shall obtain and submit, at his
or her own cost, a demographic study showing the estimated population to be
generated from the residential development.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.531  DETERMINATION OF LAND VALUE AND DISTRIBUTION OF DEVELOPMENT
IMPACT FEES.



   (A)   Determination of land value. The development impact fees for
public facilities shall be based on the fair market value of an acre of land
for such facilities. For purposes of this subchapter, the FAIR MARKET VALUE
of an acre of land in and surrounding the city shall be no less than
$832,500, which amount may be adjusted from time to time by ordinance or
resolution of the City Council. Such land value shall be used in making any
calculations required in this subchapter unless the developer files a written
appeal in accordance with § 150.544. In the event of any such appeal, the
developer, at his or her own cost, shall obtain and submit an independent
appraisal from an MAI designated appraiser indicating the fair market value
of such improved land in the area of the proposed development.



   (B)   Distribution of development impact fees. The development
impact fee for public facilities shall be collected in accordance with §
150.523(B) and shall be used solely for public facilities of the public
bodies or public service providers for which such development impact fees are
designated; provided the City Clerk has in his or her possession the
respective agreements and indemnities of the public bodies as required by
this subchapter or any required statement of disbursement from public service
providers, as the case may be, any development impact fees so collected and
held by the city shall be forwarded from time to time to the public body or
public service provider to be used in the funding of public facilities and
for other purposes as permitted by law and in accordance with any applicable
intergovernmental agreement.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.532  CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING SCHOOL DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE.



   The following criteria shall govern the calculation of the school
development impact fee.



   (A)   Service area requirement and population ratio.



      (1)   The school development impact fee shall be calculated
based on the amount of land that would be required for a school site in light
of the ultimate number of students to be generated by the residential
development.



      (2)   The school development impact fee requirement shall be
determined by obtaining the product of the following:



         (a)   Estimated number of students to be generated by
the residential development within each school classification, as derived
from the most current version of the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population
Per Dwelling Unit; over



         (b)   The maximum recommended number of students to be
served in each such school classification as established in this section;
times



         (c)   The recommended number of acres for a school site
of each school classification as established in this section.



      (3)   The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed
needed to have sufficient school site land to serve the estimated increased
number of students in each such school classification. The school site
development impact fee shall be the cash amount equal to the product of the
number of acres required for school site times the fair market value of land
per acre established in this subchapter. As of the date of adoption of this
section (July 20, 2006), the fair market value of land per acre has been
established as $832,500.



   (B)   School classification and size of school site. School
classifications and the size of school building sites within the city shall
be determined in accordance with the following criteria (based on the fair
market value as of the date of adoption of this section (July 20, 2006)):



 


School Classification by Grade

 

Capacity

 

Acres



Elementary or grade K—4
 

450

 

5



Middle or grades 5—8
 

1,260

 

22



High school or grades 9—12
 

1500

 

50




 



   (C)   School site development impact fee.



      (1)   For purposes of this division (C), the elementary/junior
high school development impact fee shall be the greater of $9,157 per
dwelling unit or the amount set forth in the city’s annual fee ordinance.



      (2)   For purposes of this division (C), the high school
development impact fee shall be the greater of $9,990 per dwelling unit or
the amount set forth in the city’s annual fee ordinance.



 


 

4 BR SF Detached



Elementary
 
.530/450 x 5 = .0058


Junior high school
 
.298/1,260 x 22 = .0052


Elementary/Jr. High Fee (Combined)
 
.011 x ($832,500)


High school
 
.360/1,500 x 50 = .012


High School Fee
 
.012 x ($832,500)



 



   (D)   Location. Where land in lieu of development impact fees is
requested, or required pursuant to § 150.527, the Comprehensive Plan and the
standards adopted by the affected school district shall be used as guidelines
in locating sites.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.533  CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING LIBRARY IMPACT FEE.



   (A)   The following criteria shall govern the calculation of the
library development impact fee. This requirement shall be determined by the
cost per capita method by obtaining the quotient of the following:



      (1)   The approved current fiscal year’s operating costs for
the library:



      (2)   Divided by the current census population of the city.
This number will be:



      (3)   Multiplied from the most current version of the Table of
Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit.



   (B)   This derived value will represent an estimate of the impact of
the proposed residential development on the library.



 


Formula



Approved fiscal year operating costs = Cost per resident census population


Cost per resident x Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit
= Library development impact fee



 



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.534  CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING POLICE IMPACT FEE.



   (A)   The cost per capita methodology shall govern the calculation
of police development impact fee. The cost per capita calculation is
determined by obtaining the quotient of the following:



      (1)   The approved current fiscal year’s operating costs for
the Police Department:



      (2)   Divided by the current census population of the city,
which equals the average cost per resident. This number:



      (3)   Will be multiplied from the most current version of the
Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit.



   (B)   This derived value will represent an estimate of the impact of
the proposed residential development on police services and facilities.



 


Formula



Approved fiscal year operating costs = Cost per resident census population


Cost per resident x Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit
= Police impact fee



 



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.535  CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING FIRE AND EMERGENCY SERVICES IMPACT FEE.



   (A)   The cost per capita methodology shall govern the calculation
of fire and emergency services development impact fee. The cost per capita
calculation is determined by obtaining the quotient of the following:



      (1)   The approved current fiscal year’s operating costs for
the city’s Fire Department:



      (2)   Divided by the current census population of the city,
which equals the average cost per resident. This number:



      (3)   Will be multiplied the most current version of the Table
of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit.



   (B)   This derived value will represent an estimate of the impact of
the proposed residential development on fire and emergency services and
facilities.



 


Formula



Approved fiscal year operating costs = Cost per resident census population


Cost per resident x Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit
= Fire and emergency service impact fee



 



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.536  CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT IMPACT FEE.



   (A)   The cost per capita methodology shall govern the calculation
of public works development impact fee. The cost per capita calculation is
determined by obtaining the quotient of the following:



      (1)   The approved current fiscal year’s operating costs for
the city’s Public Works Department:



      (2)   Divided by the current census population of the city,
which equals the average cost per resident. This number:



      (3)   Will be multiplied by the most current version of the
Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit.



   (B)   This derived value will represent an estimate of the impact of
the proposed residential development on public works services and facilities.



 


Formula



Approved fiscal year operating year budget = Average cost per resident census
population


Cost per resident x Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit
= Public works service impact fee



 



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.537  CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING PARK SITE IMPROVEMENT FEE.



   The following criteria shall govern the calculation of the park
improvement fee.



   (A)   Service area requirement and population ratio.



      (1)   The public facilities that would be required for park
purposes shall be directly related to the ultimate population to be generated
by the residential development.



      (2)   The park improvement fee requirement shall be determined
by obtaining the product of the following:



         (a)   Estimated population to be served by the park
system, as derived from the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per
Dwelling Unit; over:



         (b)   One thousand; times:



         (c)   The sum of the recommended number of acres of park
site for each park classification as established in this section.



      (3)   The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed
needed to have sufficient park site land to serve the estimated increased
population. The park site improvement fee shall be the cash amount equal to
the product of the number of acres required for park site times one-half the
fair market value of land per acre established in this subchapter. As of the
date of adoption of this section (July 20, 2006), the fair market value of
land per acre has been established as $832,500.



   (B)   Park site classification and acreage per population. Park site
classifications and the minimum acres of park site per 1,000 population shall
be determined in accordance with the following criteria (based on the fair
market value as of the date of adoption of this section (July 20, 2006):



 


Size Range

 

Minimum Acres




Type of Park

 

In Acres

 

Per 1,000 Population



Neighborhood park
 

5—20

 

2.0



Community park
 

20+

 

8.0



Total
 



 

10.0




 



   (C)   Park development impact fee. For purposes of this division
(C), the park development impact fee shall be the greater of $15,668 per
dwelling unit or the amount set forth in the city’s annual fee ordinance.



 


 

4 BR SF Detached




 
3.764/1,000 x 10 = .03764


Park Development Impact Fee
 
.03764 x .5 ($832,500)



 



   (D)   Location. Where land in lieu of development impact fees is
requested, or required pursuant to § 150.527, the Comprehensive Plan shall
be used as a guideline in locating sites. Factors affecting the location of
required park site dedication shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Accessibility to population served;



      (2)   Existence of mature vegetation;



      (3)   Proximity to permanent and seasonal waterways;



      (4)   Existence of or proximity to unique topographical
features; and



      (5)   The value of the site as an extension of existing
elements of the park system.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.538  SIZE AND TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   General rule. For purposes of implementing § 150.532 through
150.537, each dwelling unit within a residential development shall be deemed
a “4 BR SF Detached” for purposes of applying the Table of Estimated
Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit.



   (B)   Procedures for modifying general rule to a particular
development. In the event that a developer objects to the classification of
certain dwelling units as being “4 BR SF Detached,” the developer may
file a request with the City Manager seeking a specific adjustment from the
general rule set forth in division (A) above and the reasons for such
requested adjustment. The City Manager may grant such adjustment on any
justifiable basis, in which case the City Manager shall notify the developer
of such adjustment. In the event that the City Manager does not grant a
requested adjustment in whole or in part, the developer may file a formal
appeal in accordance with § 150.544. In the event of an appeal, the
developer shall deliver to the City Clerk such information and data as the
developer believes will support its appeal relating to either the particular
dwelling unit for which a building permit is sought or to all dwelling units
to be constructed within a new residential development.



   (C)   Corrective adjustment of development impact fee. In the event
that the City Council has modified the general rule in division (A) above at
the request of a developer pursuant to division (B) above for a particular
dwelling unit or units, and a subsequent building permit application is
presented for any such dwelling unit that would have required a larger
development impact fee but for the adjustment approved pursuant to the
developer’s request under this division (C), no building permit shall be
issued for such dwelling unit unless the developer of that dwelling unit pays
a corrective development impact fee. The corrective development impact fee
shall be equal to 115% of the applicable development impact fee for such
dwelling unit as calculated at the time of the building permit application
less the development impact fee initially paid in connection with such
dwelling unit.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.539  CREDIT FOR NET REDUCTION OF ANY OR ALL LOTS, DWELLING UNITS OR
BEDROOMS.



   (A)   Where a new residential development involves a net reduction
in the number of any or all of the lots, dwelling units or bedrooms on the
property on which the development is, or is to be, located and development
impact fees had previously been paid in connection with an earlier
development of such property, the developer may request a credit for a net
reduction, calculated on a “per unit of public body or public service
provider” basis. Such request shall be filed within 30 days after a new
residential development receives final zoning, subdivision and planned
development approval, where and as applicable, but prior to the presentation
of any final plat or development agreement for execution by the city or any
of its officials. The credit due the developer shall be the proportion of
such net reduction to the number of lots, dwelling units or bedrooms for
which development impact fees were previously paid in connection with the
development of the property, but in no event shall such credit reduce the
amount of development impact fees due in connection with the new residential
development to less than zero, nor shall any credit against the development
impact fee due to one public body or public service provider be used to
offset development impact fees due other public bodies or public service
providers calculated by reason of the new residential development.



   (B)   In the event a developer is entitled to a credit for the net
reduction of the number of any or all of the lots, dwelling units or bedrooms
on the property on which the development is, or is to be, located and more
than one lot is created from the property on which such unit or units were
located, the credit shall be equally divided among all such newly created
lots. The amount of such credit due per lot shall be determined prior to
recording a new plat of subdivision, and the amount of the credit for each
such lot shall be set forth in the subdivision agreement, or applicable
agreement, prior to recordation.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.540  RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND.



   Where land is requested in lieu of a development impact fee or in lieu
of a portion of a development impact fee, and the Comprehensive Plan or the
standards of the city call for a larger park site or school site in a
particular residential development than the developer is required to
dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer’s dedication shall be
reserved in accord with the statutes of the state for subsequent purchase by
the city or other public body designated by the city; provided that a
negotiated purchase is made within one year from the date of approval of the
final plat, or an agreement between the developer and the city is recorded
outlining specific conditions for the conveyance of such property.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.541  COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENT.



   Where land is requested in lieu of a development impact fee and the
residential development is less than 40 acres, where practical, a park site
or school site should be combined with dedications from adjoining
developments in order to produce a usable park site or school site without
undue hardship on a particular developer.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.542  GENERAL SITE STANDARDS.



   The slope, topography and geology of any dedicated site as well as its
surroundings must be suitable for its intended purpose. Wetlands, stormwater
detention areas and retention areas shall not be accepted for city ownership
and maintenance, nor shall such lands be credited against development impact
fees if accepted by a Parks and Recreation Department for ownership and
maintenance. A park site shall be not less than one acre in area. Wetlands,
detention areas, retention areas and areas of steep slope shall not be
accepted as school sites.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.543  SCHOOL SITE STANDARDS.



   A school site shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full
infrastructure improvements as required by this code, including, but not
limited to, electrical service, water service, sanitary sewer, storm sewer
and street improvements. Depending upon projected timing for the construction
of school facilities, a cash contribution may be required in lieu of the
sidewalk and street tree improvements. The cash contribution shall be equal
to the cost of such improvements consistent with approved engineering plans
and estimates of cost.



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.544  OBJECTIONS; APPEALS.



   (A)   In general. A developer may challenge any determination with
respect to the developer’s development under this subchapter or the
application of the provisions of this subchapter to such development by
filing an appeal in accordance with this section.



   (B)   Time for filing appeal. A developer must file any appeal
within ten days after receipt of the calculation of the development impact
fee calculation from the City Manager pursuant to § 150.523(A); except that
any appeal based on the application of the general rule set forth in §
150.538(A) shall be filed by the earliest of either:



      (1)   The time of filing a building permit application for an
individual dwelling unit for which a development impact fee had not
previously been paid;



      (2)   Within 30 days after a new residential development
receives final zoning, subdivision and planned development approval, where
and as applicable, but prior to the presentation of any final plat or
development agreement for execution by the city or any of its officials; or



      (3)   Within ten days after receiving notice of the
development impact fee calculation pursuant to § 150.523.



   (C)   Filing requirements. Any appeal filed under this subchapter
shall be filed on forms (if any) issued by the City Manager and shall be in
writing. Appeals must be received by the City Clerk on or before the filing
deadline. The written appeal shall set forth, with particularity, the
determination (including a determination of the applicability of this
subchapter or any provision of this subchapter) to which the developer
objects, as well as the basis for challenging such determination. The appeal
shall also be accompanied by any evidence supporting such appeal or otherwise
required as part of the appeal pursuant to the section of this subchapter
appealed from. In addition, if requested in writing by the City Manager, the
developer shall obtain or provide such other information as may be reasonably
requested for purposes of evaluating the developer’s appeal.



   (D)   Initial processing of appeal. Upon receiving an appeal, the
City Manager shall determine whether such appeal was timely filed and, if so,
whether any specific information will be required in order to evaluate the
merits of the appeal. If additional information is required, the City Manager
shall notify the developer in writing of the information required and provide
a reasonable time period within which such information shall be delivered. If
an appeal is found to have been untimely filed, the City Manager shall notify
the developer in writing of this determination and the reasons therefor.



   (E)   Review by city manager. Upon receipt of an appeal and all
information and data required therefor, the City Manager shall review the
appeal and related information and solicit additional information from the
public bodies, public service providers or city departments as the City
Manager may deem necessary or appropriate for purposes of evaluating the
merits of the appeal. Upon review of all such information and data, the City
Manager shall cause a report and recommendation to be prepared and delivered
to the developer, any affected public bodies or public service providers, and
the City Council.



   (F)   City Council review. Within 45 days after the City Manager
issues the report and recommendation on the appeal, the City Council shall
place the appeal on a meeting agenda for hearing and consideration, At the
appeal hearing, the City Council shall provide the developer and any affected
public bodies or public service providers the opportunity to testify and
present evidence regarding the matters at issue in the appeal. The City
Manager and the Manager’s designees shall be available to testify at such
hearing as well. The City Council may establish rules for conducting such
hearing on the appeal that provide fundamental fairness to the parties
affected by the appeal.



   (G)   Determination on appeal. The final determination on the appeal
shall be made by the City Council, in its sole discretion, based upon such
relevant information submitted to or available to the City Council.



(Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate a provision of this code
or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, construct, alter or repair mechanical equipment or systems in
violation of any approved plan or directive of the Code Official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
subject to fines of not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.



      (2)   Any person who shall continue any work in or about the
structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be subject to fines of not less than $25 nor more than $750
for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.



      (3)   In addition, any cost of collection of fines or other
amounts due to the city under this division (A) may be assessed in accordance
with § 10.99(B) of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 9-14)



   (C)   Any person who shall violate § 150.024 shall be fined not
less than $10 nor more than $750 for each offense and a separate and distinct
offense shall be regarded as committed every day on which such person, firm
or corporation shall continue to operate contrary to the provisions of §
150.024. In addition, any cost of collection may be assessed in accordance
with § 10.99(B) of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 9-21)



   (D)   (1)   Any person found to have violated any provision of
§§ 150.035 through 150.041 with respect to a distressed building shall be
subject to the following fines: for the first violation, a minimum fine of
$100 up to a maximum of $750; for the second violation, a minimum fine of
$250 up to a maximum of $750; for the third violation, a minimum fine of $500
up to a maximum of $750; for the fourth and subsequent violation, a minimum
fine of $750. Each discrete violation of §§ 150.035 through 150.041 shall
constitute a separate violation, and each day that a violation continues
shall be a separate violation. Any fine charged is in addition to any other
legal or equitable remedies available to the city. Such other remedies
include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief, application to a court of
competent jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition or condemnation,
contracting for the repair or purchase of the premises, or foreclosures of
any lien the city may have thereon.



      (2)   Each day on which such person or persons violates the
provisions of §§ 150.035 through 150.041 constitutes a separate and
distinct offense.



      (3)   The city may enforce §§ 150.035 through 150.041 in its
administrative adjudication system or through the court system.



   (E)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 150.105
through 150.111 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $750 for each such
offense. In addition, the City Council may suspend or revoke the license of
any real estate broker, who violates any provision of §§ 150.105 through
150.111, or who violates any other ordinance of the city applicable to the
activities of a real estate broker; provided, that no broker’s license
shall be suspended or revoked for the violation of §§ 150.105 through
150.111, except upon the affirmative vote of three-fourths of the aldermen
then holding office.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and
willfully file or cause to be filed, any false, fraudulent or misleading
charges, pursuant to §§ 150.105 through 150.111. Any person guilty of
making or causing to be made any such charges, shall be subject to a fine not
to exceed $750 for each such offense.



      (3)   In addition, any cost of collection of fines or other
amounts due to the city under this division (E) may be assessed in accordance
with § 10.99(B) of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 9-57)



   (F)   Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any
provision of §§ 150.140 through 150.154 shall be subject to fines of not
less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense. Every 24 hours that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition, any cost
of collection may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99(B) of this city
code.



(Prior Code, § 9-83)



   (G)   Both operators of high impact traffic and owners or
contractors utilizing high impact traffic for a development project without
an approval for high impact traffic shall be in violation of § 150.145(H),
and subject to a fine in the amount of not less than $250 nor more than $750
per violation. Each vehicle constituting high impact traffic and each pass
such vehicle makes upon the streets or roadways within the city shall be
deemed a separate violation under § 150.145(H).



(Prior Code, § 9-84)



   (H)   Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any
provision of §§ 150.165 through 150.172 shall be subject to fines not less
than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition, any cost of
collection may be assessed in accordance with § 10.99(B) of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 9-91)



   (I)   Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any of the
provisions of §§ 150.380 through 150.400 shall be fined not less than $50
nor more than $750 for each offense. Every day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition, any cost of collection may
be assessed in accordance with § 10.99(B) of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 9-201)



(Ord. 1029, passed 9-24-1977; Ord. 1025, passed 9-12-1977; Ord. 1859, passed
7-31-1989; Ord. 94-11B, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 03-14, passed 3-3-2003; Ord.
03-20, passed 3-20-2003; Ord. 03-37, passed 7-7-2003; Ord. 03-60, passed
11-20-2003; Ord. 2008-43, passed 12-1-2008; Ord. 2010-30, passed 2-16-2010)



Appendix A: Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling



 


Type of Unit

 

Preschool 0—4

 

Elementary Grades K—5

 

Junior High Grades 6—8

 

Total Grades K—8

 

Total High School Grades 9—12

 

Adults 18 years+

 

Total Per Dwelling Unit





Single-Family Detached


2-bedroom
 

0.133

 

0.136

 

0.048

 

0.184

 

0.020

 

1.700

 

2.017



3-bedroom
 

0.292

 

0.369

 

0.173

 

0.542

 

0.184

 

1.881

 

2.899



4-bedroom
 

0.418

 

0.530

 

0.298

 

0.828

 

0.360

 

2.158

 

3.764



5-bedroom
 

0.283

 

0.345

 

0.248

 

0.593

 

0.300

 

2.594

 

3.770



Single-Family Attached


1-bedroom
 

0.000

 

0.000

 

0.000

 

0.000

 

0.000

 

1.193

 

1.193



2-bedroom
 

0.064

 

0.088

 

0.048

 

0.136

 

0.038

 

1.752

 

1.990



3-bedroom
 

0.212

 

0.234

 

0.058

 

0.292

 

0.059

 

1.829

 

2.392



4-bedroom or more
 

0.323

 

0.322

 

0.154

 

0.476

 

0.173

 

2.173

 

3.145



Multiple-Family Dwelling and Community Residence


Efficiency
 

0.000

 

0.000

 

0.000

 

0.000

 

0.000

 

1.294

 

1.294



1-bedroom
 

0.000

 

0.002

 

0.001

 

0.003

 

0.001

 

1.754

 

1.758



2-bedroom
 

0.047

 

0.086

 

0.042

 

0.128

 

0.046

 

1.693

 

1.914



3-bedroom or more
 

0.052

 

0.234

 

0.123

 

0.357

 

0.118

 

2.526

 

3.053



Note:   There are only three significant categories provided in this
chart. Because of the similarities of yields of all types of attached
single-family dwellings, only one category is provided. The same is true with
apartments; there is only one category. Because of the short history of some
newer types of detached and attached single-family units, individual
evaluations may be necessary.




 



(Ord. 06-42, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 2009-28, passed 9-21-2009)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 151:  SEDIMENT GRADING, DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL



Section



   151.01   General



   151.02   Plan requirements



   151.03   Waiver of permit



   151.04   Waiver of plan submittal



   151.05   Fees and bonds



   151.06   Inspection



 



   151.99   Penalty



§ 151.01  GENERAL.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation may disturb, change or reshape
existing topography in conjunction with building construction, site grading
or landscaping without first applying for a grading permit from the City
Surveyor and Engineer. Site grading or landscape work undertaken as part of
required subdivision improvements, in accordance with plans approved by the
City Surveyor and Engineer, shall not be subject to the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   When the City Surveyor and Engineer determines that the
proposed work is of sufficient scope to require a grading plan, a grading
plan shall be submitted to the City Surveyor and Engineer showing that the
proposed site grading, landscaping or building shall not adversely affect or
change drainage patterns on adjacent property; shall also show erosion
control measures, if required, to prevent siltation of downstream properties
and drainage facilities; and shall also show how site grading and landscaping
shall not adversely affect the principal usage of the site.



   (C)   Building permits shall not be issued for any structure,
construction or addition until a grading plan, or revision to an existing
grading plan, is approved by the City Surveyor and Engineer or until a waiver
of permit and a waiver of plan submittal has been issued by the City Surveyor
and Engineer as provided herein.



   (D)   The provisions of this chapter shall govern undeveloped
properties where erosion sedimentation problems exist as determined by the
City Surveyor and Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 2-155)  (Ord. 92-27, passed 6-1-1992)



§ 151.02  PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The topographic surveying required for a grading plan shall be
prepared by either a professional engineer or land surveyor registered in the
state. The required grading plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer
registered in the state.



   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the City Surveyor and Engineer,
the plan shall include the following minimum requirements.



      (1)   The plan shall be drawn at a scale of no less than one
inch equals 20 feet, except for properties exceeding two acres where a
smaller scale may be accepted.



      (2)   The drawing size of the plan shall be no less than eight
and one-half inches by 11 inches and no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches.



      (3)   All elevations shall be on the city datum and bench
marks used shall be indicated.



      (4)   The plan shall show spot elevations of all critical
locations.



      (5)   The plan shall show spot elevations at lot corners and
at 25-foot intervals along the property lines or along the perimeter of the
area to be regraded or landscaped.



      (6)   The plan shall show the elevations and location where
drainage courses cross the property lines.



      (7)   The plan shall show existing contours for the entire
tract on one-foot contour intervals, or one-half-foot contour intervals if
the average slope of the tract is 2% or less, or five-foot contour intervals
in ravine slopes.



      (8)   The plan shall show proposed driveway location and
gradients.



      (9)   Where driveway culverts are required, the plan shall
show proposed location, size and type of culvert, and shall show proposed
entrance and discharge elevations and shall show ditch gradients at 25-foot
intervals, 100 feet upstream and downstream from the proposed culvert,
including inverts of existing upstream and downstream culverts.



      (10)   The plan shall show proposed contours at the same
contour interval as required in division (B)(7) above.



      (11)   The plan shall show proposed building top of
foundation; elevations of all entries; and elevations of proposed finished
ground grade at all significant points around the proposed building.



      (12)   The plan shall show floodplain elevation, in
conformance to the city floodplain regulations if said floodplain elevation
is within three feet of the elevation of the lowest floor of existing or
proposed structure.



      (13)   The plan shall show conformance to the city floodplain
regulations.



      (14)   The plan shall show all proposed connections to public
sewers and shall include invert elevations size and location of said public
sewers.



      (15)   The plan shall show conformance to all ravine and bluff
control regulations.



      (16)   The plan shall include provisions and a time schedule
for restoring grass and lawns or for other erosion control measures.



      (17)   Three copies of the plan shall be submitted.



      (18)   A reproducible copy of the original plan shall remain
in the possession of the property owners.



      (19)   The plan shall show location and disposition of
downspouts and footing drain discharge.



      (20)   The plan shall include information on adjacent
properties to show contours, drainage courses, structure locations, and
foundation elevations, within 50 feet of the subject property.



(Prior Code, § 2-155)  (Ord. 92-27, passed 6-1-1992)



§ 151.03  WAIVER OF PERMIT.



   (A)   A waiver of the grading permit may be approved by the City
Surveyor and Engineer only on property previously improved with the principal
use or structure; where the project consists only of minor additions to
existing dwellings or structures, the construction of accessory buildings,
tennis courts, swimming pools or minor landscaping.



   (B)   The waiver request shall include a description and address of
the property, a brief description and site plan of the work to be performed,
and a statement signed by the property owner as follows:



      The applicant hereby certifies that he or she is the owner of the
property described above, and certifies that to the best of his or her
knowledge, the above-described project will not disturb existing topography
within three feet of adjacent properties or will not create adverse drainage
problems on adjacent property. The applicant further agrees to assume all
responsibility for any drainage problems that my be caused directly or
indirectly by any action involving the above-described project and further
absolves the city of any responsibility for problems or actions that may
result from the granting of the waiver of the site grading permit
requirements.



(Prior Code, § 2-155)  (Ord. 92-27, passed 6-1-1992)



§ 151.04  WAIVER OF PLAN SUBMITTAL.



   (A)   A permit may be granted without plan submittal as determined
by the City Surveyor and Engineer, when it is determined that the following
conditions are present:



      (1)   No major watercourse crossing the buildable portion of
the property;



      (2)   No portion of proposed building or site grading within
the floodplain;



      (3)   No portion of proposed building or site grading within
bluff or ravine areas;



      (4)   No filling, grading, paving or construction of auxiliary
buildings or structures within ten feet of side or rear lot lines;



      (5)   Principal structure to be 20 feet or more from any side
or rear lot lines;



      (6)   A contour map of the area or property at no more than
two-foot contour interval and of scale no less than one inch equal to 200
feet, shall be on file in the office of the City Surveyor and Engineer; and



      (7)   A building envelope, as defined in Chapter 99 of the
city code, is not required.



   (B)   The request for plan waiver shall include the following:



      (1)   Legal description of the property;



      (2)   Brief description of project;



      (3)   Plot plan of project showing dimensions from lot lines,
height of foundation, location of driveway, provisions for roof drainage and
proposed grading limits; and



      (4)   A statement signed by the property owner as follows:



   The applicant hereby certifies that he or she is the owner of the
previously described property, and certifies to the best of his or her
knowledge that the described project will conform to the conditions for plan
waivers stated in § 151.04 of the city code, and will not create adverse
drainage problems on adjacent property. The applicant further agrees to
assume all responsibility for any drainage problems that may be caused
directly or indirectly by any action involving the above described project
and further absolves the city of any responsibility for problems or actions
that may result from the waivering of the plan submittal as required in §
151.02 of the city code.



(Prior Code, § 2-155)  (Ord. 92-27, passed 6-1-1992)



§ 151.05  FEES AND BONDS.



   (A)   The fee for a grading permit associated with new building
construction shall be as set from time to time by motion, resolution or
ordinance of the City Council, provided that such amount shall be as set out
in the fee schedule. The fee for a grading permit not associated with new
building construction shall be as set from time to time by motion, resolution
or ordinance of the City Council, provided that such amount shall be as set
out in the fee schedule.



   (B)   The fee for a waiver of a grading permit shall be as set from
time to time by motion, resolution or ordinance of the City Council, provided
that such amount shall be as set out in the fee schedule.



   (C)   Where an existing grading plan is to be revised, a new grading
permit shall be requested for a fee as set from time to time by motion,
resolution or ordinance of the City Council, provided that such amount shall
be as set out in the fee schedule.



   (D)   A financial guarantee, in the form of cash, certified check,
bond or letter of credit will be required for all site grading permits.
Subject to the provisions of § 150.153 of this code, this financial
guarantee shall be returned in the event that all grading activities and
required landscaping are completed within one year (unless a longer period of
time is expressly authorized in the grading permit or other city approval),
inspected and approved in accordance with the grading permit. The amount of
this financial guarantee shall be as set from time to time by motion,
resolution or ordinance of the City Council, provided that such amount shall
not be less than an amount as set by Council per acre of development.



(Prior Code, § 2-155)  (Ord. 92-27, passed 6-1-1992; Ord. 03-60, passed
11-20-2003)



§ 151.06  INSPECTION.



   (A)   The City Surveyor and Engineer shall inspect, or cause to be
inspected, all grading and landscaping activities as previously described in
§ 151.01 and including the public parkway.



   (B)   Where the site grading work cannot be approved at the time of
the requested inspection, and where there is no hazard to adjacent property,
the owner shall be informed of the required corrective measures and a copy of
the inspection report shall be filed with the Director of Building and
Zoning. Failure to comply within a reasonable time shall be a violation of
this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 2-155)  (Ord. 92-27, passed 6-1-1992)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of this chapter shall be subject to fines as set forth in §
10.99 of the city code.



(Prior Code, § 2-155)  (Ord. 92-27, passed 6-1-1992)



CHAPTER 152:  PLANNING



Section




Plan Commission




   152.01   Created



   152.02   Compensation




City Plan




   152.15   Established



   152.16   Effective area




Watershed Development




   152.30   Adoption of Lake County watershed development ordinance by
reference



Cross-reference:



   Plan Commission, see § 159.043



PLAN COMMISSION



§ 152.01  CREATED.



   There is hereby created a Plan Commission of the city, as provided by
65 ILCS 5/Art. 11, Div. 12.



(Prior Code, § 31-11)



§ 152.02  COMPENSATION.



   The members of said Plan Commission shall receive such compensation for
their services as shall be from time to time fixed by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 31-14)



CITY PLAN



§ 152.15  ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The Official Plan of the city is hereby established to consist
of the following:



      (1)   The city Zoning Code of 1923, as amended, see Chapter
159 of this code;



      (2)   Chapter 156 of the code, as amended;



      (3)   The Official Plan of the city, adopted by resolution of
the City Council on April 4, 1955, as amended; and



      (4)   The official map of the city, a copy of which is
attached hereto and, by this reference thereto, is incorporated herein and
made a part of this hereof.



   (B)   For current changes to the Official Plan, see Ord. 1276.



(Prior Code, § 31-21)  (Ord. 585, passed 1-7-1963)



§ 152.16  EFFECTIVE AREA.



   The Official Plan of the city shall be in full force and effect within
the city and in unincorporated areas within one and one-half miles of the
city, from and after February 11, 1963, the date of the recording of this
ordinance with the Recorder of Deeds of the county.



(Prior Code, § 31-22)



WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT



§ 152.30  ADOPTION OF LAKE COUNTY WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE BY
REFERENCE.



   The Lake County, Illinois Watershed Development Ordinance, as most
recently amended by the County of Lake on October 13, 2015, is hereby adopted
by reference and is in full force and effect within the city and is found in
its own compilation.



(Prior Code, § 31-23)  (Ord. 92-28, passed 6-1-1992; Ord. 92-46, passed
8-3-1992; Ord. 94-50, passed 11-7-1994; Ord. 97-31, passed 9-8-1997; Ord.
99-58, passed 11-1-1999; Ord. 01-04, passed 2-5-2001; Ord. 2006-06, passed
3-16-2006; Ord. 2006-58, passed 10-19-2006; Ord. 2012-25, passed 9-4-2012;
Ord. 2013-043, passed 8-5-2013; Ord. 2016-03, passed 2-1-2016)



CHAPTER 153:  SIGNS



Section




General Provisions




   153.01   Statement of purpose



   153.02   Definitions



   153.03   Prior rights, action or causes



   153.04   Severability




General Regulations and Standards




   153.15   Permits and fees



   153.16   Building Code requirements



   153.17   Building Review Board consideration



   153.18   Illumination of signs, buildings and areas



   153.19   Exempt signs



   153.20   Prohibitions



   153.21   Variations



   153.22   Illegal signs; permanent



   153.23   Illegal signs; temporary



   153.24   Unsafe signs



   153.25   Sign condition and maintenance



   153.26   Sign removal



   153.27   Nonconforming signs




Residence District Signs




   153.40   Signs announcing the sale or lease of land



   153.41   Nonresidential land uses



   153.42   Event signs on the premises



   153.43   Temporary signs




Signs Permitted in Office, Office Research and Business Districts




   153.55   Generally



   153.56   Freestanding identification signs



   153.57   Wall or window signs



   153.58   Awning signs



   153.59   Projecting signs



   153.60   Real estate signs



   153.61   Unlighted temporary advertising signs



   153.62   Community information areas



   153.63   Sandwich board signs



   153.64   Directory signs



   153.65   Design guidelines



 



   153.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.01  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to:



   (A)   Regulate signs and signage lighting in such a way as to
support objectives of the Zoning Code and the Comprehensive Plan, to preserve
and enhance the appearance of the city, and to protect the property values
herein;



   (B)   Ensure that all signs within the city are compatible with
existing land uses and/or buildings with regard to size, location, color,
message, construction, materials and manner of display, and to discourage
unsightly, dissimilar, inappropriate and excessive numbers of signs;



   (C)   Ensure that signs do not confuse, mislead or otherwise
endanger the public health, safety, morals or general well-being;



   (D)   Restrict signs and signage lighting which increase the
probability of accidents by distracting attention or obstructing vision
necessary for traffic safety; and



   (E)   Ensure that signs enable the public to locate goods and
services and facilities in the city without difficulty or confusion.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. I)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AWNING. A structure attached to a building, typically made of tubular
frame and covered with canvas or similar soft material(s).



   BULLETIN BOARD. A sign used for the posting of events, notices, hours
or related information.



   DIRECTORY SIGN. A freestanding sign identifying the location of five or
more separate businesses. One or more maps may be incorporated as part of the
DIRECTORY SIGN along with a listing of business names and types.



   EVENT SIGN. A sign announcing a noteworthy happening, social occasion
or activity taking place at a particular date and time.



   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign having not more than two sides erected at
grade level supported by one or more uprights, or other structural members,
which are placed in or on an approved foundation and not attached to any
building.



   INCIDENTAL SIGN. A sign which is incidental to the primary use and is
for public information and not for advertising purposes.



   OBSOLETE SIGN. A sign which identifies a use that is no longer on the
site.



   OPEN HOUSE SIGN. A form of event sign directing people to homes that
are for sale and open to the public for physical viewing without prior
appointment. Such signs may identify the street address and the times for
such public viewing.



   PERMANENT SIGN. Any sign which is permanently affixed or installed and
is intended for long-term use, generally being in place longer than 90 days.



   POLITICAL SIGNS.



      (1)   POLITICAL CAMPAIGN SIGN. A temporary sign that announces
or supports political candidates or issues in connection with any national,
state or local election. POLITICAL ELECTION SIGNS include only those signs
specifically advocating on behalf of a person, or a position on a question,
to be considered by voters on a ballot that has been certified in accordance
with the Illinois Election Code.



      (2)   POLITICAL MESSAGE SIGN. A sign, other than a political
campaign sign, that expresses a noncommercial message regarding an issue of
political or public concern.



   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not permanently attached to an approved
foundation or a building.



   PROJECT IDENTIFICATION SIGN. Any sign identifying only a general
contractor’s name and telephone number and the project name for building
construction and remodeling projects.



   PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign projecting from and attached perpendicular to
a wall of a building. A sign attached to the wall of a building or structure,
with the exposed face(s) in a plane perpendicular to the building wall.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The land area over which the city has rights
either through ownership or easement, to use for public street and utility
purposes.



   REAL ESTATE SIGN. Any freestanding sign that announces the sale or
lease of property, excluding tract identification signs.



   SANDWICH BOARD SIGN. A portable A-frame sign that is designed to be
self-supporting by nature.



   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between the front line of a
building or structure and the street right-of-way line, as required by the
city Zoning Code.



   SIGN. Any visible identification, description, illustration, object or
device, illuminated or non-illuminated, which directs attention to a product,
service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation. This
definition does not include products typically displayed in the window(s) of
businesses.



   TEMPORARY SIGN. A real estate sign, or any other sign in place for 90
days or less.



   TOTAL SURFACE AREA. The entire area within any continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of lettering, representations or other figures
or messages, together with any material or color which is an integral part of
the display or which is used to differentiate the sign from the background
against which it is placed.



   TRACT SIGN. Any freestanding sign which announces the sale or lease of
a subdivided or an unsubdivided tract of land containing 20 or more acres.



   WALL SIGN. A sign attached to the wall of a building or structure, with
the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the building wall.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. II)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993; Ord.
07-01, passed 1-2-2007; Ord. 2008-05, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 2012-01, passed
1-17-2012)



§ 153.03  PRIOR RIGHTS, ACTION OR CAUSES.



   Nothing contained herein shall affect any rights, actions or causes of
action which shall have accrued to the city prior to the effective date of
this chapter under any ordinance in effect immediately prior to the effective
date of this chapter.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 2)



§ 153.04  SEVERABILITY.



   In accordance with the following, it is hereby declared that the
several provisions of this chapter are separable.



   (A)   Provision of chapter. If any court of competent jurisdiction
determines any provision of this chapter to be invalid, such determination
shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not specifically
included in the court’s judgment order.



   (B)   Any particular sign. If any court of competent jurisdiction
determines any provision of this chapter to be invalid as applied to any
particular sign, such determination shall not affect the application of such
provision to any other sign not specifically included in the court’s
judgment order.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 4)



GENERAL REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS



§ 153.15  PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   No permanent sign shall be affixed or installed or displayed
in public view, or any portable sign placed or displayed in public view,
within the city without prior approvals and issuance of all permits and/or
approvals, as required herein.



   (B)   All signs shall be maintained in conformance with this section
and all other applicable requirements of the city and shall otherwise be
maintained in good repair.



   (C)   Fees shall be charged by the city for permit(s) in accordance
with the schedule of fees established by the Building Review Board and
approved by the City Council and on file in the office of the Director of
Community Development.



   (D)   Application for a sign permit can be obtained from and shall
be filed with the Director of Community Development and shall contain or have
attached thereto the following information:



      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of applicant;



      (2)   A scaled drawing showing the lot and building(s) and
structure(s) to which the sign(s) is (are) to be attached or erected. The
exact position of the sign(s) shall be noted on the drawing;



      (3)   A scaled blueprint, drawing or plan of the sign(s)
showing building specifications for the construction and attachment to the
building or in the ground;



      (4)   A sample of the construction materials and colors of the
sign(s); and



      (5)   If required by the Director of Community Development, a
copy of the necessary calculations showing that the structure is designed for
dead load and constructed to withstand wind pressure of not less than 35
pounds per square foot, certified by a licensed structural engineer.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. III, A)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.16  BUILDING CODE REQUIREMENTS.



   All signs shall be attached, anchored and/or fastened so as to
withstand wind pressure of not less than 35 pounds per square foot, unless
otherwise approved by the Director of Community Development.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. III, B)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.17  BUILDING REVIEW BOARD CONSIDERATION.



   The Building Review Board shall review all sign applications submitted
to it by the Director of Community Development in accordance with § 150.147
of the city code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. III, C)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.18  ILLUMINATION OF SIGNS, BUILDINGS AND AREAS.



   (A)   All illuminated signs shall be subject to the provisions of
the City Electrical Code. (Note: electrical permits are required for all sign
wiring.)



   (B)   The use of unshielded lights, including incandescent bulbs on
or strung on poles, wires or any other type of support to illuminate
buildings, outdoor sales areas or outdoor storage areas is prohibited. A
building may be illuminated when approved by the Building Review Board, but
all lights used for this purpose shall be located, shielded and directed in
such a manner that the light source is not directly visible from any
surrounding public or private property.



   (C)   Whenever external illumination is used for a sign, the source
of light shall be located, shielded and directed in such a manner that the
source is not directly visible from any surrounding property.



   (D)   All receptacles or devices used to provide external
illumination for wall and freestanding signs shall not protrude more than
nine inches from the face of the sign except for ground lightning.



   (E)   The lighting intensity of any sign, whether resulting from
internal or external illumination, shall not exceed 25 foot candles when
measured with a standard light meter at four feet from the center of the face
of the sign.



   (F)   The lighting intensity of all signs is subject to further
review following installation.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. III, D)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.19  EXEMPT SIGNS.



   The following signs shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a
permit and from the limitation on items of information, but shall be subject
to the other provisions of this chapter, and (with the exception of
“addresses”) shall be included for purposes of determining the allowable
total number and size of signs on a premises:



   (A)   Addresses. Address numerals and other sign information
required by law or governmental order, rule or regulation. Such address
information cannot exceed two square feet per officially assigned address, or
the size required by the law, order, rule or regulation, whichever is greater;



   (B)   Auxiliary signs. Auxiliary signs placed in store windows
regarding hours of operation, accepted charge cards, warnings or similar
information, provided that they shall not exceed one square foot or 144
square inches total;



   (C)   Bulletin boards. Bulletin boards, not exceeding 12 square feet
for public, eleemosynary or religious institutions where the bulletin board
is located on the premises of said institutions;



   (D)   Business nameplates. Non-illuminated nameplates denoting the
business name or an occupation legally conducted on the premises, provided
that only one nameplate per proprietor may be erected and that such nameplate
not exceed one square foot;



   (E)   Flags and standards. Flags, standards, emblems and insignia of
governmental, or educational organizations, having a size less than 40 square
feet, and displayed for noncommercial purposes, and not more than one flag
pole and three flags per zoning lot. Three flags and three flag poles would
be permitted in commercial areas only;



   (F)   Government signs. Signs of duly constituted governmental body,
including traffic signs or other similar regulatory devices, directional
signs, Historic District signs, legal notices, warnings at railroad crossings
and other instructional or regulatory signs pertaining to health, hazards,
parking, swimming, dumping and such emergency or non-advertising signs as may
be approved by the City Engineer or Director of Community Development for
safety purposes or by the City Council;



   (G)   Historic markers. Commemorative plaques, memorial tablets or
emblems of official historical bodies, provided that no such marker shall
exceed two square feet and provided further that all such markers shall be
placed flat against a building, monument stone or other permanent surface;



   (H)   Holiday decorations. Temporary displays of a primarily
decorative nature, clearly incidental and customary with traditionally
accepted civic, patriotic or religious holidays;



   (I)   Monument signs. Plaques, tablets, cornerstones or lettering
inlaid into the architectural materials of a building or structure of not
more than two square feet denoting the name of that structure and its date of
erection;



   (J)   Project identification signs. One freestanding sign not
exceeding two square feet per side and four feet in height may be placed on
the premises of new non-single-family and non-duplex residential building or
undergoing remodeling, which shall be reviewed and approved by the Director
of Community Development prior to installation. Signs must be removed upon
issuance of occupancy permit or final inspection;



   (K)   Site information signs. Signs of no more than two square feet
which, without including an advertising reference of any kind, provide
direction or instruction to guide persons to facilities intended to serve the
public, including, but not specifically limited to, those signs identifying
rest rooms, public telephones, walkways, traffic flow, parking restrictions
and features of a similar nature;



   (L)   Political signs. Political signs may be located entirely on
private property pursuant to the owner’s consent and subject to the
following limitations:



      (1)   Political campaign signs of not more than six square
feet in area per candidate or issue per lot may be displayed. No such sign
may exceed four feet in height;



      (2)   Political signs shall be maintained in good physical
condition and shall not exceed six square feet in area and four feet in
height per sign. Except as provided in division (L)(3) below, the total area
of political signs shall not exceed a total of 30 square feet in area per
zoning lot, and the total area of political signs that may be located within
the required setback is zero square feet;



      (3)   Notwithstanding the size limitations contained in
division (L)(2) above, from the date a ballot for any particular election has
been certified until seven days after such election occurs, in addition to
the amount of signage authorized in division (L)(2) above, political campaign
signs that meet the criteria established in division (L)(1) above may be
located within the required setback with no limitations on total square feet
per zoning lot;



      (4)   Unless a political sign includes on the sign face the
name of the person responsible for the sign, the owner of the private
property on which the sign is located shall be deemed responsible for the
sign;



      (5)   Political signs shall be exempted from any regulations
regarding sign colors, but not regulations relating to illumination of signs;



      (6)   Political signs are permitted at all times and are
exempted from permit requirements at all times; and



      (7)   Political signs may not be located in the public
right-of-way.



   (M)   Warning signs. A warning sign such as no trespassing, beware
of dog, no soliciting and the like, not to exceed one square foot in size; and



   (N)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be exempted from any
regulations regarding sign colors, but not regulations relating to the
illumination of signs.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. III, E)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993; Ord.
07-01, passed 1-2-2007; Ord. 2008-05, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 2012-01, passed
1-17-2012)



§ 153.20  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   All signs not specifically permitted by the provisions of §§
153.19, 153.40 through 153.43 and 153.55 through 153.65 shall be prohibited
within the city limits of the city.



   (B)   Blinking, flashing, fluttering, rotating lights or other
illuminating devices, or any illumination which has a change in light
intensity, brightness or color shall be prohibited, except as provided on a
temporary basis as indicated in § 153.19, i.e., holiday decorations.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to place or maintain any undulating,
swinging, rotating or otherwise moving signs, pennants, banners, flags,
balloons, ribbons, streamers and spinners or similar devices in view of any
street or highway, except as permitted by § 153.19(L).



   (D)   No color lights shall be used at any location, or in any
manner where they may be confused or construed as traffic control devices.



   (E)   Parked trucks, cars, trailers, taxi cabs and other vehicular
equipment shall not be used as stationary or mobile displays within the
corporate limits. This does not preclude incidental signs being painted or
affixed to vehicles in the customary manner of identifying the owner of a
business.



   (F)   Business name plates are not permitted in residential areas.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. III, F)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.21  VARIATIONS.



   (A)   The Building Review Board, upon written application for a sign
permit or for a variation from the regulations contained in this section to
allow for the continued use of an existing sign, and having reviewed the
same, may authorize the issuance of a sign permit or in the case of an
existing sign, the continued use of said sign, for signs that do not fully
comply with the requirements of this chapter provided that the Building
Review Board, prior thereto, makes one or more of the following findings of
fact:



      (1)   The proposed or existing sign is compatible with
surrounding land uses and/or building signs;



      (2)   The granting of approval for this proposed or existing
sign is consistent with the overall purpose of the sign regulations; or



      (3)   Due to unique circumstances or safety considerations,
the proposed or existing sign is aesthetically consistent with the
environment and because of these circumstances or considerations, it is
necessary that a variation be granted for the erection of the proposed sign
or the continued use of an existing sign.



   (B)   In the event of a denial of a variation, the applicant shall
have the right to appeal the action directly to the City Council. The City
Council may, by a majority vote, refer the application back to the Building
Review Board or set aside the action of the Building Review Board, and order
the issuance of the variation in accordance with the application thereof.



   (C)   A sign approved by the Building Review Board shall be
considered void if the work covered by the review has not been started within
90 days from when the permit is issued and completed within one year or if a
permit is not issued for the sign within two years of Building Review Board
approval.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. III, G)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.22  ILLEGAL SIGNS; PERMANENT.



   If any permanent sign has been constructed or erected or is being
maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, written notice
shall be given to the occupant or property owner thereof. If the occupant or
property owner fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the
standards herein set forth within 14 days after such notice, such sign may be
removed or altered by the city and a lien placed on the property for the full
cost of such action, including administration, legal and overhead charges.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. III, H)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.23  ILLEGAL SIGNS; TEMPORARY.



   If any temporary sign has been constructed or erected, altered or is
being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, written
notice shall be given to the occupant or property owner thereof. If the
occupant or property owner fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply
with the standards herein set forth within 24 hours of receipt of notice from
the city, such failure shall constitute a violation of this chapter and the
general penalty provisions set forth in § 10.99 of the city code shall
apply. In addition, such sign may be removed or altered by the city and a
lien placed on the property for the full cost of such action, including
administrative, legal and overhead charges.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. III, I)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.24  UNSAFE SIGNS.



   If the city shall find that any sign is unsafe or insecure or is a
menace to the public, the city may require the occupant and property owner to
repair or remove the sign, or the city may, at its own discretion, remove or
repair the sign immediately, with written notice to the occupant/property
owner at the expense of the property owner. A lien will be placed on the
property for the full cost of such action including administrative, legal and
overhead charges.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. III, J)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.25  SIGN CONDITION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   All signs, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a
good and workmanlike condition.



   (B)   Lettering shall be cleanly maintained and legible. Faded,
peeling, and broken lettering will not be permitted and must be brought to
standard requirements as soon as reasonably possible.



   (C)   Notice of deficiency must be remedied within 30 days.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. III, K)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.26  SIGN REMOVAL.



   Within 30 days after the vacation of any buildings, shop, store, space,
development or portion thereof, the owner shall remove or cause to be removed
all obsolete signs. If such signs are not removed within the 30-day time
period, the city may have such signs removed at the expense of the owner of
the property. A lien will be placed on the property for the full cost of such
action, including administrative, legal and overhead charges.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. III, L)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.27  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   Signs which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter
but which complied with all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations in
effect at the time of their erection, may remain so long as the use which
they advertise or identify remains; but in no case may said nonconforming
signs remain after September 26, 1996, except those signs conforming to the
sign regulations at the time they were approved by the city for installation.
Said signs may remain until the business name changes or the sign is replaced.



   (B)   No nonconforming sign shall be enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered or changed in any manner nor shall it be altered so as
to advertise or identify any use other than the use in effect at the time it
became a nonconforming sign. At any time that such nonconforming sign shall
cease to advertise or identify its original use, it shall lose its
nonconforming status and must be removed in accordance with the provisions of
§ 153.22.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. III, M)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



RESIDENCE DISTRICT SIGNS



§ 153.40  SIGNS ANNOUNCING THE SALE OR LEASE OF LAND.



   No signs shall be installed or permitted on properties located in the
residence zoning districts except in accordance with the following provisions
and §§ 153.41 through 153.43.



   (A)   Real estate signs.



      (1)   One real estate sign, not exceeding two  square feet in
area per side and four feet in height to the highest part of the sign or
post, announcing the sale or lease of a property, shall be permitted on the
private property, but not on the public right-of-way.



      (2)   (a)   A maximum of two open house signs may be placed
in the public right-of-way no more frequently than two days a week and for a
period of time not to exceed six hours per day.



         (b)   The open house signs shall conform to the size
requirements of real estate signs as set forth in division (A)(1) above and
may be placed on the parkway of the public right-of-way:



            1.   Abutting the private property to which the
open house sign relates;



            2.   At an intersection of the street on which the
private property is located with another street; and/or



            3.   Of the closest major intersection to the
private property.



         (c)   In no event shall any open house sign be located
in a manner or location that obstructs views of motorists using the
rights-of-way.



      (3)   Prior to the installation of a sign(s) permitted in
divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above, each real estate firm that operates within
the city shall have its general sign program, including all signs intended
for display, reviewed and approved by the Building Review Board as to color,
lettering, size, general design and appearance.



      (4)   When a property is offered for sale by the owner of said
property, the sign used to announce that said property is for sale, shall
conform to the provisions of divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above.



      (5)   When a new home and property are offered for sale by a
contractor who is not already referenced on a subdivision tract sign, an
individual sign may be used to announce that said home and/or property are
for sale. Said sign shall conform to the provisions of divisions (A)(1) and
(A)(2) above and may be used for a maximum of one year.



      (6)   A real estate sign must be removed within 48 hours of
the closing of the premises sale or during any leasehold of the premises,
other than 90 days before a current lease is about to expire.



   (B)   Tract signs.



      (1)   In tracts of land containing more than 20 acres, one
tract sign not exceeding 32 square feet in total surface area and six feet in
height shall be permitted, subject to approval by the Building Review Board
as to color, lettering, size, general design and appearance.



      (2)   Further, no such sign may be installed within 50 feet of
the front property line. Said sign shall be removed within 24 months after
the installation or 30 days after completion of sales, whichever is sooner.



      (3)   During the period of time when said sign is in place no
individual real estate sign(s) shall be permitted on any of the lots or
portion of the land within the subdivision or tract, except that an
individual home owner may advertise the resale of any individual home or lot.



      (4)   However, if there is more than one developer or owner of
lots within a subdivision, said tract sign may be amended with approval by
the Building Review Board, to provide additional information related to
multiple ownership. If the Board denies the right to amend the existing sign,
it may recommend that a second sign be erected in the interior of the
subdivision to provide for such information. Said sign shall adhere to all of
the requirements of tract signs as to size, height, color, location and
period of installation, as listed above.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. IV, A)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993; Ord.
95-19, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 07-01, passed 1-2-2007; Ord. 2008-05, passed
1-22-2008)



§ 153.41  NONRESIDENTIAL LAND USES.



   One sign not exceeding 12 square feet in total surface area shall be
permitted, subject to approval by Building Review Board, on the premises of
all nonresidential land uses which are permitted by special use permit in
accordance with § 159.045(L) of the Zoning Code. However, in the case where
the land use involves a campus type setting or more than one building, the
Building Review Board may approve signs as are deemed necessary to provide
adequate direction and/or information throughout the property.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. IV, B)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.42  EVENT SIGNS ON THE PREMISES.



   (A)   A sign not exceeding 12 square feet in total surface area and
six feet in height announcing a drive or event of a religious, civic or
philanthropic organization may be permitted on the premises of said
organization provided that the sign shall be removed within two days after
the completion of said event.



   (B)   A maximum of three additional signs may be placed at the
community information areas subject to the limitations set forth in § 153.56.



      (1)   The application for an event sign(s) shall be filed with
the office of the Director of Community Development a minimum of five days
prior to the placement of the event sign. The application shall also include
a colored photo of the sign or an eight and one-half-inch by 11-inch copy of
the art work attached thereto.



      (2)   Event signs shall be made of durable, all-weather
materials and be approved by the Director of Community Development.



      (3)   Event direction sign(s) on the public right-of-way may
be permitted where deemed necessary by the Director of Community Development
for traffic and general circulation purposes on event day(s) only.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. IV, C)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.43  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   (A)   A temporary sign of less than six square feet in area per side
and four feet in height to the highest part of the sign or post shall be
permitted on private property, but not in the required setback or on the
public right-of-way.



   (B)   A temporary sign proposing a commercial transaction of any
kind (other than approved real estate signs or “garage sale” signs) may
not be displayed unless it is reviewed and approved by the Building Review
Board as to color, lettering, size, general design and appearance.



   (C)   No owner shall have more than 18 square feet of temporary
signs on their property.



(Ord. 2008-05, passed 1-22-2008)



SIGNS PERMITTED IN OFFICE, OFFICE RESEARCH AND BUSINESS DISTRICTS



§ 153.55  GENERALLY.



   All signs associated with new developments located in the office and
business zoning districts, except governmental and public utility signs,
shall be subject to review and approval by the Building Review Board or
Historic Preservation Commission, as applicable. All replacement signs
located in office and business zoning districts, except for governmental and
public utility signs, that comply with the applicable code requirements and
design standards, shall be authorized through the issuance of a building
permit. Requests for variances from applicable code requirements and design
standards for replacement signs shall be subject to review and approval by
the Building Review Board or Historic Preservation Commission, as applicable,
prior to installation.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. V)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993; Ord.
2008-05, passed 1-22-2008)



§ 153.56  FREESTANDING IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.



   (A)   (1)   In the office and business districts, one
freestanding sign not exceeding a total area of 24 square feet per side shall
be permitted on each zoning lot which is developed with a principal building.



      (2)   Said sign shall not exceed:



         (a)   Five feet in height from grade, if lighted; or



         (b)   Eight feet in height from grade, if not lighted.



   (B)   In the Office Research District, one freestanding sign per lot
not exceeding 100 square feet in signage area may be erected provided that
said sign shall not exceed:



      (1)   Six feet in height, if lighted; or



      (2)   Ten feet in height, if not lighted.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. V, A)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.57  WALL OR WINDOW SIGNS.



   (A)   In the office and business districts, one wall or window sign
may be permitted on the front facade, not exceeding 5% of the wall area
parallel or most nearly parallel to the public way or 25 square feet,
whichever is lesser.



   (B)   In the Office Research District, one wall sign shall be
permitted on the front facade of a principal building having an area in
square feet not exceeding twice the number of lineal feet of such facade or
250 square feet, whichever is less.



   (C)   An additional sign on a corner building with frontage on two
public streets may be permitted by the Building Review Board provided that
said sign shall be deducted from the total maximum sign area allowed for the
front facade.



   (D)   The information contained on a wall or window sign shall be
limited to the regular name of business as it appears on the records of the
State Department of Revenue and a maximum of three words describing products
or services.



   (E)   Wall signs shall be no more than six inches in depth and
placed flush to the face of the building on which they are attached. Further,
said signs shall not be permitted to extend above the fascia line or coping
line for the wall to which said sign is attached, for one story or located
above the first floor elevation of the building, unless specifically approved
by the Building Review Board.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. V, B)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.58  AWNING SIGNS.



   Sign(s) on awnings(s) may be permitted, provided however, that the size
of letters on such awnings shall not exceed five inches in height and shall
be placed on the descending skirt only. Awnings shall be constructed and
erected so that the lowest portion of the projecting frame shall not be less
than seven feet six inches, and the lowest portion of the descending skirt
shall not be less than six feet eight inches, above the level of the sidewalk
or public thoroughfare. Awnings with signs shall be considered in lieu of a
wall or window sign and shall be considered a part of the 5% or 25 square
foot calculation and deducted from the total.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. V, C)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.59  PROJECTING SIGNS.



   Projecting signs may be permitted in lieu of a wall or window sign,
subject to Building Review Board approval.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. V, D)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.60  REAL ESTATE SIGNS.



   Real estate signs shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions
of § 153.40.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. V, E)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993)



§ 153.61  UNLIGHTED TEMPORARY ADVERTISING SIGNS.



   (A)   An unlighted temporary advertising sign is permitted for no
more than 15 consecutive days, five times per calendar year, for the purpose
of announcement of a sale or sale item, but only if the sign does not exceed
ten square feet in sign area, and is placed or hung in one window per facade.



   (B)   A storefront window that is physically divided into multiple
panes, and therefore does not allow for adequate and appropriate window space
for one sign of ten square feet in size, may utilized multiple contiguous
smaller signs having a maximum aggregate sign area of ten square feet.



   (C)   A dated sign permit provided by the city shall be firmly
affixed to each temporary advertising sign for the duration of the display of
said sign.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. V, F)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993; Ord.
2008-05, passed 1-22-2008)



§ 153.62  COMMUNITY INFORMATION AREAS.



   Areas of public land as designated by the City Council as community
information areas where event signs may be posted are subject to the
following.



   (A)   Application for event signs shall be filed with, and approved
by, the Director of Community Development, subject to space availability, on
a first come, first served basis, before being placed in the designated
area(s).



   (B)   The event signs must be 30 inches wide by 40 inches tall and
one-fourth inch thick to allow placement in the community sign frame
installed at the designated areas. No nails, staples or screws are permitted.



   (C)   No more than four event signs will be permitted to be
displayed at one time, and no sign shall be displayed more than the seven
days prior to the event and shall be removed within two days following the
event.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 1, Art. V, G)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993; Ord.
2008-05, passed 1-22-2008)



§ 153.63  SANDWICH BOARD SIGNS.



   (A)   As an alternative to placing or hanging a temporary
advertising sign in a storefront window pursuant to § 153.61, a business may
place one A-frame style sandwich board on the sidewalk directly in front of
the business, at the public entrance for the purpose of announcing a sale or
sale item, provided that a straight unobstructed pathway of at least 60
inches wide is maintained on the sidewalk.



   (B)   The sandwich board sign shall be constructed of a sturdy frame
and shall be no larger than two feet wide and three feet tall.



   (C)   The sandwich board may be placed on the sidewalk during
business hours only.



   (D)   A dated sign permit provided by the city shall be firmly
affixed to each sandwich board sign for the duration of the display of said
sign.



   (E)   In requesting approval from the Building Review Board, the
owner of a business seeking to use a sandwich board sign shall certify that
any sandwich board sign placed in the public right-of-way shall not be used
in any manner that would cause the city to be:



      (1)   In violation of any state law (including without
limitation any restrictions on the use of public property for political
purposes); or



      (2)   Regarded as a public forum under state law.



   (F)   Each sandwich board sign will be regarded as a temporary
advertising sign for purposes of the number of consecutive days it may be
displayed and number of such signs permitted annually for any premises.



(Ord. 2008-05, passed 1-22-2008)



§ 153.64  DIRECTORY SIGNS.



   (A)   Directory signs identifying businesses within an identifiable
shopping district such as, but not limited to, Market Square or Settler’s
Square, are permitted as freestanding, lighted signs.



   (B)   The location, size and design of the directory signs are
subject to the review and approval of the Historic Preservation Commission or
Building Review Board, as the case may be, but in no event may such directory
signs exceed four square feet in total surface area.



(Ord. 2008-05, passed 1-22-2008)



§ 153.65  DESIGN GUIDELINES.



   In addition to the standards set forth in §§ 153.56 through 153.59,
in reviewing an application for a sign permit, the Director of Community
Development, Building Review Board, Historic Preservation Commission or the
City Council, as the case may be, shall consider whether the sign meets the
City of Lake Forest Design Guidelines for Signage and Awnings in the Office
and Business Districts which guidelines are incorporated as part of this code
of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Ord. 2008-05, passed 1-22-2008)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to fines not less than $25 nor
more than $750 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.



   (B)   All real estate, contractor identification and other signs
removed by the Community Development staff for a violation of this chapter
will be returned after a service charge, as set out in the fee schedule, is
paid and it is claimed at the office of the Director of Community Development
within 14 days of removal.



   (C)   Any cost of collection of fines or charges under this chapter
may be assess in accordance with § 10.99(B) of this city code.



(Prior Code, Ch. 36, § 3)  (Ord. 93-64, passed 10-4-1993; Ord. 03-37,
passed 7-7-2003)



CHAPTER 154:  TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS



Section




General Provisions




   154.01   Definitions




Trailers




   154.15   Habitation, use and maintenance of trailers



   154.16   Parking and storing of trailers



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HOUSE-CAR TRAILER. Any structure intended for or so constructed that it
will be primarily suitable for living or sleeping quarters, or for office
purposes, mounted upon wheels, or any other device upon which it may readily
be transported, either by its own power or some externally applied tractive
effort; provided, however, that this definition shall not apply to any
vehicle lawfully operated upon fixed rails.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association or corporation.



   TOWING UNIT. Any vehicle furnishing tractive effort for a house-car
trailer.



(Prior Code, § 41-1)  (Ord. 322, passed 11-14-1946)



TRAILERS



§ 154.15  HABITATION, USE AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAILERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to inhabit, use or
maintain a house-car trailer for living or sleeping quarters in the city. It
shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or use a trailer for permanent
office purposes in the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or use a
trailer for temporary office purposes in the city without first having
obtained a permit from the Director of Building and Zoning.



(Prior Code, § 41-19)  (Ord. 322, passed 11-14-1946; Ord. 1313, passed
6-7-1982)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Buildings, see Ch. 150



   Zoning, see Ch. 159



§ 154.16  PARKING AND STORING OF TRAILERS.



   A trailer may be parked or stored in the city provided, however, that
it shall not be used for living or sleeping quarters, provided, however, that
it shall not be a nuisance or constitute a fire hazard.



(Prior Code, § 41-20)  (Ord. 322, passed 11-14-1946; Ord. 1313, passed
6-7-1982)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Buildings, see Ch. 150



   Zoning, see Ch. 159



CHAPTER 155:  HISTORIC PRESERVATION



Section



   155.01   Purpose



   155.02   Definitions



   155.03   Historic Preservation Commission



   155.04   Nomination, consideration and designation of local
landmarks and districts



   155.05   Criteria for designation of local landmarks or districts



   155.06   Criteria for designation of interior landmark



   155.07   Certificate of appropriateness



   155.08   Standards for review of applications for certificates of
appropriateness



   155.09   Exceptions to issuance of certificate of appropriateness



   155.10   Certificate of economic hardship



   155.11   Appeals



   155.12   Amendment and rescission of designation



   155.13   Designation of landmarks and properties listed in the
National Register of Historic Places



   155.14   Severability



 



   155.99   Penalty



§ 155.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the educational, cultural,
economic and general welfare of the city by:



   (A)   Identifying, preserving, protecting, enhancing and encouraging
the continued utilization and the rehabilitation of such areas, properties,
structures, sites and objects having a special historical, community,
architectural or aesthetic interest or value to the city and its citizens;



   (B)   Safeguarding the city’s historic and cultural heritage, as
embodied and reflected in such areas, properties, structures, sites and
objects determined eligible for designation by ordinance as landmarks and
historic districts;



   (C)   Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments
of the past as represented in such landmarks and districts;



   (D)   Protecting and enhancing the value of properties within the
city by promoting the attractiveness of the city to homeowners, home buyers,
tourists, visitors, businesses and shoppers, and thereby supporting and
promoting business, commerce, industry and tourism, and providing economic
benefit to the city;



   (E)   Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration and
rehabilitation of areas, properties, structures, sites and objects, including
entire districts and neighborhoods, and thereby preventing future blight and
deterioration;



   (F)   Fostering the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people
of the city through the designation of landmarks and districts;



   (G)   Encouraging orderly and efficient development that recognizes
the special value to the city of the protection of areas, properties,
structures, sites and objects as landmarks and districts;



   (H)   Continuing the preparation of surveys and studies of the
city’s historical and architectural resources and maintaining and updating
a register of areas, properties, structures, sites and objects that may be
worthy of landmark designation; and



   (I)   Encouraging public participation in identifying and preserving
historical and architectural resources through public hearings on proposed
designations, applications for changes to historic structures, applications
for economic hardships and special merit applications.



(Prior Code, § 51-1)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 155.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. In the
event of a conflict between the following definitions and the definitions
included in any other ordinance of the city, the following definitions shall
control.



   ALTERATION. Any act or process requiring a building permit or
demolition permit, or any act or process included in § 155.07(A), that
changes one or more of the historic, cultural, architectural or
archaeological features of an area or site, or the exterior architectural
appearance of a property, structure or object, including, but not limited to,
the erection, construction, reconstruction or relocation of any property,
structure or object, or any part of a property, structure or object, or land
altering activities.



   APPLICANT. A person who submits an application for issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness or certificate of economic hardship.



   APPLICATION. A form submitted for approval of alteration, interior
alteration, construction, demolition or relocation that requires issuance of
a certificate of appropriateness or certificate of economic hardship.



   AREA. A specific geographic division of the city.



   BUILDING REVIEW BOARD. The Building Review Board of the city.



   BUSINESS DAY. A day on which the Community Development Department is
open for business. Sections of this chapter that refer to time periods in
which BUSINESS DAYS are not specified shall be understood to refer to
calendar days.



   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. A certificate issued by the Commission
indicating review and authorization of plans for alteration, interior
alteration, construction, demolition or relocation of a landmark or property,
structure, site or object within a district.



   CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP. A certificate issued by the
Commission after a determination by the Commission that the previous denial
of a certificate of appropriateness has resulted in a denial of all
reasonable use of and return from the property.



   COMMISSION. The City Historic Preservation Commission.



   COMMISSIONERS. Persons appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the Council, to the City Historic Preservation Commission.



   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT. The City Community Development
Department.



   CONSTRUCTION. The act of adding to a structure, or the erection of a
new principal or accessory structure on a property or site, in a manner that
requires a building permit.



   CONTRIBUTING SIGNIFICANCE. A classification applied to an area,
property, structure, site or object within a district signifying that it
contributes generally to the qualities that give the district historic,
cultural, architectural or archaeological significance as embodied in the
criteria for designating a district. An area, property, structure, site or
object can be contributing even if it has been altered, as long as it
maintains the character defined for the district.



   COUNCIL. The City Council.



   DEMOLITION. Any act or process that destroys all or any part of an
exterior wall, foundation, interior, roof structure or exterior column or
load-bearing wall of a landmark, an interior landmark or a property,
structure, site or object within a district.



   DESIGN GUIDELINE. Any design standard specified by the Commission for
alteration, interior alteration, construction or relocation that is unique to
a particular landmark or district to be used in conjunction with other design
standards in this chapter, and the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for
Rehabilitation of Historic Properties, as amended.



   DISTRICT. An identifiable area with definable boundaries designated as
an HISTORIC DISTRICT by the Council and in which a significant number of the
properties, structures, sites or objects have a high degree of historic,
cultural, architectural or archaeological significance and integrity. Many of
the properties, structures, sites or objects included in the DISTRICT may
qualify as landmarks and may or may not be contiguous. For purposes of this
chapter and unless otherwise expressly provided by Council in the ordinance
for designation, all designations shall presumptively include the lot(s) of
record associated with structures and objects located in the district.



   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE. The architectural character and
general composition of the exterior of a property, structure or object,
visible from a public street or public way, including, but not limited to,
the kind and texture of the building material and the type, design and
character of all architectural details and elements, including, but not
limited to, windows, doors, light fixtures, trim and signs.



   INTERIOR ALTERATION. Any act or process requiring a building permit or
a demolition permit, or an act or process included in § 155.07(A) that
changes one or more of the historic, cultural, architectural, or
archaeological features of an interior landmark.



   INTERIOR LANDMARK. The interior portion of a structure designated as an
INTERIOR LANDMARK by the Council because of its historic, cultural,
architectural or archaeological significance to the city. For purposes of
this chapter, any INTERIOR LANDMARK designation shall be limited exclusively
to those areas and features within a structure expressly described or
depicted in the Council’s ordinance for designation, and may include
without limitation the configuration of interior space, the kind, color and
texture of the building materials and finishes, the type and style of
windows, doors, lights, signs, affixed elements such as columns, cornices,
baseboards, fireplaces and mantels, flooring, paneling, light fixtures,
hardware and other fixtures appurtenant to such interior.



   LAND ALTERING ACTIVITY. Any act or process requiring a permit that
changes one or more of the historic, cultural, architectural, natural or
archaeological features of an area, property or site, including but not
limited to, berming, scraping, leveling, grading, pile driving, excavating
and compacting.



   LANDMARK. A site, property, structure or object designated as a
LANDMARK by the Council that has a high degree of historic, cultural,
architectural or archaeological significance to the city. Designation by
Council as a LANDMARK does not require that the site, property, structure or
object be of higher historic, cultural, architectural or archaeological
significance than a site property, structure or object contributing
significance in a District. For purposes of this chapter and unless otherwise
expressly provided by Council in the ordinance for designation, all
designations shall presumptively include the lot(s) of record associated with
the structure or object designated as a LANDMARK and shall be limited to the
exterior of the LANDMARK.



   LOT OF RECORD. A zoning lot as defined in the City Zoning Code, §
159.002.



   MEMBERS. Members of the Commission, also referred to throughout this
chapter as COMMISSIONERS.



   NOMINATOR. A person or persons who submit a form for the designation of
a landmark, interior landmark or district.



   NON-CONTRIBUTING. A designation applied to a property, structure, site
or object within a district indicating that it is not a representation of the
qualities that give the district historic, cultural, architectural or
archaeological significance as embodied in the criteria for designating a
district.



   OBJECT. Anything constructed, fabricated or created, the use of which
does not require permanent or semi-permanent location on or in the ground,
and can be moved from one location to another, including, without limitation,
ships, boats, railroad cars, automobiles, wagons, tractors, statues and works
of art.



   OWNER OF RECORD. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in a
property. The OWNER OF RECORD may be established by reference to the most
current property tax assessment rolls as maintained by the Assessor of the
county.



   PERSON. An individual, corporation, governmental agency, business
trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more persons having a
joint or common interest or any other legal entity.



   PLAN COMMISSION. The City Plan Commission.



   PROJECT. Any alteration, construction, demolition or relocation of an
area, property, structure, site or object.



   PROPERTY. Land and structures or land and objects identified as a
separate lot for purposes of the subdivision and zoning regulations of the
city.



   RELOCATION. Any repositioning of a structure or object on its site or
to another site.



   REPAIR. Any change to an area, property, structure, site or object that
is not alteration, construction, relocation or demolition.



   RULES. The rules and procedures of the City Historic Preservation
Commission, as they may exist from time to time.



   SITE. The location of an event, activity, structure or object.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires,
directly or indirectly, a permanent location on or in the ground, including
without limitation buildings, garages, fences, gazebos, signs, billboards,
antennas, satellite sending or receiving dishes, swimming pools, walks,
walls, steps, sidewalks and works of art.



   ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. The City Zoning Board of Appeals.



(Prior Code, § 51-2)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 155.03  HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.



   (A)   Creation, composition, term. There is hereby created a City
Historic Preservation Commission herein referenced as the Commission.



      (1)   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, shall appoint seven Commissioners with one of the members appointed
as Chairperson. Each shall have demonstrated interest, knowledge, ability,
experience or expertise in architectural restoration, rehabilitation or
neighborhood conservation or revitalization. Each member may serve a maximum
of three consecutive, two-year terms on a staggered basis so that the terms
of not more than four Commissioners shall expire in any calendar year. Every
Commissioner shall continue in office after expiration of the term until a
successor shall have been duly appointed.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the requirements of division (A)(1)
above, upon adoption of this chapter, the Mayor, with the advice and consent
of Council, shall appoint seven Commissioners. The terms of these
Commissioners shall commence upon appointment.



      (3)   A Chair of the Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, prior to May 1 of each
year. The Chair shall serve a term of one year and shall be eligible for
reappointment. In the absence of the Chair, a designated Commission member
shall act as Chair and shall have all the powers of the Chair. The acting
Chair shall have such other powers and duties as may from time to time be
provided by the rules of the Commission.



      (4)   One of the Commissioners may also serve concurrently as
a member of the Plan Commission.



      (5)   Permanent vacancies on the Commission shall be filled by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council for the unexpired term of
the former Commissioner.



      (6)   Any Commissioner may be removed from office at any time
by the Mayor for failure to regularly attend meetings or inattention to
duties or responsibilities.



      (7)   Commissioners shall be subject to the provisions of all
rules, regulations, ordinances and statutes governing conduct of members of
the boards and commissions of the city, including, but not limited to,
Chapter 40, Ethics, of the city code, state statutes regarding gifts to
public officials, filing of statements of economic interest and the like.



      (8)   Commissioners shall serve without compensation.



   (B)   Powers and duties. The Commission shall have the following
powers and duties:



      (1)   To investigate and make recommendations to the Council
or its duly authorized committee concerning amendments and additions to city
ordinances or codes;



      (2)   To provide a forum for public discussion of historic
preservation issues;



      (3)   To prepare and distribute application forms for the
review of proposed demolitions, replacement structures, new structures on
vacant lots, additions and alterations within the historic districts; to hold
meetings and public hearings to review applications for certificates of
appropriateness affecting proposed or designated landmarks, interior
landmarks and districts; to approve or disapprove the issuance of
certificates of appropriateness;



      (4)   To recommend that the Council grant or deny exceptions
to the maximum floor area (building scale) requirements set forth in §
150.148(C) of the city code, for a new residence or an addition to an
existing residence that is a landmark or structure within a district, based
on the standards set forth in this § 150.148(D) of the city code are met;



      (5)   To consider applications for certificates of economic
hardship; to hold meetings and public hearings to review applications for
certificates of economic hardship affecting proposed or designated landmarks,
interior landmarks and districts; to approve or disapprove the issuance of
certificates of economic hardship and to recommend to the City Council
incentive plans as provided for in this chapter;



      (6)   To advise and make recommendations to other city boards
and commissions on matters before those bodies;



      (7)   To call upon available city staff members as well as
other experts for technical advice;



      (8)   To adopt its own procedural rules and regulations;



      (9)   To undertake any other action or activity necessary or
appropriate to the implementation of its powers and duties or to
implementation of the purposes of this chapter;



      (10)   To develop guidelines, if it deems appropriate, to
further explain how the standards set forth in § 155.08 may appropriately be
incorporated into a project. Such guidelines shall be available from the
Community Development Department; and



      (11)   To hold meetings and public hearings to review
nominations for landmark, interior landmarks and district designations; to
make determinations as to whether such nominations do or do not meet the
criteria for designation and to forward recommendations for approval of
designations to the City Council.



   (C)   Meetings, hearings, procedures and decisions.



      (1)   Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held
monthly. Special meetings may be called, or meetings may be canceled by the
Chair or any four Commissioners. All meetings, hearings and deliberations
shall be subject to the provisions of the Illinois Open Meetings Act, being 5
ILCS 120. Testimony at any hearing may be required by the Commission to be
given under oath.



      (2)   The meeting minutes and a permanent record of all
resolutions, motions, transactions and determinations of the Commission shall
be kept by the Director of Community Development or designee. Such records,
unless exempt from disclosure by law, shall be public records open to
inspection during working hours upon reasonable notice.



      (3)   The Commission shall adopt its own procedural rules for
the conduct of its business not inconsistent with the statutes of the state,
this chapter and the Council rules. Such rules shall be filed with the
Commission and with the City Clerk. Any rule so adopted which relates solely
to the conduct of hearings, and which is not required by the statutes of the
state or by the Council or by this chapter, may be waived by the Chair upon
good cause being shown.



      (4)   The Commission, by its rules, may create a sub-committee
structure to enhance efficiency in consideration of Commission business.



      (5)   No motion shall be passed by the Commission that could
in any manner deprive or restrict the owner of a property, structure, site or
object in its use, alteration, maintenance, disposition or demolition until
such owner shall first have had the opportunity to be heard at a public
meeting of the Commission.



      (6)   Every determination made by the Commission on an
application shall include written findings of fact, and shall specify the
reason or reasons for such determination.



      (7)   Notice of any decision of the Commission shall be mailed
to the applicant, ordinarily within ten business days of such decision.



      (8)   A quorum shall consist of four Commissioners for any
regular or special meeting. A meeting of the Commission cannot be called to
order without establishment of a quorum.



(Prior Code, § 51-3)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 155.04  NOMINATION, CONSIDERATION AND DESIGNATION OF LOCAL LANDMARKS AND
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Initiation of nomination.



      (1)   For landmarks and districts. Nomination of an area,
property, structure, site or object for consideration and designation as a
landmark or district shall be submitted to the Commission on a form prepared
by the Commission, and may be initiated by any of the following:



         (a)   An owner of record of the area, property,
structure, site or object being nominated;



         (b)   A member of the Commission;



         (c)   A simple majority of the Council; or



         (d)   A local, state or federal preservation
organization.



      (2)   For interior landmarks. Nomination of an interior space
(or portion thereof) of a structure for consideration and designation as an
interior landmark shall be submitted to the Commission on a form prepared by
the Commission; and provided that for nomination of an interior space (or
portion thereof) of any single-family residential property, such nomination
is initiated by, or concurred with in writing by, the beneficial or legal
owner of such interior space may be initiated by any of the following:



         (a)   An owner of record of the area, property,
structure, site or object being nominated;



         (b)   A member of the Commission;



         (c)   A simple majority of the Council; or



         (d)   A local, state or federal preservation
organization.



   (B)   Notification of nomination and public hearing notice.



      (1)   Owners of record shall be notified, by regular mail, of
the submission of a nomination form within ten business days of receipt of a
complete application.



      (2)   (a)   The Commission shall schedule a public hearing
on the nomination within 60 days following receipt of the completed
nomination form.



         (b)   Notice of the time, place and purpose of such a
hearing shall be given by the Commission not more 30 days nor less than 15
days prior thereto by the following methods:



            1.   By mailing of notification to each owner of
record of a nominated landmark or interior landmark or owner of record of
each property, structure, site or object in a nominated district; and



            2.   By publishing a notice in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city.



   (C)   Hearing.



      (1)   The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the
rules of the Commission.



      (2)   The Commission shall consider all testimony or evidence
relating to the designation criteria in § 155.05, from any person who makes
written submissions or appears at the public hearing.



      (3)   The owner of any nominated landmark, interior landmark
or of property, a structure, site or object within a nominated district,
shall be allowed a reasonable opportunity to present testimony or evidence
concerning the applicability of the designation criteria in § 155.05.



   (D)   Recommendation by Commission.



      (1)   (a)   Within 60 days of the close of the public
hearing, the Commission shall make a determination upon the evidence as to
whether the nominated landmark, interior landmark or district does or does
not meet the criteria for designation in § 155.05.



         (b)   If the Commission determines that the nominated
landmark, interior landmark or district does meet the criteria for
designation, the Commission shall forward a recommendation of approval to the
Council.



         (c)   The recommendation shall be accompanied by a
report detailing the findings of the Commission in support of the nomination
and shall be transmitted to the Council within 60 days.



      (2)   If the Commission fails to make its recommendation
within 60 days of the public hearing, or if the Commission finds that the
nominated landmark, interior landmark or district does not meet the criteria
for designation, the nomination process shall end.



      (3)   If the Commission fails to make its recommendation
within 60 days of the public hearing, or if the Commission votes not to
recommend a proposed designation to the Council, the Commission may not
reconsider the proposed designation, except as provided in division (F)
below, for a period of two years from the date of Commission action or the
close of the public hearing, whichever is applicable.



   (E)   Designation by Council.



      (1)   The Council shall not act upon a proposed landmark,
interior landmark or district until it has received a written report and
recommendation of approval from the Commission.



      (2)   In reaching its decision, the Council shall review the
evidence and testimony presented to the Commission.



      (3)   The designation of a nominated landmark, interior
landmark or district shall be by amendment to this chapter and shall require
the concurrence of a majority of the members of the Council.



      (4)   Notice of the Council’s approval of the designation
shall be provided by regular mail to the nominator and all property owners of
record of the landmark, interior landmark or properties within the District.



      (5)   If the Council does not approve the recommended
designation, the Commission may not reconsider the proposed designation,
except as provided in division (F) below, for a period of two years from the
date of the Council’s consideration.



   (F)   Reconsideration of previously nominated landmarks, interior
landmark and districts. The Commission may reconsider previously nominated
landmarks, interior landmark and districts within a period of two years of
previous action that occurred in accordance with divisions (D) and (E) above
only under the following conditions:



      (1)   Significant new information concerning the previously
nominated landmark, interior landmark or district relating to the criteria
for designation in § 155.05 is provided; and



      (2)   The Commission votes by an affirmative vote of at least
four Commissioners to reconsider the previously nominated landmark, interior
landmark or district.



(Prior Code, § 51-4)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 155.05  CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION OF LOCAL LANDMARKS OR DISTRICTS.



   Every nominated landmark or district must meet one or more of the
following criteria for designation.



   (A)   Criteria for landmark designation. The Commission shall limit
its consideration to the following criteria in making a determination on a
nomination of an area, property, structure, site or object for designation by
ordinance as a landmark:



      (1)   Its exemplification of an architectural type, style or
design distinguished by innovation, rarity, uniqueness or overall quality of
design, detail, materials or craftsmanship;



      (2)   Its identification as the work of an architect,
designer, engineer or builder whose individual work is significant in the
history or development of the city, the state, the Midwest region or the
United States;



      (3)   Its exemplification of important planning and urban
design techniques distinguished by innovation, rarity, uniqueness or overall
quality of design or detail;



      (4)   Its representation of an historic, cultural,
architectural, archaeological or related theme expressed through distinctive
areas, properties, structures, sites or objects that may or may not be
contiguous;



      (5)   Its unique location or distinctive physical appearance
or presence representing an established and familiar visual feature of a
neighborhood, community of the city;



      (6)   Its exemplification of a pattern of neighborhood
development or settlement significant to the cultural history or traditions
of the city, whose components may lack individual distinction;



      (7)   Its identification with a person or persons who
significantly contributed to the historic, cultural, architectural,
archaeological or related aspect of the development of the city, state,
Midwest region or the United States;



      (8)   Its association with important cultural or social
aspects or events in the history of the city, the state, the Midwest region
or the United States;



      (9)   Its location as a site of important archaeological or
natural significance; and



      (10)   Its location as a site of a significant historic or
prehistoric event or activity which may or may not have taken place within or
involved the use of any existing improvements on the property.



   (B)   Criteria for historic district designation.



      (1)   Unified historic districts. All historic districts that
contain contiguous properties, structures, areas or objects of significance
must satisfy the following criteria:



         (a)   At least 50% of the properties, structures, areas
or objects of significance in the historic district must satisfy at least one
of the criteria for landmark designation set forth in division (A) above;



         (b)   The Historic District must be geographically
definable and reasonably compact in geographic size; and



         (c)   The Historic District must satisfy at least one of
the following five criteria:



            1.   The properties, structures, areas or objects
of significance in the Historic District, taken together, shall convey or
represent one or more architectural, cultural, economic, historic, social or
other aspects particular to the heritage of the city, county, state or county;



            2.   The properties, structures, areas or objects
of significance in the Historic District shall exhibit consistency or
similarity of use, design, size, scale, style, orientation, materials,
detailing, facade design, ornamentation, color, lighting, technology and/or
storefronts;



            3.   The properties, structures, areas or objects
of significance in the Historic District must have been built, used or have
been significant during the same specified time period;



            4.   The properties, structures, areas or objects
of significance in the Historic District must create, define or enhance the
character of the area for which historic district designation is appropriate;
and/or



            5.   The properties, structures, areas or objects
of significance in the historic district must be largely intact, particularly
with respect to those qualities for which designation as a Historic District
is sought, unless such alterations or modifications to those properties,
structures, areas, objects and landscapes of significance in the area comply
with the United States Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for
Rehabilitation.



      (2)   Non-contiguous historic districts. All historic
districts that contain non-contiguous properties, structures, areas or
objects of significance must satisfy the following criteria:



         (a)   The elements of the historic district must be
thematically related; and



         (b)   One hundred percent of the properties, structures,
areas or objects of significance in the historic district satisfy at least
one of the criteria for landmark designation set forth in division (A) above.



   (C)   Integrity of landmarks and districts. Any area, property,
structure, site or object that meets any one or more of the criteria in
division (A) above shall also have sufficient integrity of location, design,
materials and workmanship to make it worthy of preservation or restoration.



(Prior Code, § 51-5)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 155.06  CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION OF INTERIOR LANDMARK.



   (A)   Every nominated interior landmark must meet one or more of the
following criteria for designation:



      (1)   It exemplifies an architectural type, style or design
distinguished by innovation, rarity, uniqueness or overall quality of design,
detail, materials or craftsmanship;



      (2)   It is identified as the work of an architect, designer,
engineer or builder whose individual work is significant in the history or
development of the city, the state, the Midwest region or the United States;



      (3)   It exemplifies important design techniques distinguished
by innovation, rarity, uniqueness or overall quality of design or detail;



      (4)   It represents an historic, cultural, architectural,
archaeological or related theme;



      (5)   It is identified with a person or persons who
significantly contributed to the historic, cultural, architectural,
archaeological or related aspect of the development of the city, state,
Midwest region of the United States; and/or



      (6)   It is associated with important cultural or social
aspects or events in the history of the city, the state, the Midwest region
of the United States.



   (B)   Any nominated interior landmark that meets any one or more of
the criteria in division (A) above shall also have sufficient integrity and
distinctiveness of location, design, materials and remarkable workmanship to
make it worthy of preservation or restoration.



(Prior Code, § 51-5A)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 155.07  CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.



   (A)   When required.



      (1)   Landmarks; districts. A certificate of appropriateness
shall be required before the following actions may be undertaken affecting
any landmark or structure within a district:



         (a)   Any construction of a new residential or
commercial building on a vacant lot;



         (b)   Any demolition in whole or in part, requiring a
permit from the city, which affects the exterior architectural appearance of
a structure;



         (c)   Any replacement structure constructed in
conjunction with approval of a demolition;



         (d)   Any addition to a structure, as defined in the
Commission’s rules and regulations, which is visible, at any time of the
year, in whole or in part, from any public right-of-way, publicly owned land
or adjacent private property that is not held in common ownership with the
subject property;



         (e)   Any alteration, as defined in the Commission’s
rules and regulations, which affects the exterior architectural appearance of
a structure;



         (f)   Any alterations affecting the interior space of a
building that has been designated an interior landmark; and



         (g)   Any request for a variance from the building scale
ordinance of the city.



      (2)   Interior landmark. A certificate of appropriateness also
shall be required before any required permit for construction, alteration,
addition, replacement or demolition may be issued by the city that involves
or affects any portion of a structure that has been designated an interior
landmark.



   (B)   Applications for certificate of appropriateness.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful to undertake any of the work
specified in division (A) above without first obtaining a certificate of
appropriateness from the Commission. Applications for a certificate of
appropriateness shall be made on a form prepared by the Commission, and shall
be submitted to the Community Development Department.



      (2)   Application forms shall be available from the Community
Development Department. Applicants may be required to submit plans, drawings,
elevations, specifications and other information as may be necessary for the
Commission to adequately review the application. Fees may be required with
any application filed as approved and periodically updated by the Council.



      (3)   The Community Development Department shall not act upon
any permit for work specified in division (A) above until the Commission has
reviewed the work application and issued a certificate of appropriateness.



   (C)   Review by Commission.



      (1)   Application for Commission consideration and action.



         (a)   A complete application shall include without
limitation the following plans and information and shall be submitted in
accordance with the schedule adopted on an annual basis by the Commission.



            1.   Completed building scale calculation form;



            2.   Impervious surface calculation;



            3.   Application form;



            4.   Description of exterior/interior materials
form;



            5.   Statement of intent;



            6.   Legal plat of survey;



            7.   Site plan of proposed improvements;



            8.   Grading plan (if any grade change is
proposed);



            9.   Site grading cross section (if any grade
change is proposed);



            10.   Tree survey;



            11.   Dimensioned drawings of all new structures
or additions showing exterior materials;



            12.   All elevations, including interior if
appropriate; at least one elevation shall be in color;



            13.   Floor plans;



            14.   Roof plan;



            15.   Cross sections;



            16.   Streetscape elevation (required for all new
houses and major additions visible from the street);



            18.   Landscape plan;



            19.   Photographs of the site, existing buildings
and interior if appropriate;



            20.   All applicable fees; and



            21.   Other materials as required by the Director
of Community Development, including, without limitation, a roof line mock-up.



         (b)   In addition to the above materials, the following
shall be submitted for all applications for demolition:



            1.   A written statement addressing the demolition
criteria;



            2.   Historic preservation consultants report and
assessment;



            3.   Structural evaluation from an independent
structural engineer;



            4.   Massing model;



            5.   Site plan overlay of existing and proposed
structures and hardscape; and



            6.   Elevation overlays of existing and proposed
elevations.



         (c)   1.   One or more of the required materials may
be waived if the Director of Community Development determines that the
information is not relevant to the project or to the issues that will be
considered by the Commission.



            2.   Detailed information on the required
materials shall be provided in the application packet available from time to
time through the Community Development Department.



         (d)   Site staked: no less than 14 days prior to the
Commission meeting at which the application is scheduled to be considered,
the footprint of all new buildings and all additions shall be staked and
outlined on site.



      (2)   Public hearing.



         (a)   After receipt of a complete Commission
application, as determined by the city, a public hearing shall be set within
60 days thereafter, or at the first regularly scheduled Historic Preservation
Commission meeting that has not been fully subscribed.



         (b)   The time to consider the application may be
extended with the consent of the applicant.



            1.   Notice of hearing.



               a.   Not less than ten days before the date
of the public hearing, the Community Development Department shall post notice
of the time and place of the hearing and mail notice of the hearing to the
owners of each property within 1,320 feet of the subject property or within
three properties deep, whichever is less.



               b.   For purposes of this section, an OWNER
of a property shall be either:



                  i.   An occupant;



                  ii.   A legal or beneficial owner; or



                  iii.   The person to whom the most
recent real estate tax bill has been sent.



               c.   Failure of any owner of a property to
receive notice shall not affect the validity of any action taken with respect
to a petition.



            2.   Action by Commission.



               a.   At the conclusion of the public
hearing, the Commission shall vote in public whether to approve, disapprove
or grant conditional approval of the application based upon consideration of
the standards set forth in § 155.08.



               b.   The Commission may continue
consideration of an application if the Commission determines that additional
information is required.



                  i.   Approval by Commission. If the
Commissioners vote to approve the application, the certificate of
appropriateness shall be issued to the applicant and filed with the City
Clerk within ten business days following the decision of the Commission. Upon
receipt of the certificate of appropriateness the applicant may submit an
application to the Community Development Department to obtain necessary
permits, if any, which permits may not be issued until the time for appeal as
set forth in divisions (D) and (E) below has expired. The certificate of
appropriateness shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of
issuance by the Commission. Certificates of appropriateness shall not be
transferable from the applicant to another subsequent owner of the same
property without the consent of the Commission.



                  ii.   Disapproval by Commission. If
the Commissioners vote to disapprove the application, the applicant shall be
notified within ten business days following the decision of the Commission.
The Commission shall make reasonable efforts to confer with the applicant,
offer technical guidance, and attempt to resolve differences. The applicant
may resubmit an amended application for consideration by the Commission. At
the discretion of the Commission, additional application fees may be waived.



                  iii.   Timing. Delays in the issuance
of a certificate of appropriateness or of a notification of denial shall not
affect the decision of the Commission with respect to any application for a
certificate of appropriateness.



   (D)   Appeal of approvals. Any aggrieved person may appeal to the
Council any decision of the Commission granting a certificate of
appropriateness. The appeal must be filed within 14 calendar days after the
date that the Commission’s decision is filed with the City Clerk in the
office of the City Manager.



   (E)   Appeal of denials. Following a final decision of the
Commission denying a certificate of appropriateness (or approving such
certificate upon conditions unacceptable to the applicant), an applicant may,
within 14-calendar days of the denial, file an appeal of such denial with the
City Clerk on a form prepared by the Commission and available at the
Community Development Department. A copy of anything filed with the City
Clerk under this section shall also be filed with the Community Development
Department.



   (F)   Effect of issuance. Any grant of a certificate of
appropriateness shall require the owner or applicant to make any change to
the property in accordance with the terms of the certificate of
appropriateness, only as directed by the terms of the certificate of
appropriateness, and to refrain from taking any action inconsistent with the
certificate of appropriateness.



(Prior Code, § 51-6)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 155.08  STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS FOR CERTIFICATES OF
APPROPRIATENESS.



   (A)   Standards for review of replacement structures, new
construction, additions and alterations. In considering an application for a
certificate of appropriateness for replacement structures, new construction,
additions and alterations, the Commission shall consider only the following
general standards, specific design guidelines, if any, accompanying the
ordinance designating the landmark, interior landmark or district, and the
standards included in this section, as relevant and applicable.



      (1)   Height. Height shall be visually compatible with
properties, structures, sites, public ways, objects, and places to which it
is visibly related.



      (2)   Proportion of front facade. The relationship of the
width to the height of the front elevation shall be visually compatible with
properties, structures, sites, public ways, objects and places to which it is
visually related.



      (3)   Proportion of openings. The relationship of the width to
height of windows and doors shall be visually compatible with properties,
structures, sites, public ways, objects and places to which the building is
visually related.



      (4)   Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The
relationship of solids to voids in the front facade of a structure shall be
visually compatible with properties, structures, sites, public ways, objects
and places to which it is visually related.



      (5)   Rhythm of spacing and structures on streets. The
relationship of a structure or object to the open space between it and
adjoining structures or objects shall be visually compatible with the
properties, structures, sites, public ways, objects and places to which it is
visually related.



      (6)   Rhythm of entrance porches, storefront recesses and
other projections. The relationship of entrances and other projections to
sidewalks shall be visually compatible with the properties, structures,
sites, public ways, objects and places to which it is visually related.



      (7)   Relationship of materials and texture. The relationship
of the materials and texture of the facade shall be visually compatible with
the predominant materials used in the structures to which it is visually
related.



      (8)   Roof shapes. The roof shape of a structure shall be
visually compatible with the structures to which it is visually related.



      (9)   Walls of continuity. Facades and property and site
structures, such as masonry walls, fences and landscape masses, shall, when
it is a characteristic of the area, form cohesive walls of enclosure along a
street, to ensure visual compatibility with the properties, structures,
sites, public ways, objects and places to which such elements are visually
related.



      (10)   Scale of a structure. The size and mass of structures
in relation to open spaces, windows, door openings, porches, adjacent
structures and balconies shall be visually compatible with the properties,
structures, sites, public ways, objects and places to which they are visually
related.



      (11)   Directional expression of front elevation. A structure
shall be visually compatible with the properties, structures, sites, public
ways, objects and places to which it is visually related in its directional
character, whether this be vertical character, horizontal character or
nondirectional character.



      (12)   Preserving distinguishing features. The distinguishing
original qualities or character of a property, structure, site or object and
its environment shall not be destroyed or adversely affected in a material
way. The alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural
features should be avoided when possible.



      (13)   Protection of resources. Every reasonable effort shall
be made to protect and preserve archaeological and natural resources affected
by, or adjacent to any project.



      (14)   New construction. In considering new construction, the
Commission shall not impose a requirement for the use of a single
architectural style or period, though it may impose a requirement for
consistency with the chosen style.



      (15)   Repair to deteriorated features. Deteriorated
architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, wherever
possible, in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for
the Treatment of Historic Properties. In the event replacement is necessary,
the new material need not be identical to but should match the material being
replaced in composition, design, color, texture and other visual qualities.
Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be based on
accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic, physical or
pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of
different architectural elements from other buildings or structures.



      (16)   Surface cleaning. The surface cleaning of historic
material and distinctive architectural features shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will
damage the historically, visually, aesthetically, culturally or
archaeologically significant materials shall not be undertaken.



      (17)   Reversibility of additions and alterations. Wherever
possible, additions or alterations to historic properties shall be done in
such manner that if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the
future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property would not
be impaired.



   (B)   Standards for review of demolitions. In considering an
application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition, the
Commission shall consider only the following general standards, the Secretary
of Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Properties, as
amended, and the standards included in division (A) above:



      (1)   Whether the property, structure or object is of such
historic, cultural, architectural or archaeological significance that its
demolition would be detrimental to the public interest and contrary to the
general welfare of the people of the city and the state;



      (2)   Whether the property, structure or object contributes to
the distinctive historic, cultural, architectural or archeological character
of the district as a whole and should be preserved for the benefit of the
people of the city and the state;



      (3)   Whether demolition of the property, structure or object
would be contrary to the purpose and intent of this chapter and to the
objectives of the historic preservation for the applicable district;



      (4)   Whether the property, structure or object is of such
old, unusual or uncommon design, texture, and/or material that it could not
be reproduced without great difficulty and/or expense; and



      (5)   Except in cases where the owner has no plans for a
period of up to five years to replace an existing landmark or property,
structure or object in a district, no certificate of appropriateness shall be
issued until plans for a replacement structure or object have been reviewed
and approved by the Commission.



   (C)   Building scale. The maximum allowable square footage, in
accordance with § 150.148 of the city code, may be limited if the City
Historic Preservation Commission finds that the proposed residence or
addition(s) violate the city historic preservation chapter. In addition, for
any addition, alteration or construction that satisfies the standards of this
section, but does not conform with the building scale limitations in the city
code, the Commission may recommend that the Council grant relief from the
building scale limitations of the city code, based on the standards for
variances from the building scale regulations as set forth in the city code
from time to time. Should such relief be required, any certificate of
appropriateness shall be subject to the granting of such relief by the
Council.



(Prior Code, § 51-7)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 155.09  EXCEPTIONS TO ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.



   (A)   The limitations upon the issuance of demolition permits or
building permits in any district or affecting any landmark or interior
landmark, shall not apply when alteration, construction, demolition or
relocation involved in the permit has been ordered by the Director of
Community Development for the preservation of the public health or safety or
involves a temporary use by the city.



   (B)   If the Director of Community Development has ordered
alteration, construction, demolition or relocation of a landmark or a
property, structure or object located within a district, the Commission shall
be notified of the proposed alteration, construction, demolition or
relocation. If the Commission disagrees with the plan, the Commission shall
have the right to delay the proposal 60 days by submitting a delay request.
During the delay period, the Commission may develop alternative plans for
consideration. If after 60 days no such alternative plans can be developed,
the proposed alteration, construction, demolition or relocation may proceed
as ordered.



(Prior Code, § 51-8)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 155.10  CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP.



   (A)   Application.



      (1)   Any applicant, whose application for a certification of
appropriateness has been denied by the Commission (and by the Council after
an appeal) may, within 60 days after the Council’s denial on appeal make
application for a certificate of economic hardship on a form prepared by the
Commission and submitted to the Commission.



      (2)   Application forms shall be available from the Commission.



   (B)   Standard to be applied. The Commission shall only approve an
application for a certificate of economic hardship upon a determination that
the denial of the certificate of appropriateness has resulted in the denial
of all reasonable use of and return from the property.



   (C)   Consideration of evidence. In applying this standard, the
Commission shall consider among other things any evidence presented
concerning the following:



      (1)   Any opinions from a licensed structural engineer or
licensed architect with experience in renovation, restoration or
rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any structures or objects on
the property and their suitability for continued use, renovation, restoration
or rehabilitation;



      (2)   Any estimates prepared by a licensed architect or
licensed structural engineer, of the cost of the proposed alteration,
construction, demolition or relocation and an estimate of any additional cost
that would be incurred to comply with the recommendations of the Commission
for changes necessary for it to be approved;



      (3)   Any estimates prepared by a real estate broker or agent
licensed by the state or an appraiser certified by the state of the market
value of the property in its current condition; after completion of the
proposed alteration, construction, demolition or relocation; after any
expenditures necessary to comply with the recommendations of the Commission
for changes necessary for it to approve a certificate of appropriateness; and
in the case of a proposed demolition, after renovation of the existing
property for continued use;



      (4)   In the case of a proposed demolition, any estimates,
prepared by licensed architects, real estate consultants and appraisers or
other licensed real estate professionals and experienced in rehabilitation,
as to the economic feasibility of restoration, renovation or rehabilitation
of any existing structures or objects; and



      (5)   Any and all applicable zoning provisions and incentives.



   (D)   Information to be supplied by applicant. At the discretion of
the Commission, the applicant shall submit by affidavit some or all of the
following information:



      (1)   The assessed value of the property, structure, site or
object for the two most recent assessments;



      (2)   Real property taxes for the previous two years;



      (3)   The amount paid for the property, structure, site or
object by the owner, the date of purchase and the party from whom purchased,
including a description of the relationship, if any, between the owner and
the person from whom the property was purchased;



      (4)   The current balance of any mortgages or any other
financing secured by the property, structure, site or object, and the annual
debt service, if any, for the previous two years;



      (5)   All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by
the owner or applicant in connection with purchase, offerings for sale,
financing or ownership of the property, structure, site or object;



      (6)   All listings of the property, structure, site or object
for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any, within the
previous four years;



      (7)   All studies commissioned by the owner as to profitable
renovation, rehabilitation or utilization of any structures or objects on the
property for alternative use;



      (8)   For income producing property or structures, itemized
income and expense statements from the property or structures for the
previous two years;



      (9)   Estimates, prepared by licensed general contractors or
licensed architects, of the cost of the proposed alteration, construction,
demolition or relocation and an estimate of any additional cost that would be
incurred to comply with the recommendations of the Commission for changes
necessary for it to approve a certificate of appropriateness;



      (10)   Form of beneficial ownership or operation of the
property, structure, site or object whether sole proprietorship, for-profit
or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture or other.
All partners and shareholders shall be identified;



      (11)   Where applicable, the information, evidence or
documentation requested by the Commission or provided by the applicant shall
bear the imprint of the professional stamp, seal or license number of the
individual preparing such information, evidence or documentation; and



      (12)   Any other information, documentation or evidence as the
Commission determines to be necessary to its consideration of the application
for certificate of economic hardship.



   (E)   Failure by applicant to submit requested information. In the
event that any of the information required to be submitted by the applicant
is not reasonably available, the applicant shall file with the affidavit a
statement of the information that cannot be obtained and shall describe the
reasons why such information is unavailable.



   (F)   Public hearing. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on
the application for certificate of economic hardship within 60 days following
receipt of the completed application form and all complete information
required to be submitted therewith, as determined by the city.



      (1)   (a)   Notice of the time and place of the public
hearing shall also state the general nature of the question involved, and
shall be given not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days prior to the date
of such hearing by the following methods:



            1.   By mailing of notification to the applicant
and the owner of record of the affected landmark, interior landmark or
property, structure, site or object in a district;



            2.   By mailing of notification to the owners of
record of all property within 250 feet of the property lines of the affected
landmark, interior landmark or property, structure, site or object in a
district; and



            3.   By publication in a newspaper of city-wide
circulation.



         (b)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
provide to the Commission, by affidavit, the names and addresses of all
owners of record pursuant to division (F)(l)(a) above.



      (2)   The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the
rules of the Commission.



      (3)   No member of the Commission absent from the entire
hearing shall be eligible to vote on any matter, unless the meeting has been
fully transcribed or recorded and the absent member certifies that he or she
has reviewed such transcript or recording.



      (4)   The Commission may continue a proceeding for such
additional time as it reasonably takes an applicant, any other interested
person or the Commission to comply with a request for additional information,
documentation or evidence.



   (G)   Determination by the Commission. The determination by the
Commission of whether the denial of the certificate of appropriateness has or
has not resulted in the denial of all reasonable use of and return from the
property shall be made within 60 days following close of the public hearing
and submission of all information, documentation or evidence requested by the
Commission. The determination shall be accompanied by findings of fact and a
report stating the reasons for the decision.



   (H)   Disapproval by Commission.



      (1)   If the determination of the Commission is to disapprove
the application for a certificate of economic hardship, the applicant shall
be notified within ten business days.



      (2)   The notice shall include a copy of the findings of fact.



      (3)   Any aggrieved person may appeal a decision of the
Commission to the Council.



      (4)   The appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within 14
days calendar days after the date notice is sent to the applicant of the
Commission’s decision.



   (I)   Determination of economic hardship.



      (1)   If the determination of the Commission is that the
denial of the certificate of appropriateness has resulted in the denial of
all reasonable use of and return from the property, the Commission shall
issue a certificate of economic hardship no later than 90 days following the
date of the determination of economic hardship unless during that time the
Council approves an incentive plan pursuant to divisions (J) and (K) below.



      (2)   A copy of the determination of the Commission together
with the findings of fact shall be mailed to the applicant and transmitted to
the Council or its duly authorized committee within ten business days
following the determination of economic hardship.



   (J)   Incentive plan. The purpose of an incentive plan is to provide
a mechanism to allow a reasonable use of and return from the property without
the complete or partial demolition of a landmark, interior landmark or
property, structure, site or object in a district. This incentive plan may
include, but is not limited to, property tax relief, loans or grants from the
city or other public or private sources, acquisition by purchase or eminent
domain, Building and Safety Code modifications to reduce the cost of
maintenance, restoration, rehabilitation or renovation, changes in applicable
zoning regulations including a transfer of development rights, or relaxation
of the provisions of this chapter sufficient to allow reasonable use of and
return from the property.



   (K)   Council consideration of incentive plan.



      (1)   Consideration of an incentive plan may be begun by the
Commission following the denial of a certificate of appropriateness, and can
be considered simultaneously with any other proceedings that may be occurring
under this chapter.



      (2)   The Commission shall forward a report recommending an
incentive plan to the Council or its duly authorized committee. Upon receipt
of the report, the Council or its duly authorized committee shall give prompt
consideration to the incentive plan.



      (3)   The Council shall approve or disapprove the incentive
plan allowing the reasonable use of and return from the property within 90
days following determination by the Commission. Any determination regarding
an incentive plan shall be by resolution of the Council.



      (4)   If the Council does not approve an incentive plan within
the time specified, the report and recommendation of the Commission regarding
the incentive plan shall be deemed to be denied by the Council.



      (5)   A copy of the resolution enacted by the Council together
with the incentive plan, if any, shall be mailed to the applicant and
transmitted to the Commission within five business days following the
enactment of the ordinance.



   (L)   Issuance of certificate of economic hardship.



      (1)   (a)   If the Commission approves a certificate of
economic hardship, the Commission shall issue a certificate of economic
hardship to the applicant within ten business days after:



            1.   Receipt by the Commission of a copy of a
resolution of the Council disapproving an incentive plan; or



            2.   Failure of the Council to act to either
approve or disapprove an incentive plan pursuant to division (K)(3) above.



         (b)   The certificate of economic hardship for
demolition may be subject to conditions for subsequent construction including
compliance with the standards included in § 155.08.



         (c)   The certificate of economic hardship shall be
valid for a period of one year from issuance by the Commission.



         (d)   Certificates of economic hardship shall not be
transferable from the applicant to another subsequent owner of the same
property.



      (2)   A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued to the
applicant simultaneously with the delivery of the certificate of economic
hardship.



      (3)   Notwithstanding approval of a certificate of economic
hardship, no permit for demolition of a landmark or a property, structure or
object in a district shall be issued, except simultaneously with the issuance
of a building permit for the replacement property, structure or object.



(Prior Code, § 51-9)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 155.11  APPEALS.



   (A)   Action by Council.



      (1)   (a)   Within 35 days following the receipt of any
appeal under this chapter, or at the first regularly scheduled Council
meeting that has not been fully subscribed or such further time to which the
applicant may agree, the Council shall consider such appeal and shall hear a
report from the Chairperson of the Historic Preservation Commission or the
Chairperson’s designee.



         (b)   The Council shall either uphold the decision of
the Commission, overturn the decision with or without modifications or
conditions, or remand the application to the Commission for further review.



         (c)   In considering appeals, the Council shall apply
the same standards as those applied by the Commission, but it is recognized
that the Council shall apply such standards in the context of its broader
responsibility in promoting, and broader perspective of, the public health,
safety, welfare and in the context of its fiduciary responsibility.



      (2)   The failure of the Council to consider the appeal within
the time period prescribed or such further time period to which the applicant
may agree shall be deemed to be an affirmation of the determination of the
Commission.



   (B)   Appeal procedures.



      (1)   The Council may establish procedures from time to time
for the conduct of any appeal.



      (2)   Such procedures may be modified in the discretion of the
Council in order to foster the gathering of information necessary to ensure
that the purposes of this chapter are achieved and to provide full and fair
hearing and consideration of the issues on appeal.



   (C)   Remand to Commission.



      (1)   In the case of a vote by the Council for remand of an
application, the Chairperson of the Commission shall be so notified and shall
schedule the matter for a new public hearing at the next regularly scheduled
Commission meeting for which adequate time is available to provide the
required public notice under § 155.07(C)(2)(b), or such later time to which
the applicant may agree.



      (2)   In all other respects, the hearing on remand shall be
conducted in the same manner as any other hearing under § 155.07(C).



      (3)   If the hearing on remand is not commenced within 60 days
after the Council’s decision to remand, however, the application shall be
deemed approved.



   (D)   Reversal of decision. In the case of a vote by the Council to
overturn, in whole or in part, the decision of the Commission, written
findings shall be prepared in support of the Council’s decision and a copy
of said findings shall be provided to the Chairperson of the Commission.



(Prior Code, § 51-10)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 155.12  AMENDMENT AND RESCISSION OF DESIGNATION.



   (A)   Designation may be amended or rescinded only after a period of
two years following the designation, upon the filing of a petition to the
Commission and compliance with the same procedures and according to the same
criteria set forth herein for designation as follows.



      (1)   Petitions for amendment or rescission of a designation
may be submitted by the same persons authorized to submit nominations
pursuant to § 155.04(A).



      (2)   Properly submitted petitions are referred to the
Commission for public hearing as provided in § 155.04(B) and (C).



      (3)   In the case of a rescission of a landmark designation or
part or all of a district designation, the Commission shall consider whether
the landmark or district no longer meets the criteria for designation, and
make a recommendation to the Council as provided in § 155.04(D).



   (B)   (1)   The Council shall rescind or amend a designation only
after all of the above procedures have been followed.



      (2)   The Council shall rescind a designation only by adoption
of an ordinance upon a finding that the designated landmark or district no
longer meets the criteria for designation in §§ 155.05 and 155.06.



(Prior Code, § 51-11)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 155.13  DESIGNATION OF LANDMARKS AND PROPERTIES LISTED IN THE NATIONAL
REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES.



   The following areas, properties, structures, sites or objects are found
to meet the criteria for designation in §§ 155.05 or 155.06 based on
reports submitted to the Council in support of said designation and are
hereby designated under the provisions of this chapter:



 


Date Listed

 
Description





9-17-1998

 
The area of the 1857 plat of the city, known as the Lake Forest Historic
District, listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 1976 and
defined by the boundaries of such listing, is found to meet the criteria for
designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a historic district
under the provisions of this chapter



9-17-1998

 
The Vine-Oakwood-Green Bay Road Historic District, listed in the National
Register of Historic Places in 1980 and defined by the boundaries of such
listing, is found to meet the criteria for designation in this chapter and is
hereby designated as a historic district under the provisions of this chapter



9-17-1998

 
The Green Bay Road Historic District, listed in the National Register of
Historic Places in 1995 and defined by the boundaries of such listing, is
found to meet the criteria for designation in this chapter and is hereby
designated as a historic district under the provisions of this chapter



9-17-1998

 
1230 North Green Bay Road, “Ragdale,” the home of architect Howard Van
Doren Shaw, listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 1975, is
found to meet the criteria for designation in this chapter and is hereby
designated as a landmark under the provisions of this chapter



9-17-1998

 
1500 West Kennedy Road, Lake Forest Academy, “Reid Hall;” the J. Ogden
Armour House and Gardens designed by architect Arthur Heun, listed in the
National Register of Historic Places in 1982, is found to meet the criteria
for designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a landmark under
the provisions of this chapter



9-17-1998

 
111 West Westminster, the Noble Brandon Judah, Jr. Estate, House and Gate
House, built 1925—1928 and designed by architect Philip Lippincott Goodwin,
listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 1990, is found to meet
the criteria for designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a
landmark under the provisions of this chapter



9-17-1998

 
211 West Westminster, the Noble Brandon Judah, Jr. Estate, Pool and Gazebos,
built 1925—1928 and designed by architect Philip Lippincott Goodwin, listed
in the National Register of Historic Places in 1990, is found to meet the
criteria for designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a
landmark under the provisions of this chapter



9-17-1998

 
255 East Illinois Road, the Deerpath Inn, built 1928 and designed by
architect William C. Jones with alterations in 1938 designed by architect
Stanley D. Anderson, listed in the National Register of Historic Places in
1992, is found to meet the criteria for designation in this chapter and is
hereby designated as a landmark under the provisions of this chapter



9-17-1998

 
810 South Ridge Road, the Robert P. Lamont House, “West View Farms,”
built in 1924 and designed by architect Howard Van Doren Shaw, listed in the
National Register of Historic Places in 1993, is found to meet the criteria
for designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a landmark under
the provisions of this chapter



9-17-1998

 
89 East Deerpath, the Edward H. Bennett House and Studio, “Bagatelle,”
built in 1915—1916 and designed by architect Edward H. Bennett, listed in
the National Register of Historic Places in 1995, is found to meet the
criteria for designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a
landmark under the provisions of this chapter



8-10-2000

 
1190 Inverlieth Terrace, 550, 561, 565, 570, 575 and 579 Hathaway Circle, the
Chicken House, Milk House, South Cottage, Middle Cottage, Main Barn, Carriage
Barn and North Cottage, respectfully, of the Clifford Milton Leonard Farm,
“Meadowood Dairy,” built in 1923—1926 and designed by architect Ralph
Varney, listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 2000, is found
to meet the criteria in § 155.05 and is hereby designated as a district
under the provisions of this chapter



12-18-2000

 
595 Circle Lane, garden features of the Edith Rockefeller McCormick and
Harold McCormick Estate, “Villa Turicum,” built in 1908—1918 and
designed by architect Charles Adam Piatt, is found to meet the criteria for
designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a landmark under the
provisions of this chapter



12-18-2000

 
1525 North Lake Road, Lake Forest Cemetery Plan designed in 1857 by landscape
architect Ossian Cole Simonds and Cemetery Entrance Gate built in 1919, is
found to meet the criteria for designation in this chapter and is hereby
designated as a landmark under the provisions of this chapter



7- -2002

 
188 Foster Place, the garden wall of the Louis Swift Estate, is found to meet
the criteria for designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a
landmark under the provisions of this chapter



8-5-2002

 
The Grove Cultural Campus, located at 40-100 East Old Mill Road, including
Dickinson Hall and Stirling Halt built in 1929—1930 and designed by
architect Edwin H. Clark; Bennett Hall built in 1949 and designed by
architect Stanley D. Anderson; and the Log Cabin, is found to meet the
criteria for designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a
district under the provisions of this chapter



10-17-2002

 
1203 Griffith Road, a Sears Honor Built Catalogue Home, is found to meet the
criteria for designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a
landmark under the provisions of this chapter



6-2-2003

 
365 East Westleigh Road, the William E. Clow, Jr. House, “Twin Doors,”
built in 1939—1940 and designed by architect Stanley D. Anderson and James
Ticknor, is found to meet the criteria for designation in this chapter and is
hereby designated as a landmark under the provisions of this chapter



6-2-2003

 
436 East Westleigh Road, the William E. Clow, Jr. House, “Twin Doors,”
built in 1939—1940 and designed by architect Stanley D. Anderson and James
Ticknor, is found to meet the criteria for designation in this chapter and is
hereby designated as a landmark under the provisions of this chapter



8-2-2004

 
251 King Muir Road, the Henry K. Turnbull House, built in 1928 and designed
by architect Howard Irwin, is found to meet the criteria for designation in
this chapter and is hereby designated as a landmark under the provisions of
this chapter



11-18-2004

 
1100 Jensen Drive, the Gordon Phelps Kelley House, built in 1938 and designed
by architect Lincoln Norcott Hall, is found to meet the criteria for
designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a landmark under the
provisions of this chapter



3-7-2005

 
955 Mellody Road, built in 1928 and designed by architects William T. Braun
and Stanley D. Anderson, is found to meet the criteria for designation in
this chapter and is hereby designated as a landmark under the provisions of
this chapter



3-17-2005

 
404 North Green Bay Road, the Calvin Fentress, Jr. House, built in 1965 and
designed by architect John Volk is found to meet the criteria for designation
in this chapter and is hereby designated as a landmark under the provisions
of this chapter



7-5-2005

 
870 West Deerpath, entrance walls and gates to the Albert Blake Dick, Sr.
Estate “Westmoreland,” built in 1902 and designed by architect James
Gamble Rogers, is found to meet the criteria for designation in this chapter
and are hereby designated as a landmark under the provisions of this chapter



10-16-2005

 
104 Atteridge Road, the Cad Vogt, Jr. House; built in 1915—1916; is found
to meet the criteria for designation in this chapter and is hereby designated
as a landmark under the provisions of this chapter



4-20-2006

 
1701 Kennedy Road, Baggott House, “Blithefield,” built in 1929 and
designed by architects Oldefest and Williams, is found to meet the criteria
for designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a landmark under
the provisions of this chapter



4-20-2006

 
525 Broadsmoore Drive, the James Ward Thorne House; built in 1911—1913 and
designed by architects William A. Otis and Edwin H. Clark, is found to meet
the criteria for designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a
landmark under the provisions of this chapter



11-6-2006

 
580 Broadsmoore Drive, the James Ward Thorne Estate Gardener’s Cottage and
Pump House, designed by architect William Otis and Edwin H. Clark, is found
to meet the criteria for designation in this chapter and is hereby designated
as a landmark under the provisions of this chapter



10-15-2007

 
1275 North Waukegan Road, the Clarence W. Hubbard House; built in 1929 and
designed by architect Ralph Varney; is found to meet the criteria for
designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a landmark under the
provisions of this chapter



4-7-2008

 
1536 Estate Lane, the Albert D. Lasker Estate “Milk House,” built in 1926
and designed by architect David Adler, is found to meet the criteria for
designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a landmark under the
provisions of this chapter



8-4-2008

 
344 East Wisconsin Avenue, the George H. Fitzgerald House, built in 1902, is
found to meet the criteria for designation in this chapter and is hereby
designated as a landmark under the provisions of this chapter



8-4-2008

 
721 North Mayflower Road, the Mrs. William E. Clow, Jr. House; built in 1954
and designed by architect Stanley D. Anderson and Associates is found to meet
the criteria for designation in this chapter and is hereby designated as a
landmark under the provisions of this chapter



8-4-2008

 
1150 East Westleigh Road, the Cyrus McCormick, Jr. “Walden” Estate
implements shed, built in 1907, is found to meet the criteria for designation
in this chapter and is hereby designated as a landmark under the provisions
of this chapter



10-6-2008

 
1522 Estate Lane, the Albert D. Lasker Estate “Dove Cote,” built in 1926
and designed by architect David Adler, is found to meet the criteria for
designation in § 155.05 and is hereby designated as a landmark under the
provisions of this chapter



4-7-2010

 
1065 Acorn Trail, the Gate Lodges and coachhouse/garage, built in 1917 and
designed by architect David Adler for A. Watson Armour are found to meet the
criteria for designation in § 155.05 and are hereby designated as landmarks
under the provisions of this chapter



6-21-2010

 
1401 Middlefork Drive, Elawa Farm, a gentleman’s farm comprised of three
structures designed by Alfred Hopkins for A. Watson Armour is found to meet
the criteria for designation in § 155.05 and is hereby designated as a
landmark under the provisions of this chapter



10-2-2017

 
The property located at 1579 Conway Road is found to meet the criteria for
designation in § 155.05 of this chapter and is hereby designated as a
landmark under the provisions of this chapter




 



(Prior Code, § 51-12)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012; Ord. 2017-56, passed
10-2-2017)



§ 155.14  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions are
declared to be severable.



(Prior Code, § 51-14)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 155.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Fines for violation.



      (1)   Failure to perform any act requited by this chapter or
performance of any act prohibited by this chapter shall constitute a
violation.



      (2)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to $750 for each day on which a
violation exists.



   (B)   Penalty for willful violation or gross negligence. In addition
to the fines authorized by division (A) above, a person who willfully or
through gross negligence violates the provisions of this chapter by
participating in alteration, construction, demolition or relocation affecting
a property, structure, site or object nominated or designated as a landmark,
interior landmark or located in a nominated or designated district without
complying with the required procedures in this chapter for review of such
alteration, construction, demolition and relocation, shall not be issued
building permits, certificates of occupancy, licenses and curb cut permits
for alteration, construction, demolition or relocation affecting such
property, structure, site or object for a period of five years following the
date of the violation except to correct structural defects affecting the
foundation, roof, walls, partitions, floor supports, ceilings and chimneys of
the nominated or designated landmark, interior landmark or property,
structure, site or object located in a nominated or designated district.



   (C)   Other remedies.



      (1)   In addition to the provisions of divisions (A) and (B)
above, the city may institute appropriate proceedings in law and equity to
prevent or remedy any violation of the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   In the case of willful violation or gross negligence by
any person, the city may seek reversal and removal of the prohibited work and
restoration if appropriate without regard to economic hardship.



(Prior Code, § 51-13)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012)



CHAPTER 156:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   156.001   Purpose



   156.002   Definitions



   156.003   Applicability



   156.004   Public improvements to be approved



   156.005   Inspection



   156.006   Variances



   156.007   Exceptions



   156.008   Building permits



   156.009   Changes and amendments



   156.010   Fees




Plats




   156.025   General provisions



   156.026   Tentative plat; application requirements



   156.027   Tentative plat; procedure for review and approval



   156.028   Final plat; application requirements



   156.029   Final plat of subdivision; procedures for review and
approval



   156.030   Recordation of final plat; requirements prior to recording




Improvement Standards




   156.045   Responsibility for improvements



   156.046   City acceptance of public improvements



   156.047   Plans and specifications



   156.048   Sanitary sewers



   156.049   Street improvements



   156.050   Storm sewers and drainage



   156.051   Water distribution



   156.052   Sidewalks



   156.053   Street lights



   156.054   Parkway trees and landscaping



   156.055   Street name signs and traffic signs



   156.056   Perimeter street improvements



   156.057   Steep slope setbacks.




Design Standards




   156.070   Generally



   156.071   Lot lines



   156.072   Lot design



   156.073   Street layout



   156.074   Topography



   156.075   Preservation of landscape



   156.076   Relation of proposed building to environment and existing
development



   156.077   Utility services



   156.078   Noise abatement



   156.079   Floodplains



   156.080   Open space



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 156.001  PURPOSE.



   The regulations contained herein are adopted, pursuant to 765 ILCS 205,
65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 et seq., and the city’s home rule powers pursuant to Art.
VII, Sec. 6 of the Illinois Constitution, for the following purposes:



   (A)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety and
general welfare of the municipality;



   (B)   To guide the future growth and development of the city, in
accordance with the City Comprehensive Plan;



   (C)   To protect the character, the social and economic stability,
and to permit the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the city;



   (D)   To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the city
and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land;



   (E)   To establish reasonable improvement standards for all required
public improvements to ensure that all such improvements have sufficient
capacity to serve both proposed and future development and are of such high
quality so as to minimize long term maintenance costs;



   (F)   To encourage the wise use, management and preservation of
natural resources throughout the city in order to preserve the integrity,
stability and beauty of the community and value of the land; and



   (G)   To establish minimum design standards intended to encourage
the development of subdivisions that are compatible with the unique
character, spaciousness and ambiance of existing development and the
preservation of existing natural features within the community.



(Prior Code, § 38-1)  (Ord. 2010-48, passed 11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed
11-7-2016)



§ 156.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDABLE AREA. The gross land area of a lot less all required setback
areas and all floodplain and non-tableland area.



   COLLECTOR/DISTRIBUTOR STREET. A street which provides the main access
to a neighborhood by connecting local streets to the major and/or secondary
streets in the city’s thoroughfare system.



   FEE SCHEDULE. A document adopted periodically by the City Council
establishing fees related to development activity.



   FLOODPLAIN. The continuous land area adjacent to a watercourse, the
elevation of which is equal to or below the flood base elevation.



   LOCAL STREET. A low-traffic volume street designed for the purpose of
providing access to properties fronting on said street.



   PLAT OF SUBDIVISION. A map, drawing or chart which, upon approval
pursuant to this chapter, provides for a division of lands into lots or
parcels and which may or may not include streets, alleys, common areas, parks
or other public lands or easements.



   PRIVATE ROAD. A private thoroughfare, other than a private street or
alley, permanently reserved in order to provide a means of access to more
than one zoning lot.



   STREET. Public land improved or unimproved, which affords a primary
means of access to abutting property, whether designated as a street, avenue,
highway, road, boulevard, lane, throughway, right-of-way or otherwise, but
does not include private roads and driveways to buildings.



   SUBDIVISION. Includes any change, division, resubdivision or
rearrangement of any piece or parcel of land, block, lot or sub-lot, or any
part thereof into two or more lots, pieces or parcels of land.



   SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT. A contract between the subdivider and the city
specifying among other things the improvements to be made as a part of the
subdivision and the timetable for the installation of said improvements.



   TABLE LAND. Land other than floodplain where the slope in any direction
does not exceed 10%.



(Prior Code, § 38-2)  (Ord. 2010-48, passed 11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed
11-7-2016)



§ 156.003  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions contained herein shall be applicable to all
subdivisions in the city and to all subdivisions within any unincorporated
area lying within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to all planned
developments whether residential, commercial or otherwise in nature, and to
any and all other developments whether a subdivision is required or not under
the laws, statutes, ordinances or regulations of the governmental body or
agency having jurisdiction or control, regardless of whether the same is
labeled a subdivision or not, it being the intent of this chapter to apply to
all types of development, both within the city and to areas lying within one
and one-half miles of the corporate limits of the city.



(Prior Code, § 38-3)  (Ord. 1372, passed 6-18-1983; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.004  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS TO BE APPROVED.



   (A)   All plans, specifications, details, contracts, insurance,
financial guarantees and other documents, as determined to be necessary by
the city, for public improvements required by or installed as a condition of
subdivision approvals, including, but not limited to, street paving, water
distribution systems, sewer systems, utilities, detention ponds, curbs,
sidewalks streetlights and street name signs shall be subject to approval by
the City Surveyor and Engineer.



   (B)   Such approvals must be obtained before the plat of subdivision
is recorded.



   (C)   In no event shall construction activity for public or private
improvements precede the recording of the plat or the issuance of proper
permits.



   (D)   In addition, approval by the City Attorney of the subdivision
agreement, financial guarantee and all covenants and conditions shall be
required prior to recording of the final plat of subdivision.



   (E)   All proposed improvements shall be consistent with the City of
Lake Forest Engineering and Construction Standards.



(Prior Code, § 38-4)  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.005  INSPECTION.



   (A)   All public improvements to be made under the provisions of
this chapter shall be inspected during the course of construction by the City
Surveyor and Engineer or his or her designee.



   (B)   The cost of said inspections shall be paid for by the
developer or owner in accordance with the provisions of § 156.010.



(Prior Code, § 38-5)  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010)



§ 156.006  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Upon written request from an applicant on forms provided by
the Director of Community Development, the Plan Commission may recommend
variances from the requirements of this chapter in specific cases where the
applicant demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the city, that extraordinary
hardships or practical difficulties, unique to the site, would result from
strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Conditions resulting from the actions of any current or
previous owner of the property shall not be deemed hardships or practical
difficulties.



   (C)   Any such variance shall not allow for density greater than
that permitted by the applicable provisions of the Zoning Code or be
detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare of the surrounding area
or overall community, as determined by the city.



   (D)   All such recommended variances shall be communicated to the
City Council in writing along with written findings supporting the
Commission’s recommendation, so that the City Council may consider any
variance request prior to City Council consideration of a final plat of
subdivision.



   (E)   The Plan Commission may recommend, and the City Council may
impose, conditions on any grant of variance.



(Prior Code, § 38-6)  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010)



§ 156.007  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The sale or exchange of small parcels of land to or
between adjoining property owners may be approved by the City Surveyor and
Engineer where such sale or exchange does not create additional lots or
create any lot which is not in full conformance with the Zoning Code, and
where the resulting combined parcel of land would be of such shape or
configuration to conform with the requirements of Chapter 159, the City
Zoning Code.



      (2)   In addition, no lot may be created in which portions of
the lot are separated by any right-of-way, access easement or any other
easement which would have the effect of creating two separate parcels of land.



      (3)   If a sale or exchange is approved by the City Surveyor
and Engineer consistent with the provisions herein, it shall otherwise be
exempt from the subdivision requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   The division of land into two parcels for sale or
donation of one such parcel to a not-for-profit corporation whose sole
purpose and objective is to acquire and maintain lands in a natural state as
a nature preserve is exempt from the requirements of this chapter; provided
that such division does not reduce the area of any parcel to less than the
minimum lot area required in the applicable zoning district.



      (2)   Such corporation shall deliver to the city a recordable
instrument on a form prescribed by the City Attorney, signed and acknowledged
by such corporation wherein such corporation agrees that in the event it
determines to convey the land in question for a use other than that of a
nature preserve, it shall first cause such property to be platted as a
subdivision in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   The division of land into two parcels for sale or donation of
one such parcel to the city for the purpose and objective of preserving and
maintaining the agricultural use of land within the city or for the purpose
and objective of acquiring additional park land.



   (D)   With regard to any subdivision of five or more lots, no more
than 20% of the lots may be reduced up to 10% from the minimum lot area
requirements set forth in the applicable section of the Zoning Code, provided
that the average lot area of all the lots in the subdivision shall equal or
exceed the minimum lot area prescribed in the applicable section of the
Zoning Code.



(Prior Code, § 38-7)  (Ord. 998, passed 12-18-1976; Ord. 1136, passed
10-17-1979; Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed 11-1-2010)



§ 156.008  BUILDING PERMITS.



   In addition to the requirements of other applicable ordinances, codes
or provisions of the city code, building permits for lots-of-record in a
subdivision approved pursuant to this chapter shall only be issued after such
subdivision has been developed and improved in accordance with all of the
following, as applicable:



   (A)   Provisions of this chapter;



   (B)   Approved engineering plans, landscape plans, tree removal
plans, the subdivision agreement and any other documents incorporated as part
of the final approval of the subdivision; and



   (C)   Covenants appearing on the plat or running with the land.



(Prior Code, § 38-8)  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010)



§ 156.009  CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.



   Any amendments to this chapter shall first be submitted to the Plan
Commission for its study and recommendation.



(Prior Code, § 38-9)  (Ord. 2010-48, passed 11-1-2010)



§ 156.010  FEES.



   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall file an
application for subdivision under the terms of this chapter shall be charged
a fee in accordance with the fee schedule established by the City Council and
amended from time to time, in order to defray the approximate cost of such
review and recording procedures.



   (B)   All such filing fees shall be submitted at the time of
application for subdivision and before any action is taken by the Plan
Commission.



   (C)   In addition, plan review fees, inspection fees, connection
fees, impact fees, reimbursable legal and consulting fees, shall be paid, in
accordance with the fee schedule, prior to the recordation of the final plat,
if applicable, or upon notification of payment due by the city.



   (D)   Payment shall be submitted to the Community Development
Department of the city.



   (E)   Violations of this provision shall subject the applicant to
fines and penalties consistent with the approved fee schedule.



   (F)   The city will not accept improvements, conduct inspections or
authorize additional work related to a proposed subdivision for which
outstanding fees or fines are due and owing.



(Prior Code, § 38-10)  (Ord. 984, passed 6-7-1976; Ord. 1252, passed
10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed 11-1-2010)



PLATS



§ 156.025  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Preliminary requirements; minimum.



      (1)   An application for subdivision may not be filed or
considered if either:



         (a)   An application involving the subject property that
requests action inconsistent with the proposed subdivision application
currently pending before any board, commission or other body in the city; or



         (b)   An application involving the subject property is
the subject of ongoing judicial review.



      (2)   An application for subdivision may not be filed or
considered unless either:



         (a)   The proposed subdivision conforms to the
underlying zoning for the property as set forth on the city’s official
zoning maps; or



         (b)   The proposed subdivision is accompanied by a
request for zoning relief that would, if granted, result in the subdivision
conforming to the zoning requirements.



   (B)   Pre-application meeting.



      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation proposing to subdivide
land within the corporate limits of the city or proposing to dedicate streets
or other lands for public use shall first schedule at least one
pre-application meeting with the Community Development Department.



      (2)   Following said meeting, a complete and accurate
application shall be submitted to the Community Development Department
consistent with the provisions of § 156.026.



(Prior Code, § 38-14)  (Ord. 2010-48, passed 11-1-2010)



§ 156.026  TENTATIVE PLAT; APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following materials must be included in a complete
application for tentative plat approval:



      (1)   Completed tentative plat of subdivision application
checklist;



      (2)   (a)   Completed application form as supplied by the
city, including any applicable application for a special use permit or
variances and the disclosure of interests statement on the form provided by
the city as part of the application.



         (b)   In addition, the completed application must
conform to the following requirements:



            1.   If the applicant is a corporation, the
application must be accompanied by a resolution of the corporation
authorizing the execution and submittal of the application. In addition, the
application shall indicate on its face the names of all directors and
officers of the corporation and also the names of all shareholders who own
individually or beneficially 5% or more of the outstanding stock of the
corporation;



            2.   If the applicant is a general partnership,
the application shall contain a list of all general partners who have a 5% or
greater individual or beneficial interest in the partnership;



            3.   If the applicant is a limited partnership,
the application shall contain the following information: a list of all the
names of general partners and the names of all limited partners having 5% or
greater individual or beneficial interest in the partnership;



            4.   If the applicant is an LLC, the application
shall contain the names of all managing partners and all limited partners
having a 5% or greater individual or beneficial interest in the LLC; and



            5.   If the applicant is a land trust or any other
trust, the application shall contain the names and addresses of all
beneficiaries of the trust together with their respective interests in the
trusts. The application shall be further verified by the applicant in the
capacity of trustee or by the beneficiary as a beneficial owner of an
interest in the trust. The application shall be signed individually by as
many beneficiaries as are necessary to constitute greater than 50% ownership
of the beneficial interest of the trust.



      (3)   Application fee as established on the current fee
schedule;



      (4)   Statement of intent describing the history of the
parcel, the site, the surrounding area, unique features of the property, the
design rationale for the subdivision, any special studies conducted and any
other information deemed by the petitioner to be relevant to the
consideration of the subdivision request;



      (5)   A current legal description of the property proposed for
subdivision submitted in digital format, ready for publication;



      (6)   (a)   A tentative plat of subdivision drawn at a
scale determined to be acceptable to the city, generally 100 feet to one inch
or in the case of small tracts, 50 feet to one inch; and



         (b)   The tentative plat should illustrate, at a
minimum, the following:



            1.   All boundaries of the property proposed to be
subdivided, section and fractional section lines, existing permanent
buildings, watercourses, wetlands, woodlands, floodplains, flood ways,
bluffs, ravines and all other existing features pertinent to proper
subdivisions;



            2.   All corporate boundary lines within or
adjacent to the proposed subdivision;



            3.   Compliance with the applicable zoning
district and all applicable provisions of the city zoning ordinance of 1923,
as amended;



            4.   Width and names of all existing and proposed
roads, streets, avenues and alleys within 100 feet of the limits of the
property;



            5.   All proposed property lines,  building area
lines and accurate dimensions;



            6.   Adjoining properties and, if subdivided, the
name of the subdivision;



            7.   The name of the proposed subdivision and the
name and address of the owner, trustee or sponsor, and any architect,
engineer, land planner or surveyor participating in the preparation of the
plat and related information;



            8.   All existing and proposed easements;



            9.   The date of preparation and each revision
date thereafter; and



            10.   A north arrow.



      (7)   Existing and proposed easement agreements;



      (8)   Preliminary engineering plans including, but not limited
to, existing site conditions, overall layout, existing and proposed locations
of public and private utilities, grading and drainage plans and corresponding
calculations to demonstrate compliance with the Lake County Watershed
Development Ordinance, as adopted by reference in § 152.30;



      (9)   Wetland delineations and jurisdictional determination,
base flood elevation per the Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance, as
adopted by reference in § 152.30, and approvals from outside agencies as
appropriate;



      (10)   A traffic study, for developments over five lots and
for smaller developments as determined to be necessary by the City Engineer
due to potential traffic impacts;



      (11)   Tree survey indicating the location, size, species and
condition of all existing trees eight-inch DBH or larger and all trees in
clusters of six or more trees of at least four-inch DBH in accordance with §
99.068 of this city code;



      (12)   Steep slope analysis and restoration plans for
development parcels which include non-table land, ravines or bluffs;



      (13)   Preliminary landscape plan including as appropriate,
but not limited to, a tree removal plan, plantings in all common areas
including around detention ponds, street tree plantings, wetland restoration
and a typical landscape plan(s) for individual lots. The landscape plan shall
be drawn on the preliminary drainage and grading plan to allow identification
of any potential conflicts;



      (14)   A pro forma demonstrating that there is sufficient
financial capacity to complete all phases of the project. The pro forma shall
include, but not be limited to, information regarding the availability and
structure of proposed financing and a timeline for starting and completing
the project, or each phase of the project if applicable. The pro forma must
include any requests for waiver or deferral of development fees if
applicable, or any requests for other special assistance;



      (15)   For subdivisions proposed with more than five buildable
lots, an impact study comparing the current and future cost of providing city
services to the proposed development and the current and future revenues
expected to be generated by the development in a form acceptable to the city;
and



      (16)   Any other plans or documents determined to be necessary
by the Director of Community Development or City Engineer to allow a complete
and thorough review of the proposed tentative plat and to determine
compliance with this chapter and other applicable regulations.



   (B)   Upon the determination that any of the requirements of
divisions (A)(6) through (A)(16) above is not applicable to the specific
request, the Director of Community Development or City Engineer may waive
such requirement.



(Prior Code, § 38-15)  (Ord. 2010-17, passed 5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.027  TENTATIVE PLAT; PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   Complete application. Upon determination by the Director of
Community Development that the applicant has submitted a complete application
for tentative plat of subdivision approval, and after staff review and
determination that said plat conforms to this chapter, other pertinent
ordinances of the city, and the City Comprehensive Plan of 1998 as it may be
amended from time to time, and with the general design and layout of similar
areas of the city as required by the city’s Charter, such application shall
be scheduled for Plan Commission review.



   (B)   Public notice. Public notice must be provided in accordance
with the following requirements.



      (1)   Notice by the petitioner.



         (a)   Must be provided to all legal owners of property
to a depth of three ownerships in all directions, but not to exceed 1,320
feet, from the perimeter of the property proposed for subdivision;



         (b)   Notice must be provided by certified mail, return
receipt requested;



         (c)   For purposes of satisfying this notice
requirement, notices sent to the names and addresses of the persons receiving
tax bills as set for in the most recent real estate tax assessment records
maintained by the County Treasurer for the nearby properties as described in
division (B)(1)(a) above shall be deemed to be sufficient notice to the
owners of such properties;



         (d)   The notice shall contain:



            1.   An explanation of the request; general
location of the property by address or other identifiable characteristics;



            2.   A copy of the proposed tentative plat of
subdivision and site plan;



            3.   The name of the petitioner, property owner
and developer; and



            4.   The date, time and place of the public
hearing; and notice that the full application may be examined at City
Community Development Department, 800 Field Drive, Lake Forest.



         (e)   The petitioner must submit evidence of compliance
with the above notice requirements by filing an affidavit of notice with the
Community Development Department at least five days prior to the scheduled
hearing. The affidavit shall include a listing of the names and addresses of
property owners to whom notice was sent;



         (f)   The petitioner bears the sole responsibility for
complying with the notification procedures; and



         (g)   Re-notification for petitions that are continued
by the Plan Commission is not required unless specifically directed by the
Commission as part of the motion to continue the petition.



      (2)   Notice by the city.



         (a)   Publication of a legal notice stating the date,
time and place of the public hearing shall be made in a newspaper of general
circulation at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. The publication
shall include a description of the subdivision request. Republication for
continued matters is not required unless specifically directed by the
Commission as part of the motion to continue the petition.



         (b)   The agenda for the public hearing shall be posted
at five public locations and on the city’s website at least seven days
prior to the public hearing. Posting of the agenda in accordance with this
provision is required for new and continued petitions.



   (C)   Plan Commission action on a tentative plat of subdivision.



      (1)   If the tentative plat is found to conform to the
requirements of this chapter and other pertinent ordinances of the city, the
Plan Commission shall recommend approval of the tentative plat to the City
Council by a motion of the Commission. The tentative plat shall be delivered
to the City Council, along with the findings in support of approval as
determined by the Plan Commission.



      (2)   (a)   If it is determined by the Commission that the
tentative plat does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, other
pertinent ordinances of the city and the City Comprehensive Plan of 1998 as
it may be amended from time to time, or that the tentative plan does not
conform with the general design and layout of similar areas of the city, as
required by the City’s Charter, the Plan Commission may:



            1.   Continue the matter to allow the petitioner
to revise the proposal and provide additional information; or



            2.   Recommend denial of the tentative plat to the
City Council with supporting findings.



         (b)   Alternatively, the petitioner may withdraw the
application.



   (D)   City Council action on a tentative plat of subdivision.



      (1)   Upon receipt of a recommendation from the Plan
Commission regarding a tentative plat, the City Council shall consider the
findings presented by the Plan Commission and assess whether the proposed
tentative plat is in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and
other pertinent ordinances.



      (2)   The Council may take action to:



         (a)   Approve the tentative plat;



         (b)   Remand the matter to the Plan Commission with
direction for further modification and consideration; or



         (c)   Deny the application.



      (3)   If the application is denied, submittal of the
application, in the same form, is precluded for a period of 12 months from
the date of the denial.



   (E)   Duration and extension of approvals.



      (1)   (a)   Tentative plat approval shall be valid for 12
months from the date of City Council approval.



         (b)   A final plat application, addressing all
conditions and requirements of tentative plat approval, must be submitted to
the Community Development Department in accordance with the requirements of
§ 156.028 within 12 months from the date of City Council approval of the
tentative plat, or if extensions are specifically authorized by the City
Council as provided herein, within 24 or 36 months.



         (c)   Failure to timely submit a final plat application
will be deemed a withdrawal of the application and will result in the voiding
of the tentative plat approval.



         (d)   Any further consideration of the proposed
subdivision shall require a new application for tentative plat approval in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   Upon written request submitted to the Director of
Community Development by the property owner, and upon determination by the
City Council that there is good cause, the City Council may grant not more
than two 12-month extensions of the tentative plat approval.



(Prior Code, § 38-17)  (Ord. 1168, passed 4-7-1980; Ord. 1252, passed
10-5-1981;  Ord. 2010-48, passed 11-1-2010)



§ 156.028  FINAL PLAT; APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   In addition to the application requirements for tentative plat
approval, the following materials must be included in a complete application
for final plat approval:



      (1)   Completed final plat of subdivision application
checklist;



      (2)   Completed application for final plat of subdivision
approval as supplied by the city. If any information pertaining to variances
or the disclosure of interests statement has changed since submittal of the
tentative plat application, re-submittal of all application forms with
changes highlighted is required;



      (3)   Application fee as established on the current fee
schedule;



      (4)   Statement of intent describing any changes to the
proposed development since and in response to tentative plat approval and
providing evidence that all conditions of tentative plat approval are
satisfied;



      (5)   The final plat of subdivision, which shall be in
compliance with the requirements of 765 ILCS 205 (Plat Act) and consistent
with the approved tentative plat of subdivision, except that the final plat
shall reflect changes in response to the conditions of tentative plat
approval and shall provide additional details, not limited to, but including
the following:



         (a)   Identification of all lands and road rights-of-way
to be dedicated to the city for public use and all lands to be authorized for
city use or public use through easements;



         (b)   Street names as approved by the city and United
States Post Office;



         (c)   All necessary dimensions both linear and angular.
Linear dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimal parts of a foot.
Complete curve data shall be shown for all curves forming street or property
line boundaries;



         (d)   All certificates and seals of approval and
acceptance shall appear along with notarized signatures of the property owner
and the project engineer;



         (e)   All certificates and seals of approval and
acceptance shall appear with space for signatures and notary seals of the
Mayor of the city, the Plan Commission Chairperson, the City Marshal and the
Clerk of Lake County; and



         (f)   All standard plat notes shall be reflected along
with any notes required as a condition of tentative plat approval.



      (6)   Final engineering plans and specifications detailing all
proposed public and private improvements as determined to be necessary by the
City Engineer, including, but not limited to, sanitary and storm sewers,
detention ponds and swales, water distribution systems, utility
installations, roads and streetlights;



      (7)   Engineer’s cost estimates of all improvements;



      (8)   All approvals and permits from outside agencies as
required by the City Engineer;



      (9)   A final tree and vegetation removal/ preservation plan
detailing all existing trees and vegetation, indicating which materials will
be protected and preserved and identifying which materials will be removed
consistent with the requirements of Chapter 99 of the city code. For trees
and vegetation intended for preservation, a protection plan, prepared by a
certified arborist, indicating measures that will be taken prior to, during
and after construction to achieve preservation is also required;



      (10)   A final landscape plan, based upon the final grading
and drainage plan, identifying the type of trees and other vegetation (using
common names), the number, the size at time of planting and the estimated
size at maturity. The plan should include, but not be limited to, landscaping
for entrances to the development, streetscapes, detention ponds, wetlands,
landscape buffers, perimeter plantings, all other common areas and a typical
landscape plan for each distinct type of individual lot; and



      (11)   Any other plans or documents determined to be necessary
by the Director of Community Development or City Engineer to permit a
complete and thorough review of the proposed final plat to determine
compliance with the conditions of tentative plat approvals, this chapter and
other applicable regulations.



   (B)   Upon the determination that any of the requirements of
division (A)(6) through (A)(11) above is not applicable to the specific
request, the Director of Community Development or City Engineer may waive
such requirement.



(Prior Code, § 38-18)  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 93-40, passed
7-6-1993; Ord. 2010-48, passed 11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.029  FINAL PLAT OF SUBDIVISION; PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   Complete application. Upon determination by the Director of
Community Development that the applicant has submitted a complete application
for final plat of subdivision approval, and after staff review and
determination that said plat conforms to this chapter, other pertinent
ordinances of the city and the City Comprehensive Plan of 1998 as it may be
amended from time to time, with the general design and layout of similar
areas of the city as required by the city’s Charter, and with all
conditions of tentative approval, such application shall be scheduled for
Plan Commission review.



   (B)   Public notice. Public notice must be provided in accordance
with § 156.027(B).



   (C)   Plan Commission review of final plat of subdivision.



      (1)   (a)   If the final plat is found to conform to the
requirements of this chapter, all of the conditions of the tentative plat
approval and other pertinent ordinances of the city, the Plan Commission
shall recommend approval of the final plat to the City Council by a motion of
the Commission.



         (b)   The final plat shall be delivered to the City
Council, along with the findings in support of approval as determined by the
Plan Commission.



         (c)   If the Plan Commission approves the final plat
with conditions, the petitioner is responsible for delivering to the
Community Development Department any revised plans or further documentation
evidencing compliance with such conditions prior to final City Council
consideration and within one year of the date of the Plan Commission’s
motion to recommend final plat approval.



         (d)   Failure to do so may result in rescission of all
previous approvals.



      (2)   (a)   If it is determined by the Commission that the
final plat does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, to other
pertinent ordinances of the city or to the conditions of tentative plat
approval, the Plan Commission may:



            1.   Continue the matter to allow the petitioner
to make revisions or provide additional information; or



            2.   Recommend denial of the final plat to the
City Council with supporting findings.



         (b)   Alternatively, the petitioner may withdraw the
application.



   (D)   City Council review of final plat.



      (1)   Upon receipt of a recommendation from the Plan
Commission regarding a final plat, the City Council shall consider the
findings presented by the Plan Commission and assess whether the proposed
final plat is in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and other
pertinent ordinances.



      (2)   The City Council may:



         (a)   Approve the final plat and in the case of a
planned preservation subdivision, the associated special use permit;



         (b)   Remand the matter to the Plan Commission with
direction for further modification and consideration; or



         (c)   Deny the application.



      (3)   If the application is denied, resubmittal requires full
compliance with the requirements in this chapter beginning with submittal of
an application for review and approval of a tentative plat of subdivision.
Submittal of an application for tentative plat approval, in the same form as
the application receiving denial, is precluded for a period of 12 months from
the date of the denial.



   (E)   Duration and extension of approvals. Final plat approval shall
be valid for 12 months from the date of City Council approval, during which
time, all requirements for recordation of the final plat must be met to the
satisfaction of the city.



(Prior Code, § 38-19)  (Ord. 566, passed 7-2-1962; Ord. 1252, passed
10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed 11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.030  RECORDATION OF FINAL PLAT; REQUIREMENTS FOR RECORDING.



   (A)   No final plat of any subdivision of land within the corporate
limits of the city shall be recorded in the Recorder’s office of the
county, or have any legal force or effect until it receives all approvals
consistent with this chapter and the following requirements are met to the
satisfaction of the Director of Community Development and the City Engineer.



      (1)   All conditions of final plat approval that are required
to be met prior to recordation of the final plat shall be satisfied.



      (2)   Copies of the final plat, in number and form as directed
by the Director of Community Development, in a form ready for recording,
shall be submitted to the Community Development Department.



      (3)   All documents related to the conveyance of any land to
be dedicated for public streets, alleys, schools, parks or any other public
use shall be submitted in a form acceptable to the City Engineer.



      (4)   All applicable fees shall be paid.



      (5)   (a)   A subdivision agreement, in a form acceptable
to the City Engineer and City Attorney, shall be submitted to the city.



         (b)   Said agreement shall document that the developer
or property owner agrees to install and bear the cost of installing
infrastructure as detailed on the approved engineering plans and consistent
with the approvals granted by the City Council for the final plat of
subdivision.



         (c)   A construction schedule and maximum times for
completion of installation of all improvements as detailed on the approval
final engineering plans shall be set forth in said agreement.



      (6)   (a)   A properly completed and executed letter of
credit or other comparable financial guarantee as may be approved by the City
Engineer and City Attorney with an expiration date of not less than 90 days
after all improvements are to be completed in accordance with the timetable
set forth in the subdivision agreement shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department.



         (b)   Said financial guarantee shall be provided in an
amount as required by the City Surveyor and Engineer, but in no case shall it
be less than 110% of the Engineer’s estimate of the cost of the
improvements, as set forth in the plans and specifications required under
this chapter, plus the cost of engineering inspections, as set forth in the
fee schedule.



         (c)   The financial guarantee shall always be maintained
in an amount not less than 100% of the estimate of any balance due for
improvements.



         (d)   The financial guarantee shall serve as security
for:



            1.   The faithful performance by the developer or
property owner in full conformance with the subdivision agreement and all
ordinances of the city; and



            2.   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by
the city and all costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with
any failure to comply.



         (e)   The City Council may grant variances from this
section if it determines that such provisions were not intended to apply to a
particular subdivision because of its size, shape, nature or extent of the
improvements.



      (7)   Evidence satisfactory to the County Tax Collector
showing that all taxes and past due installments of special assessments on
the property to be subdivided have been paid shall be submitted to the
Community Development Department.



      (8)   All necessary signatures and seals shall be obtained on
all three mylar copies of the final plat.



   (B)   After the final plat has been recorded, an original plat,
stamped by the Lake County Recorder’s Office, shall be returned to the city
and shall be kept on file by said City Surveyor and Engineer for the use and
benefit of the city.



(Prior Code, § 38-20)  (Ord. 2010-48, passed 11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61,
passed 11-7-2016)



IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS



§ 156.045  RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPROVEMENTS.



   The developer or property owner shall be responsible for the
preparation for and installation of all improvements required under this
subchapter and as set forth in the subdivision agreement, including, but not
limited to, the cost of all necessary surveys, specifications, detailed
drawings, construction and inspections.



(Prior Code, § 38-25)  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010)



§ 156.046  CITY ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The City Council shall consider the acceptance of public
improvements by resolution upon completion of the following:



      (1)   Developer has transferred a minimum of 50% of the lots
to third party purchasers; and



      (2)   Construction of principal buildings is completed and
certificates of occupancy have been issued for 50% of the lots; and



      (3)   The City Engineer has verified the overall development
site is maintained in a good and serviceable condition as required by the
subdivision agreement; and



      (4)   Certification by the City Engineer that all
improvements, consistent with the approved engineering plans, have been
completed, inspected and determined to be in full compliance with the Lake
Forest Engineering and Construction Standards, as amended; and



      (5)   Delivery of the guarantee security required for the
improvements to be accepted; and



      (6)   All fees due to the city are paid in full.



   (B)   The acceptance resolution may modify or waive any of the
foregoing requirements, and the City Council may condition such acceptance as
set forth in the terms of the acceptance resolution.



(Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.047  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The developer or property owner shall submit to the City
Surveyor and Engineer, in conformance with the application requirements in
this chapter, detailed plans and specifications, suitable for competitive
bidding, prepared by a registered engineer of the state for all required
improvements.



   (B)   The design criteria, material specifications, installation
procedures and testing shall be in accordance with this subchapter and the
Lake Forest Engineering and Construction Standards, as amended, on file in
the office of the City Surveyor and Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 38-26)  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.048  SANITARY SEWERS.



   (A)   A system of public sanitary sewers with necessary manholes and
lateral connections for each lot shall be required.



   (B)   Design and size of the sewers shall:



      (1)   Provide for the ultimate service area as depicted in the
City Comprehensive Plan;



      (2)   Conform with the adopted zoning and established
development patterns; and



      (3)   Conform with the Lake Forest Engineering and
Construction Standards, as amended, on file in the office of the City
Surveyor and Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 38-27)  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.049  STREET IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Residential public streets.



      (1)   Residential public streets shall be improved with a 20
foot wide pavement with concrete, or other material subject to the approval
of the City Engineer, curb and gutter providing a width of 22 feet between
curbs.



      (2)   The pavement shall consist of ten inches of bituminous
base, binder and surface or approved equivalent material having a structural
number as established by the IDOT Design Manual of not less than three inches.



   (B)   Collector/distributor streets shall be improved with a 26 foot
width between curbs and the pavement shall consist of approved materials
having a structural number of not less than 3.0.



   (C)   Phased street improvements may be permitted at the discretion
of the city to allow a delay to the application of the final lift of asphalt
on streets until after completion of the heavy construction activity in the
subdivision.



   (D)   Private roads.



      (1)   Private roads shall be improved with an 18 foot wide
pavement consisting of seven inches of bituminous base and surface or
approved equivalents having a structural number of not less than 2.0.



      (2)   The Plan Commission may recommend reductions in pavement
widths where unique conditions exist and where no more than two lots are
served.



      (3)   Private roads may be established to serve no more than
five zoning lots, unless such limitation is specifically waived through a
variance or special use permit approved by the City Council.



   (E)   A public street or streets shall be required whenever access
to six or more zoning lots is proposed in a subdivision, unless such
requirement is specifically waived through a variance or special use permit
approved by the City Council.



   (F)   All streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the proposed
subdivision unless terminated by a cul-de-sac designed to the standards in
this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 38-28)  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.050  STORM SEWERS AND DRAINAGE.



   (A)   All developments must be in compliance with the Lake County
Watershed Development Ordinance, as adopted by reference in § 152.30, and
with the Lake Forest Engineering and Construction Standards, as amended, on
file in the office of the City Surveyor and Engineer.



   (B)    When detention ponds are required under the applicable
ordinances, such detention ponds must meet all applicable provisions of the
Lake Forest Engineering and Construction Standards, as amended, as well as
the following requirements:



      (1)   For subdivisions exceeding three lots, detention ponds
must be located on separate outlots within the subdivision, and appropriate
covenants and restrictions must be executed to ensure ongoing funding for and
maintenance of such detention ponds;



      (2)   The slope spanning the distance between the high water
mark and the table land may not be less than 22 degrees;



      (3)   A minimum distance of 20 feet of table land must be
provided between a detention pond and the property line of the lot or outlot
on which the detention pond is located; and



      (4)   Riprap may not be used to armor the perimeter of the
detention pond;



(Prior Code, § 38-29)  (Ord. 92-34, passed 7-7-1992; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.051  WATER DISTRIBUTION.



   (A)   A complete water distribution system shall be installed to
serve all of the lots in the proposed subdivision.



   (B)   The mains shall be constructed of materials as specified in
the Lake Forest Engineering and Construction Standards or as approved by the
City Engineer and shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter or of a larger
size for feeder mains, as may be required at the sole discretion of the City
Engineer.



   (C)   The system shall include gate valves at all junction points
and at intervals of approximately 600 feet between junction points and shall
include fire hydrants at intervals of a minimum of 500 feet for single-family
or duplex residential development and an interval distance of a minimum of
300 feet for commercial or multi-family development.



(Prior Code, § 38-30)  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.052  SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   A five foot wide concrete walk shall be installed on at least
one side of all streets, within the subdivision.



   (B)   The Plan Commission may recommend waiving this requirement for
streets that serve fewer than five zoning lots, or where there are no
connecting sidewalks on adjacent streets.



(Prior Code, § 38-31)  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.053  STREET LIGHTS.



   A system of street lights on all public streets within the subdivision
shall be required to provide a city standard street light at all
intersections, cul- de-sacs, and at intervals of not more than 400 feet.



(Prior Code, § 38-32)  (Ord. 654, passed 5-3-1965; Ord. 1252, passed
10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed 11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.054  PARKWAY TREES AND LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Street trees shall be installed in all subdivisions in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 99 of this city code.



   (B)   Parkways shall be graded and seeded to provide a turf crop.



(Prior Code, § 38-33)  (Ord. 654, passed 5-3-1965; Ord. 1143, passed
11-17-1979; Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed 11-1-2010; Ord.
2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.055  STREET NAME SIGNS AND TRAFFIC SIGNS.



   (A)   The city shall install all required name and traffic signs.



   (B)   The cost of such installation shall be the owner or
developer’s responsibility.



(Prior Code, § 38-34)  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.056  PERIMETER STREET IMPROVEMENTS.



   Where existing perimeter streets are deficient in any of the
requirements of this section, the Plan Commission may recommend that the
developer or property owner install any or all of the deficiencies or to
place on deposit with the city a sum of money equal to one-half of the total
cost of the required improvements, as determined by the City Engineer, for
the total frontage of the proposed subdivision.



(Prior Code, § 38-35)  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61, passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.057  STEEP SLOPE SETBACKS.



   Due to the fragile ravine and bluff ecosystem, any subdivision must
comply with § 159.015 of this city code for the purpose of protecting
adjacent public and private lands from damage due to land development and
construction activity.



(Prior Code, § 38-36)  (Ord. 2010-48, passed 11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61,
passed 11-7-2016)



DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 156.070  GENERALLY.



   (A)   The following standards shall be considered by the Plan
Commission and City Council in reviewing all proposed subdivisions and all
associated site, landscape and building plans.



   (B)   These standards are intended to guide the applicant in the
development of proposed subdivision plats and site and building plans, as
well as to provide a standard of review for the city.



   (C)   The standards are intended to encourage the development of
subdivisions that are compatible with the unique character, natural features,
spaciousness and ambiance of existing development of the city.



(Prior Code, § 38-51)  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48, passed
11-1-2010)



§ 156.071  LOT LINES.



   (A)   The lot lines shall be drawn whenever possible along naturally
definable boundaries, through buffer areas and through natural features, so
as to provide buildable areas that will be spaced and separated from such
natural elements and so as to preserve and utilize said natural elements to
the best aesthetic effect in the design of the subdivision.



   (B)   The lot lines, however, will be generally straight and not
irregular to provide lots with a minimum ratio of lot width, as measured at
the front setback line, to depth, of not more than 1:2.



(Prior Code, § 38-51(A))  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48,
passed 11-1-2010)



§ 156.072  LOT DESIGN.



   (A)   All lots shall be designed to:



      (1)   Contain table land equaling not less than 70% of the
minimum lot area required by the applicable zoning classification; and



      (2)   Contain buildable area of not less than 70% of that
obtained on a rectangular lot in the same zoning classification which has
both minimum width and minimum gross land area tabulated as follows:



 


Zoning Classification

 

Minimum Buildable Area




R-5

 

44,100




R-4

 

23,000




R-3

 

15,960




R-2

 

6,650




R-1

 

1,925




 



   (B)   All lots shall have a minimum lot width at the street
right-of-way of not less than 50% of the minimum lot width required in the
applicable zoning classification; provided, however, that for each five feet
or less of lot width reduction below the minimum required width, the setback
for all required sideyards shall be increased by one foot.



(Prior Code, § 38-51(B))  (Ord. 2010-48, passed 11-1-2010; Ord. 2016-61,
passed 11-7-2016)



§ 156.073  STREET LAYOUT.



   (A)   The streets shall be curved wherever possible to provide a
gentle curvilinear street pattern.



   (B)   The streets shall be located wherever possible to preserve the
natural elements of the site, as well as those of surrounding properties.



   (C)   The creation of through lots, lots with street frontage on two
sides and the alignment of streets adjacent to each other in a linear manner
should be avoided.



   (D)   Further, the number of new intersections with existing and
proposed major or secondary arterials and collector/distributor streets shall
be kept to a minimum.



(Prior Code, § 38-51(C))  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48,
passed 11-1-2010)



§ 156.074  TOPOGRAPHY.



   The existing topography shall be preserved by limiting grade changes to
those necessary to provide for proper drainage on the site and to minimize
the impact on surrounding properties.



(Prior Code, § 38-51(D))  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48,
passed 11-1-2010)



§ 156.075  PRESERVATION OF LANDSCAPE.



   Significant and native landscapes shall be preserved in a natural
state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal, so that
the resulting development will be in keeping with the general appearance of
neighboring developed areas and will not adversely affect the ecology of the
area.



(Prior Code, § 38-51(E))  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48,
passed 11-1-2010)



§ 156.076  RELATION OF PROPOSED BUILDING TO ENVIRONMENT AND EXISTING
DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to the
terrain and to existing structures that have visual relationship to the
proposed structures.



   (B)   Development shall be in harmony with the prevailing
development of the city, the existing development of the area and the
Comprehensive Plan.



(Prior Code, § 38-51(F))  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48,
passed 11-1-2010)



§ 156.077  UTILITY SERVICES.



   (A)   Electric and telephone lines shall be underground.



   (B)   Any utility installations remaining above ground shall be
relocated underground as part of the subdivision development.



(Prior Code, § 38-51(G))  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48,
passed 11-1-2010)



§ 156.078  NOISE ABATEMENT.



   (A)   On property located along expressways, major arterial streets,
railroads and other nonresidential land uses, noise abatement berms, a buffer
of natural vegetation or a fence or wall of sufficient size shall be detailed
in the plans.



   (B)   The city shall consider the method of the noise abatement
proposal in the context of the character of the neighborhood.



(Prior Code, § 38-51(H))  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48,
passed 11-1-2010)



§ 156.079  FLOODPLAINS.



   All floodplain land shall be preserved in its natural state or as
farmland and no subdivision in the floodplain shall be permitted except that
a portion of a lot may be located in the floodplain provided that the portion
of the lot outside the floodplain is equal to at least 50% of the minimum lot
area required by the applicable zoning classification.



(Prior Code, § 38-51(I))  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48,
passed 11-1-2010)



§ 156.080  OPEN SPACE.



   At the discretion of the City Council, where appropriate to maintain
and preserve open space, a portion of the property, not to exceed 10%, may be
required to be allocated for parks or open space and deeded either to the
city, the City Open Lands Association or other preservation organizations, as
designated by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 38-51(J))  (Ord. 1252, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 2010-48,
passed 11-1-2010)



CHAPTER 157:  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



Section



   157.01   Adoption by reference



§ 157.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The Comprehensive Plan, as amended, is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length in this code of
ordinances.



(Ord. 1990-47, passed 8-6-1990; Ord. 93-54, passed 8-2-1993; Ord. 01-22,
passed 7-2-2001; Ord. 2013-29, passed 6-3-2013)



CHAPTER 158:  INCLUSIONARY HOUSING



Section



   158.01   Definitions



   158.02   Policy



   158.03   Covered development projects



   158.04   Percentage of affordable housing units required



   158.05   Development cost off-sets



   158.06   Density bonuses



   158.07   Integration of affordable housing unit



   158.08   Alternatives to on-site affordable housing units



   158.09   Target income levels for affordable housing units



   158.10   Eligibility of households



   158.11   Period of affordability



   158.12   Inclusionary housing plan and development agreements



   158.13   Preservation of affordability and restrictions on resale



   158.14   Implementation



§ 158.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   In general. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. To the
extent that words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this
section, but such words or phrases are defined in the Zoning Code (Chapter
159), such words or phrases shall be deemed to have the meanings set forth in
the Zoning Code. Otherwise, words and phrases shall be interpreted in their
commonly used sense as set forth in the Webster’s Third International
Dictionary (Ed.), unless the context reasonably requires another construction.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AFFORDABLE HOUSING. Any housing that qualifies as affordable
low-income housing or moderate housing.



      AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND. A trust fund to be established by
the city with the central purpose of providing financial resources to address
the affordable housing needs of individuals and families of low- and
moderate-income households who live in the city.



      AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT. A dwelling unit that meets the criteria
for affordable low-income housing or for moderate housing.



      AFFORDABLE LOW-INCOME HOUSING. Decent, safe, sanitary and
appropriate housing that low-income households, households earning between
60% and 80% of the area median income, can own or rent without having to
devote more than approximately 30% of their gross income to monthly housing
expenses.



      AREA MEDIAN INCOME. The median income level for the Chicago area,
as established and defined in the annual schedule published by the Secretary
of Housing and Urban Development, and adjusted for household size.



      CONVERSION. A change in a residential or mixed-use rental
development to individual-owner residential condominium units.



      COVERED DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. Any development project in the city
that is required to provide affordable housing units under provisions of this
chapter. Projects at one location undertaken in phases, stages or otherwise
developed in distinct parts shall be considered a SINGLE COVERED DEVELOPMENT
PROJECT.



      ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD. For purposes of this chapter, a low- or
moderate-income household.



      HOUSING EXPENSES.



         (a)   For rental housing, rent and utilities; and



         (b)   For home ownership, principal and interest of any
mortgages placed on the unit, property taxes, condominium or homeowner’s
association fees, if applicable, and insurance.



      LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS.



         (a)   For owner occupied units, households that have
incomes that do not exceed 80% of the area median income; and



         (b)   For rental units, households that have incomes
that do not exceed 60% of the area median income.



      MARKET RATE UNITS. Residential dwelling units that are not
required to be affordable housing units under the requirements of this
chapter.



      MODERATE HOUSING. Decent, safe, sanitary and appropriate housing
that moderate-income households, households earning between 80% and 120% of
the area median income, can own or rent without having to devote more than
approximately 30% of their gross income to monthly housing expenses.



      MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS.



         (a)   For owner occupied units, households that have
incomes that do not exceed 120% of the area median income, or such higher
income limit as may be established for a local, county, state or federal
housing program.



         (b)   For rental units, households that have incomes
that do not exceed 80% of the area median income.



(Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 2011-24, passed 10-17-2011)



§ 158.02  POLICY.



   (A)   (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public
health, safety and welfare by encouraging high quality housing throughout the
community sufficient to meet the needs of all city residents.



      (2)   Throughout its history, the city has offered a diverse
housing stock that permitted families of varying income levels and with
various housing needs to own homes in the community.



      (3)   In recent years, property values have escalated to the
point of discouraging a diverse housing stock.



      (4)   A certain percentage of residents who currently live in
the city are unable to meet or maintain the household income level necessary
to support home ownership and, therefore, must look to other communities for
housing.



      (5)   Based upon the review and consideration of reports and
analyses of the housing situation in the city, it is apparent that the
diversity of the city’s housing stock has declined as a result of
increasing property values and housing costs; that demolition of certain
existing dwellings has led to a reduction in the diversity of the city’s
housing stock and affordable housing opportunities, and that subsequent
redevelopment has in many cases contributed to property value increases that
further the difficulty of making affordable housing available in the city.



      (6)   With the exception of housing developed in partnership
with the city and the Lake Forest Senior Cottages Foundation, the privately
developed new residential housing that is being built in the city generally
is not affordable to low- and moderate-income households.



      (7)   The city recognizes the need to provide alternative
housing opportunities in order to maintain the diversity of population that
has historically characterized the city.



   (B)   (1)   While this chapter provides specific alternatives to
the production of on-site affordable housing units, the intent and preference
of this section is to provide permanent affordable housing units that are
constructed on the site of the covered development project.



      (2)   Ownership and management of the units by the Lake Forest
Senior Cottages Foundation, or a similarly qualified not-for-profit agency,
is encouraged.



(Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.03  COVERED DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all residential
developments that result in or contain five or more dwelling units (excluding
any single-family detached dwellings).



   (B)   The types of development subject to the provisions of this
code include without limitation the following:



      (1)   A development consisting of new residential construction
or new mixed-use construction with a residential component;



      (2)   A development consisting of the renovation or
reconstruction of over 50% of the total square footage of an existing
multiple-family residential structure and that increases the number of
residential units from the number of units in the original structure;



      (3)   A development that will change the use of an existing
building in whole or in part from nonresidential to residential; and



      (4)   A development that includes the conversion of rental
property to condominium property.



(Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.04  PERCENTAGE OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   General requirement. Except as otherwise provided in §
158.08, at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units within any covered
development project shall be affordable housing units and shall be located on
the site of the covered development project.



   (B)   Calculation.



      (1)   To calculate the number of affordable housing units
required in a covered development project, the total number of proposed units
shall be multiplied by 15%.



      (2)   For purposes of this calculation, if 15% of the number
of proposed units results in a fraction, a fraction of 0.5 or more shall be
rounded up, and a fraction of less than 0.5 shall be rounded down. For
example, a proposed multiple-family development containing 15 units would be
required to set aside two units as affordable housing units. A similar 20
unit development would be required to set aside three of the units as
affordable housing units.



      (3)   Except, that in no case, shall the required number of
units be less than one unit.



(Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 2011-24, passed 10-17-2011)



§ 158.05  DEVELOPMENT COST OFF-SETS.



   (A)   An applicant that fully complies with the requirements of this
chapter (including any administrative rules that may be developed in
accordance with § 158.14) shall, upon written request, receive from the city
with regard to only the affordable housing units in the covered development
project, a waiver of all of the otherwise applicable application fees,
building permit fees, plan review fees, inspection fees, sewer and water
tap-on fees, demolition permit fees, impact fees and other development fees
and costs which may be imposed by the city.



   (B)   The fees charged for the total development shall be adjusted
proportionately to reflect this waiver of fees for the affordable housing
units.



   (C)   In the event that an applicant has paid any development costs
that might otherwise be subject to a waiver, such applicant may, upon
satisfaction of the requirements of this chapter, seek reimbursement of such
development costs.



(Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.06  DENSITY BONUSES.



   (A)   For all covered development projects that are located in the
B-2, B-3 or B-4 Zoning Districts, the maximum floor area ratio for the zoning
district may be increased an additional 0.25 if the affordable housing units
are constructed on the site of the covered development project.



   (B)   (1)   For all covered development projects that are located
in all other zoning districts, a density bonus shall be provided equal to one
market rate unit for each affordable housing unit required under this code if
the affordable housing units are constructed on the site of the covered
development project; provided, however, that the maximum number of dwelling
units in a covered development project shall not, pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, exceed 115% of the total number of dwelling units otherwise
authorized under the applicable zoning district regulations under the Zoning
Code.



      (2)   For example, a proposed multiple-family development
containing 20 units would be required to provide three affordable housing
units in the development and would be permitted to construct three additional
market rate units; resulting in a total of 23 units in the development.



(Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.07  INTEGRATION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT.



   (A)   Location of affordable housing units. Affordable housing units
shall be dispersed among the market rate units throughout the covered
development project.



   (B)   Phasing of construction.



      (1)   Where possible, affordable housing units shall be
constructed concurrent with the development of market-rate units.



      (2)   Construction phasing of affordable housing units shall
not be delayed beyond the schedule noted below, unless authorized by the
Director of Community Development when it is demonstrated by the developer to
the satisfaction of the city that a delay is necessary in order to account
for the different financing and funding requirements, economics of scale, and
infrastructure needs applicable to development of the market rate and the
affordable housing units:



 


Construction of Market-Rate Units (%)

 

Required Construction of Affordable Housing Unit (%)






Up to 30%

 

None required




30% plus 1 unit

 

At least 10%




Up to 50%

 

At least 30%




Up to 75%

 

At least 50%




75% plus 1 unit

 

At least 70%




Up to 90%

 

100%



Fractions of units shall not be counted




 



   (C)   Exterior appearance.



      (1)   The exterior appearance of the affordable housing units
in any covered development project shall be visually compatible with the
market rate units in the development.



      (2)   External building materials and finishes shall be
substantially the same in type and quality for affordable housing units as
for market rate units.



   (D)   Interior appearance and finishes. Affordable housing units may
differ from market rate units with regard to interior finishes and square
footage, provided that:



      (1)   Interior features and structural elements of affordable
housing units shall comply in all respects to the minimum construction
standards set forth in the city code;



      (2)   The differences between the affordable housing units and
the market rate units shall not include improvements related to energy
efficiency, including mechanical equipment and plumbing, insulation, windows,
and heating and cooling systems;



      (3)   The bedroom mix and aggregate gross square footage of
the affordable housing units shall be no less than the minimum requirements
outlined in the table below (unless adjusted in accordance with §
158.12(B)); and



 


Number of Affordable Housing Units

 
Number of Bedrooms
 
Minimum Aggregate Gross Square Footage


1 Bedroom
 
2 Bedroom




1
 
0
 
1
 
1,200


2
 
1
 
1
 
2,000


3
 
1
 
2
 
3,200


4
 
2
 
2
 
4,000


5
 
2
 
3
 
5,200


6
 
3
 
3
 
6,000


7
 
3
 
4
 
7,200


8
 
4
 
4
 
8,000


9
 
4
 
5
 
9,200


10
 
5
 
5
 
10,000


11
 
5
 
6
 
11,200


12
 
6
 
6
 
12,000


13
 
6
 
7
 
13,200


14
 
7
 
7
 
14,000


15
 
7
 
8
 
15,200


16
 
8
 
8
 
16,000


17
 
8
 
9
 
17,200


18
 
9
 
9
 
18,000


19
 
9
 
10
 
19,200


20
 
10
 
10
 
20,000




 



      (4)   To the extent that a covered development project is
required to provide more than 20 affordable housing units, the mix and
aggregate gross square footage of such units shall be determined in a manner
consistent with the preceding table.



(Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.08  ALTERNATIVES TO ON-SITE AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS.



   (A)   As an alternative to constructing affordable housing on the
site of the covered development project, the City Council may approve,
concurrent with the approval of the overall development, one or more of the
three alternatives to constructing affordable housing set forth in this
section.



   (B)   This section shall not be utilized unless the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City Council that the alternate means
of compliance will further affordable housing opportunities in the city to an
equal or greater extent than compliance with the on site requirements of this
chapter.



   (C)   The terms and requirements for utilizing the provisions of
this section shall be specifically set forth in the development agreement
required pursuant to § 158.12(B) of this chapter.



      (1)   Cash payment in lieu of affordable housing units. A cash
payment in lieu of constructing some or all of the required affordable
housing units on the site of a covered development project.



         (a)   Amount and use of cash in lieu.



            1.   The per unit payment amount for cash in lieu
of affordable housing units shall be set at an amount may be determined by
ordinance of the City Council.



            2.   The per unit amount shall be based on an
estimate of the cost of providing an affordable housing unit and shall be
reviewed periodically by the City Council, with any increase set forth in the
city’s annual fee ordinance.



            3.   The cash payment shall be deposited directly
into an Affordable Housing Trust Fund established by the city, which shall be
used for the purpose of providing financial resources to address affordable
housing needs within the city by promoting, preserving and producing
long-term affordable housing; providing housing-related services; or
providing support for not-for-profit organizations that actively address the
affordable housing needs of residents within the community.



            4.   The applicant shall execute all documentation
relating to such payment as the City Manager (in consultation with the City
Attorney) deems to be appropriate.



         (b)   Calculation.



            1.   For purposes of determining the total in lieu
payment amount, the per unit amount established by the city shall be
multiplied by 15% of the number of units proposed in the covered development
project.



            2.   For purposes of this calculation, if 15% of
the number of proposed units results in a fraction, the fraction shall not be
rounded up or down.



            3.   If the cash payment is in lieu of providing
one or more but not all of the required units, the calculation shall be
prorated as appropriate.



      (2)   Dedication of land. A dedication of land of a size and
location appropriate for the development of affordable housing units as
determined by the City Council, which dedication shall be made to the city
or, at the city’s discretion, a qualified not-for-profit housing agency.



      (3)   Provision of another site. The provision of an
equivalent number of affordable housing units at another site within the city.



(Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.09  TARGET INCOME LEVELS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS.



   (A)   For-sale affordable housing units.



      (1)   In covered development projects that contain for-sale
units, at least one affordable housing unit and no less than 50% of the
affordable housing units shall be sold at a price that is affordable to a
low-income household.



      (2)   Any remaining affordable housing units shall be sold at
a price that is affordable to a moderate-income household.



      (3)   The owner shall execute and record any documents
required by § 158.12 or any other provision of this chapter to ensure
compliance with this section.



   (B)   Rental of affordable housing units.



      (1)   In covered development projects that contain rental
units, at least one affordable housing unit and no less than 50% of the
affordable housing units shall be rented or leased at a price that is
affordable to a low-income household.



      (2)   Any remaining affordable housing units shall be rented
or leased at a price that is affordable to a moderate-income household.



      (3)   The owner shall execute and record any documents
required by § 158.12 or any other provision of this chapter to ensure
compliance with this section.



(Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.10  ELIGIBILITY OF HOUSEHOLDS.



   (A)   For-sale affordable housing units.



      (1)   Only eligible households shall be permitted to purchase
and occupy an affordable housing unit for purposes of satisfying the
requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   In order to address current and anticipated future
demands within the city for affordable housing, the developer of a covered
development project shall establish a plan, which plan shall be subject to
the approval of the City Manager (or the Manager’s designee).



      (3)   (a)   Such plan is intended to give priority to low-
and moderate-income households in the following order (unless adjusted in
accordance with § 158.12(B)):



            1.   Households who live in the city and the head
of the household or the spouse or domestic partner is 75 years of age or
older;



            2.   Households who live in the city and the head
of the household or the spouse or domestic partner is 65 years of age or
older;



            3.   Former city residents that are age 65 and
older;



            4.   Parents of city residents who are age 65 and
older; and



            5.   Households in which the head of the household
or the spouse or domestic partner works in the city.



         (b)   The selection of eligible households for the
affordable housing units shall be conducted by the City Manager, or such
other person or entity designated by the City Council in accordance with §
158.12(B).



      (4)   If the gross income of the eligible household increases
above the eligible household income levels provided in § 158.09, the
eligible household may continue to own and occupy the affordable housing
unit, subject to the limitations on sale or lease as set forth in § 158.11.



      (5)   The owner of the covered development project shall
execute and record any documents required by § 158.12 to ensure compliance
with this section.



   (B)   Rental affordable housing units.



      (1)   Only eligible households shall be permitted to rent and
occupy an affordable housing unit for purpose of this code.



      (2)   In order to address current and anticipated future
demands within the city for affordable housing, the developer of a covered
development project shall establish a plan, which plan shall be subject to
the approval of the City Manager (or the Manager’s designee).



      (3)   (a)   Such plan is intended to give priority to low-
and moderate-income households in the following order (unless adjusted in
accordance with § 158.12(B)):



            1.   Households who live in the city and the head
of the household or the spouse or domestic partner is 75 years of age or
older;



            2.   Households who live in the city and the head
of the household or the spouse or domestic partner is 65 years of age or
older;



            3.   Former city residents that are age 65 and
older;



            4.   Parents of city residents, who are age 65 and
older; and



            5.   Households in which the head of the household
or the spouse or domestic partner works in the city.



         (b)   The selection of eligible households for the
affordable housing units shall be conducted by the City Manager, or such
other person or entity designated by the City Council in accordance with §
158.12(B).



      (4)   If the gross income of the eligible household increases
above the eligible household income levels provided in § 158.09, during the
lease period, the eligible household may continue to lease and occupy the
unit and may renew the lease as well, subject to the limitations on lease as
set forth in § 158.11.



      (5)   The owner of the covered development project shall
execute and record any documents required by § 158.12 to ensure compliance
with this section.



(Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.11  PERIOD OF AFFORDABILITY.



   (A)   Sale of affordable housing units.



      (1)   In covered development projects that contain for-sale
units, affordable housing units shall be resold to low- and moderate-income
households in perpetuity, or as long as permissible by law.



      (2)   The owner of the covered development project shall
execute and record all documents required by § 158.12 to ensure compliance
with this section, in each case, the owner of a for-sale affordable housing
unit shall occupy such unit, and such unit may not be leased or subleased
unless expressly approved by the city and such lease or sublease is to permit
occupancy by a low- or moderate-income household.



   (B)   Rental of affordable housing units.



      (1)   (a)   In covered development projects that contain
rental units, affordable housing units shall be rented to low- and
moderate-income households in perpetuity, or as long as permissible by law.



         (b)   The owner of the covered development project shall
execute and record all documents required by § 158.12 to ensure compliance
with this section.



      (2)   In each case, the rental affordable housing unit shall
be occupied by a low- or moderate-income household, and such unit may not be
leased or subleased unless expressly approved by the city and such lease or
sublease is to permit occupancy by a low- or moderate-income household.



         (a)   In the event that the owner of a covered
development project with one or more rental units sells the development, the
new owner shall be required to continue to provide the affordable housing
units in accordance with this chapter.



         (b)   If the owner of a covered development project with
one or more rental units converts the development to condominiums, the
development shall be subject to the for-sale development requirements of this
chapter.



(Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.12  INCLUSIONARY HOUSING PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   Inclusionary housing plan.



      (1)   Prior to the approval of any covered development project
by the city (including the issuance of any permits), the applicant shall
present to the City Manager (or, in the event that the City Council enters
into an agreement with a person or entity to implement provisions of this
chapter, to such person or entity) an inclusionary housing plan that outlines
and specifies the covered development project’s compliance with each of the
applicable requirements of this code.



      (2)   The plan shall specifically contain, at a minimum, the
following information regarding the covered development project:



         (a)   A general description of the development,
including whether the development will contain rental units or individually
owned units, or both;



         (b)   The total number of market rate units and
affordable housing units in the development;



         (c)   The number of bedrooms in each market rate unit
and each affordable housing unit;



         (d)   The gross square footage of each market rate unit
and each affordable housing unit;



         (e)   Site plans showing the location of each market
rate unit and each affordable housing unit within the covered development
project, and/or floor plans showing the location of each market rate unit and
each affordable housing unit within a multiple-family residential structure;



         (f)   The pricing for each market rate unit and each
affordable housing unit;



         (g)   The phasing and construction schedule for each
market rate unit and each affordable housing unit;



         (h)   Documentation and plans regarding the exterior and
interior appearances, materials and finishes of the development and each of
its individual units;



         (i)   A description of the marketing plan (which shall
at least include the priority provisions set forth in § 158.10) that the
applicant proposes to utilize and implement to promote the sale or rental of
the affordable housing units within the development;



         (j)   A description of the specific efforts that the
applicant will undertake to provide affordable housing units to low- and
moderate-income households in accordance with this chapter; and



         (k)   A description of the documentation deemed
necessary or appropriate by the city in accordance with this chapter to
ensure continued affordability of the affordable housing units in accordance
with this chapter.



   (B)   Development agreement with not-for-profit agencies.



      (1)   Prior to issuance of a building permit for any covered
development project, the applicant shall enter into a development agreement
with the city or, at the city’s discretion, a qualified not-for-profit
housing agency, regarding the specific requirements and restrictions
regarding affordable housing and the covered development project.



      (2)   The applicant shall execute all documents deemed
necessary or appropriate, including restrictive covenants and other related
instruments, to ensure the continued affordability of the affordable housing
units in accordance with this chapter.



      (3)   Applicants may also enter into agreements with a
not-for-profit housing entity to provide the long-term management, including
leasing of the affordable housing units to low- or moderate-income
households, and maintenance of the affordable housing units by the agency.



   (C)   Additional documentation. In addition to the requirements of
divisions (A) and (B) above (as applicable), the documentation required for
covered development projects under this chapter shall include, without
limitation:



      (1)   The identification of target income levels for
affordable housing units;



      (2)   The identification and selection of eligible low- and
moderate-income households for the affordable housing units;



      (3)   Assurances that, for during the period of affordability,
any covered development projects upon which association assessments are
imposed are designed to limit such assessments in a manner that will preserve
the affordability of the affordable housing units;



      (4)   Method for marketing of the affordable housing units to
eligible low- and moderate-income households in the community;



      (5)   The execution and recordation of all documents deemed
necessary to ensure the development and continued affordability of the
affordable housing units, including without limitation a development
agreement between the owner of the covered development project and the city
or its designee;



      (6)   Agreements relating to the long-term management and
maintenance of the affordable housing units in a covered development project;



      (7)   The bedroom mix and aggregate gross square footage of
the affordable housing units; and



      (8)   Agreements and decisions regarding the applicability of
any one or more of the alternatives to the provision of on-site affordable
housing units as set forth in § 158.08.



(Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.13  PRESERVATION OF AFFORDABILITY AND RESTRICTIONS ON RESALE.



   (A)   For-sale affordable housing units.



      (1)   A for-sale affordable housing unit, the unit may be sold
to a private party who meets the income level and eligibility requirements
established in this chapter.



      (2)   The parties to the transaction shall execute and record
all documentation as required by this chapter and reviewed by the city (or
its authorized designee), including, at a minimum, each of the following:



         (a)   The affordable housing unit shall be sold to and
occupied by an eligible low- and moderate-income household;



         (b)   The affordable housing unit shall be conveyed
subject to restrictions that shall permanently maintain the affordability of
such affordable housing units for eligible low- and moderate-income
households; and



         (c)   The resale price of any permanently affordable
housing unit shall not exceed the purchase price paid by the seller of that
unit plus inflation as measured by the Consumer Price Index (all urban
consumers, all cities average, residential real estate) for the period of
time that the unit owner resided in the unit.



   (B)   Rental affordable housing units.



      (1)   For covered development projects with that contain
affordable housing units for rent, the owner of the development shall execute
and record such documentation as required by this chapter to ensure the
provision and continuous maintenance of the affordable housing units.



      (2)   All documents shall be submitted to the city (or its
authorized designee) for review to ensure, at a minimum, each of the
following:



         (a)   The affordable housing units must be leased and
occupied by eligible low- and moderate-income households;



         (b)   The affordable housing units must be leased at
rent levels affordable to eligible low- and moderate-income households; and



         (c)   Preference for the affordable housing units shall
be given to eligible households pursuant to the priorities set forth in §
158.10.



(Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 158.14  IMPLEMENTATION.



   (A)   The City Manager (or the Manager’s designee) shall develop
appropriate regulations and forms that are consistent with this chapter and
necessary or convenient to effect its efficient and effective administration.



   (B)   Such regulations and rules shall be reported to the City
Council and thereafter made available to the public.



(Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005)




CHAPTER 159:  ZONING



Section



General Provisions



   159.001   Short title



   159.002   Rules and definitions



   159.003   Interpretation



   159.004   Separability



   159.005   Scope of regulations



   159.006   Number of buildings on a zoning lot



   159.007   Minimum lot size



   159.008   Lot-in-depth subdivisions



   159.009   Accessory buildings



   159.010   Bulk regulations



   159.011   Exceptions and modifications to use regulations



   159.012   Building setback lines



   159.013   Existing special uses



   159.014   Floodplain regulations



   159.015   Steep slopes



Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses



   159.025   Statement of purpose



   159.026   Authority to continue nonconforming buildings, structures
and uses



   159.027   Restrictions on nonconforming buildings, structures and
uses



Administration and Enforcement



   159.040   Organization



   159.041   Administrative Officer



   159.042   Zoning Board of Appeals



   159.043   The Plan Commission



   159.044   Amendments



   159.045   Special uses



   159.046   Application; disclosure of interests



   159.047   Planned developments



   159.048   Historic residential and open space preservation



   159.049   Zoning certificates



   159.050   Occupancy certificates



   159.051   Plats



   159.052   Fees



Zoning Districts



   159.065   Districts



   159.066   Maps



   159.067   Zoning of annexed land



Residence and General Residence Districts



   159.080   General requirements



   159.081   R-5 Single-Family Residence District



   159.082   R-4 Single-Family Residence District



   159.083   R-3 Single-Family Residence District



   159.084   R-2 Single-Family Residence District



   159.085   R-1 Single-Family Residence District



   159.086   GR-4 General Residence District



   159.087   GR-3 General Residence District



   159.088   GR-2 General Residence District



   159.089   GR-1 General Residence District



   159.090   OA Open Area District



   159.091   ROS Residential Open Space



   159.092   RE Single-Family Residence and Educational District



Office and Business Districts



   159.105   General requirements



   159.106   O-1 Office District



   159.107   OR Office Research District



   159.108   OR-2 Office Research District



   159.109   B-1 Neighborhood Business District



   159.110   Central Business District zoning purpose



   159.111   B-2 Community Commercial Business District



   159.112   B-3 Traditional Business District



   159.113   B-4 Preservation Business District



   159.114   Central Business District Planned Development



   159.115   TD Transitional District



   159.116   Use matrix; business districts



Off-Street Parking and Loading



   159.130   Scope of regulations



   159.131   General requirements



   159.132   Location, design and construction



   159.133   Cleaning and maintenance



   159.134   Shelter building



   159.135   Signs



   159.136   Off-street parking table



   159.137   General requirements; off-street loading



   159.138   Residence and general residence districts



   159.139   Business and office districts



Personal Wireless Service Facilities



   159.150   Purpose and interpretation



   159.151   Definitions



   159.152   Policy statement



   159.153   Site selection criteria



   159.154   Personal wireless service facilities overlay district



   159.155   Overlay district requirements



   159.156   Co-location



   159.157   Design criteria for new support structures



   159.158   Design criteria for installation of antennas on existing
structures



   159.159   Landscaping; screening



   159.160   Non-use; abandonment



   159.161   Application requirements



   159.162   Third party review



   159.163   Severability



   159.164   Provisions for amending the overlay district



   159.165   Necessity



 



   159.999   Penalty



   Appendix A: Example of lot types



   Appendix B: Lot width and lot depth explained



   Appendix C: Required yards



   Appendix D: Buildings; principal and accessory



   Appendix E: Example of lot-in-depth subdivision



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 159.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known, and be cited, as “The Lake Forest Zoning
Code.”



(Prior Code, § 46-1)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.002  RULES AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions
contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when the
context clearly indicates otherwise.



   (B)   In further amplification and for clarity of interpretation of
the context, the following definitions of word usage shall apply.



      (1)   Rules.



         (a)   Words used in the present tense shall include the
future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural
number, and the plural the singular.



         (b)   The words “shall” and “must” are mandatory
and not discretionary.



         (c)   The word “may” is permissive.



         (d)   The word “lot” shall include the words
“piece,” “parcel” and “plot;” the word “building” includes
all structures of every kind regardless of similarity to buildings; and the
phrase “used for” shall include the phrases “arranged for,”
“designed for,” “intended for,” “occupied for” and “maintained
for.”



         (e)   All “measured distances” shall be exact to the
nearest one-tenth foot.



         (f)   Where any other requirement of this chapter
results in a fraction of a unit, the lower whole number shall be considered a
whole unit and any fraction shall be disregarded.



         (g)   The word CITY shall mean the City of Lake Forest.



      (2)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         ACCESS AREA. That land area which is an extended portion of
a lot-in-depth or an easement area used to provide ingress and egress to one
or more lots in a lot-in-depth subdivision.



         ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. A building or use which:



            1.   Is located on the same zoning lot as the
principal building or use served, except as may be specifically provided
elsewhere in this chapter. (See Appendix D.)



            2.   Is incidental to and subordinate in purpose
to the principal building or use;



            3.   Is operated and maintained solely for the
comfort, convenience, necessity or benefit of the occupants, employees,
customers or visitors of or to the principal building or use; and



            4.   May, but need not, be limited to one or more
of the following:



               a.   Garden house, private greenhouse or a
children’s playhouse;



               b.   A garage, carport, shed or other
storage building;



               c.   The storage of merchandise or material
normally carried in stock on the same zoning lot with any business or
service; and



               d.   Public utility facilities.



         ADDITIVE USES. Those uses identified in bold in § 159.116,
the Use Matrix, that have been deemed to provide a desired use or to attract
additional customers to the business districts.



         ALLEY. A public right-of-way primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on a street.



         AUTO LAUNDRY. A manned facility, enclosed in a building,
for washing automobiles or other vehicles and utilizing such devices as a
vehicle conveyor, blowers, steam cleaners, waxers or any other such
mechanical devices.



         AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A building or portion thereof,
or premises used for dispensing, or offering for sale at retail, any
automotive fuels or oils; or where battery, tire and other similar services
are rendered. AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS do not include open sales and
rental lots, as defined herein, the rebuilding, reconstruction or repair of
motor vehicles except such repair that can be accomplished in six working
hours or less in accordance with the Chilton Flat Rate Manual, or the storage
of motor vehicles, other than the temporary storage of vehicles customarily
incidental to the performance at such service station of services authorized
to be performed hereunder. Facilities, other than auto laundry facilities, as
defined herein, for the washing of not more than two vehicles at any time are
permitted if enclosed in a building.



         BASEMENT. The portion of a structure which may have part,
but not more than one-half, of its height above grade.



         BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a
combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way,
shore lines or waterways or municipal boundary lines.



         BLUFF AREA. Includes all property within or adjacent to a
bluff beginning at the point of intersection of a line with the table land,
said line extending from the toe of the slope upward at a vertical angle of
22 degrees. (See Appendix A.)



         BLUFF EDGE. The point on the lake side of the table land
where the slope of the land first exceeds 10%. (See Appendix A.)



         BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel where, for
compensation and by prearrangement, lodging and meals are provided for at
least three, but not more than 12 persons who are not members of the
principal family which occupies the building as a dwelling.



         BORROW PIT. An excavation of rock, stone, sand, soil or
other mineral as it is found in its natural state as part of the earth for
the purpose of disposition away from the immediate premises and which shall
be in excess of two feet in depth, or at least ten cubic yards in volume,
that would be removed from one zoning lot in one year, not included are
excavations for buildings, structures, highways, streets, private roads,
driveways, underground utilities, drainage improvements or floodplain
requirements which are authorized and controlled by other sections of the
chapter, or other ordinances of the city.



         BUILDING. Any structure designed or built for the support,
enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of
any kind.



         BUILDING AREA. The horizontal area of a building including
all projections from the building.



         BUILDING BULK. The term used to indicate the size and
setbacks of buildings or structures and the location of a building or
structure with respect to another building or structure, and includes the
following:



            1.   Size and height of building;



            2.   Location of exterior walls at all levels in
relation to lot lines, streets and other buildings or structures;



            3.   Gross floor area of buildings or structures
in relation to lot area;



            4.   All open spaces allocated to buildings; and



            5.   Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.



         BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded by open space on
the same zoning lot as the principal building but separated from the
principal building by not less than ten feet.



         BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from existing grade
to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a
mansard roof; or to the top of gable, hip and gambrel roofs or to the top of
any structure of substance thereupon, excluding required chimneys.



         CAPACITY IN PERSONS OF AN ESTABLISHMENT OR USE. The maximum
number of persons that can avail themselves of the services (or goods) of
such establishment, at any one time, with reasonable safety and comfort, as
determined in the Fire Prevention Code of the city.



         CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL. An organization of physicians or
dentists licensed by the state who have their offices in a common building. A
CLINIC shall not include in-patient care.



         CLUBS, PRIVATE. Buildings and facilities, owned or operated
by a corporation, association, person or persons, for a social, educational
or recreational purpose, of which no part of the income is distributed
directly or indirectly to its members, owners, directors or officers.



         DESIGNER SHOWCASE DISPLAY HOMES AND/OR OTHER SIMILAR
EVENTS. Those events where the contents or rooms of a house and/or grounds
are shown to the public for a period of time exceeding three days in any
two-week period and where the public pays an admission fee for such event.



         DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, construction of or
substantial improvements to, buildings or other structures, the placement of
mobile homes, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations.



         DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT. A place of business operated for
the sale, dispensing or service of food, beverages, other commodities or
services or entertainment, designed and equipped to allow its patrons to be
served or accommodated while remaining in their automobiles. It may also
allow patrons to serve themselves and consume food, refreshments or beverages
in automobiles on the premises or elsewhere on the premises, but outside any
completely enclosed structure. A place of business shall be considered a
DRIVE-IN if, in addition to the consumption of food, refreshments or
beverages in automobiles or elsewhere on the premise outside any completely
enclosed structure, it allows the consumption of such products within a
completely enclosed structure.



         DRIVEWAY. An open space or a private thoroughfare, other
than a street or alley, providing vehicular access to one zoning lot.



         DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, designed or used
as living quarters including single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings
and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels or motels or rooming
and boarding houses.



         DWELLING, ATTACHED. One which is joined to another dwelling
at one or more sides by a party wall or walls or roof.



         DWELLING, DETACHED. One which is entirely surrounded by
open space on the same tot.



         DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building, or portion thereof,
containing three or more dwelling units.



         DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building containing one dwelling
unit only.



         DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building containing two dwelling
units only.



         DWELLING UNIT. Consists of one or more rooms which are
arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual
bathrooms and complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, shall be
included for each DWELLING UNIT.



         EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit consisting of one
principal room exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets or dining
alcove directly off the principal room.



         ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS. A place of business the ownership,
proprietorship or management of which are separate and distinct from those of
any other place of business.



         FAMILY. Two or more persons related to each other by blood,
marriage or legal adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or
a group of not more than three persons unrelated to each other by blood,
marriage or legal adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit
exclusive of the usual domestic servants.



         FARM. An area which is used for growing farm products such
as vegetables, fruit, trees and grain, and their storage on the area. The
term FARMING includes the operating of such an area for one or more of the
above uses, including the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing
the produce, provided however, that the operation of any such accessory uses
shall be secondary to that of the normal fanning activities. The area may
also be used for the raising of farm poultry and farm animals, but such use
shall not include the slaughtering or processing of poultry or animals except
for consumption by the person or persons owning or operating the farm, and
provided further that farming does not include the feeding of garbage or
offal to swine or other animals.



         FARMERS’ MARKET. An annual, seasonal, outdoor event of
which vendors offer locally grown produce and/or locally produced products to
residents and visitors.



         FENCE HEIGHT. The height measured from average ground level
to top of fence; average around level being the mean elevation measured two
feet on each side of the fence alignment.



         FLOOR AREA. For the purpose of determining off-street
parking and loading requirements, shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of
the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the
walls, including accessory storage areas located within selling or working
space, such as counters, racks or closets and any basement floor area devoted
to retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to
business or professional offices. However, FLOOR AREA for the purpose of
determining off-street parking and loading requirements shall not include:
floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes (except as otherwise noted
herein); FLOOR AREA devoted to utility purposes, stairwells or elevator
shafts; FLOOR AREA devoted to off-street parking and loading facilities,
including aisles, ramps and maneuvering space; or BASEMENT FLOOR AREA other
than that area devoted to retailing activities, to production or processing
of goods, or to business or professional offices.



         FLOOR AREA, GROSS.



            1.   The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings.



            2.   The GROSS FLOOR AREA of a building shall
include elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, floor space used for
mechanical equipment (except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the
roof), penthouses, attic space having headroom of seven feet ten inches or
more, interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches and floor area
devoted to accessory uses. However, any space devoted to off-street parking
or loading shall not be included in GROSS FLOOR AREA.



            3.   The GROSS FLOOR AREA of structures devoted to
bulk storage of materials including, but not limited to, grain elevators and
petroleum storage tanks shall be determined on the basis of height in feet;
i.e., ten feet in height shall equal one floor.



         FLOOR AREA RATIO. An intensity measured as a ratio derived
by dividing the gross floor area of a building or structure by the area of
the zoning lot on which it is located.



         FRONT LOT. In a lot-in-depth subdivision, is a lot which
fronts on a public street and could be developed and provided access without
the use of an access area.



         FRONTAGE. All the property on one side of a street between
two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line
of the street, or if street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting
on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.



         GARAGE, REPAIR. A building or portion thereof, other than a
private garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing or storing motor
driven vehicle including doing general repair and body work.



         GARAGE AND/OR HOUSE SALES. The sale of residential
household or similar items on residential premises. This definition shall
include such sales as yard sales, attic sales, lawn sales, auctions and
similar type sales. It shall not be permitted for any merchandise to be sold
that has been purchased or brought onto the property by the resident for the
purpose of sale or resale.



         GRADE, EXISTING. Established by either:



            1.   The building pad elevation, as shown on a
subdivision grading plan as approved by the City Engineer; or



            2.   Where such plans do not exist, existing grade
shall be the average elevation of the ground surface, in its natural state,
measured at the corners of the proposed structure. For structures in excess
of 100 feet in length, additional measurements at 100-foot intervals,
measured from the lower corner to the higher corner, shall also be included
in establishing the average. This comparison must be reviewed and approved by
the City Engineer.



         GROUND FLOOR AREA. The area contained within the outer
plane of the enclosing walls of a building at grade, exclusive of garages,
carports, unenclosed porches and unenclosed breezeways.



         GUEST OR SERVANT HOUSE. A detached accessory building
located on the same zoning lot as the principal building and containing
living quarters for temporary guests or servants.



         GUEST, PERMANENT. A person who occupies, or has the right
to occupy, a hotel accommodation, boarding house or lodging house as his or
her domicile and place of permanent residence.



         GUEST, TEMPORARY. A person who occupies, or has the right
to occupy, a hotel or motel accommodation, boarding house, lodging house or
guest house as a transient and not as his or her domicile or place of
permanent residence.



         HOME OCCUPATION. Any work conducted in a home resulting in
the sale of goods or services, or resulting in the taking of orders for such
goods and services, either in or out of the home. All such home occupations
shall conform to the standards set forth in § 159.080(B)(3). The standards
for HOME OCCUPATIONS are intended to ensure compatibility with other
permitted uses and with the residential character of the neighborhood, and to
clearly establish such home occupations as secondary and incidental in
relation to the residential use of the property.



         HOTEL. A building in which lodging, or boarding and
lodging, is provided and offered to the public and in which access to all
rooms is normally made through a supervised inside lobby or office. As such,
it is open to the public in contradistinction to a boarding house, a lodging
house or multiple-family dwelling and motel which are herein separately
defined.



         INCOMPATIBLE USE. A use or service which is unsuitable for
direct association or contiguity with certain other uses because it is
contradictory, incongruous or discordant.



         KENNEL. A building used for housing or confining more than
three dogs. The existence of more than three dogs, age six months or older,
on a zoning lot, shall constitute a kennel and shall be subject to all
regulations set forth herein.



         LAKE, ARTIFICIAL. A human-made basin other than a swimming
pool, designed or intended to permanently contain water, which shall have a
depth of not less than two feet or a minimum area of 250 square feet at the
low water stage.



         LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY. A trafficway, including toll roads,
for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting
property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from
the same, except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined
by the public authority having jurisdiction over such trafficway.



         LOADING BERTH, OFF-STREET. A space on privately owned
property adequate for parking, loading and unloading service vehicles and
trucks together with properly related access to a public street or alley.
Required off-street loading space for three or more vehicles shall have
individual spaces marked and shall be designed, maintained and regulated so
that no maneuvering incidental to parking, loading or unloading shall be on
or across any public way or right-of-way.



         LOT. A parcel of land which is either a “lot of record”
or a “zoning lot.” (See Appendix A.)



         LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the
front, side and rear lot lines.



         LOT AREA, MINIMUM. The area of a lot in any zoning
district, exclusive of the area of any street, road, private road or access
area or access easement on or across such lot.



         LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two
streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.
(See Appendix A.)



         LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front
lot line and the rear lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
(See Appendix B.)



         LOT DEPTH, MINIMUM. Is equal to the minimum lot width as
required by the applicable zoning district but in no case shall said depth be
less than 125 feet.



         LOT-IN-DEPTH. A lot in which the width of the access area
for ingress and egress is less than the minimum lot width required for a lot
in the zoning district in which the property is located.



         LOT-IN-DEPTH SUBDIVISION. Any division of land which
contains a lot-in-depth.



         LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner or reversed corner
lot. (See Appendix A.)



         LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot which abuts a public
street, or where no public street exists, abuts a private road.



         LOT LINE, REAR. That boundary of a lot which is most
distant from and is or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line.



         LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front
lot line or a rear lot line.



         LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a duly recorded plat
of subdivision; or a parcel of land which has been conveyed by the identical
description by a deed of record recorded prior to November 5, 1923; or a
parcel of land conveyed by a deed of record, if on the date of the recording
of said deed all the requirements of the subdivision and zoning ordinance
then in effect were met.



         LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot the street side lot line
of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first
lot to its rear. (See Appendix A.)



         LOT, THROUGH. A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines
along two or more or less parallel public streets, and which is not a corner
lot. On a THROUGH LOT both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines. (See
Appendix A.)



         LOT WIDTH, MINIMUM. The horizontal distance between the
side lot lines of a lot, measured at the front setback line, and said lot
width minimum shall continue for a minimum depth of 45 feet.



         LOT, ZONING. A single tract of land located within a single
block, which (at the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by
its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a ZONING LOT OR LOTS may
or may not coincide with a lot of record. Every ZONING LOT must have access
to a public street either by having frontage on a public street or by private
road, as defined herein.



         MEMORIAL GARDEN. A landscaped area, located on the grounds
of a church, that is used for the burial of cremated remains.



         MEZZANINE. An intermediate story between the floor and
ceiling of a main story and extending over not more than 25% of the main
floor.



         MOTEL. An establishment consisting of a group of attached
or detached living or sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space,
located on a single zoning lot and designed primarily for use by tourists. A
MOTEL furnishes customary hotel services.



         MOTOR VEHICLES. A passenger vehicle, motor scooter,
motorcycle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer or semi-trailer propelled or drawn
by mechanical or electrical power.



         NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. Any building or
structure which does not comply with all of the regulations of this chapter
or of any amendment hereto for the zoning district in which such building or
structure is located.



         NONCONFORMING USE. Any use of land, buildings or
structures, lawful at the time of the enactment of this chapter which does
not comply with all of the regulations of this chapter or of any amendment
hereto governing use for the zoning district in which such use is located.



         OPEN SALES AND RENTAL LOT. Any land used or occupied for
the purpose of buying, selling or renting new or used motor vehicles, boats,
trailers, aircraft, recreational or camping equipment or other commodities
and for the storage thereof prior to sale or rental.



         PARKING, OFF-STREET. Space adequate for parking standard
passenger vehicles together with properly related access to a public street
or alley.



         PARKING AREA, CUSTOMERS. Off-street parking designed and
arranged to an approved standard established by the City Surveyor and
Engineer that provides parking for all standard passenger vehicles with a
minimum of maneuvering and made available as an accommodation to occupants
and patrons of the property.



         PARKING AREA, EMPLOYEE. Off-street parking designed to
minimum dimensions including arrangements of parking spaces which are
accessible only through other spaces and made available only for parking of
vehicles of the owner or employees associated with office or business use.



         PAVEMENT. The hard surface area used to provide access to
one or more lots. Said hard surface may consist of stone if the pavement is
used to serve a single residence or a bituminous or concrete surface if the
pavement is used to serve more than one lot.



         PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A tract of land which contains or will
contain two or more principal buildings, developed under single ownership or
control; the development of which may be of a substantially different
character than that of surrounding areas. A PLANNED DEVELOPMENT allows for
flexibility not available under normal zoning district requirements.



         PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR USE. The main building or use of land
or building as distinguished from an accessory building or use.



         PRIVATE ROAD. A private thoroughfare other than a street or
alley permanently reserved in order to provide a means of access to more than
one zoning lot.



         PROPERTY LINES. The lines bounding a zoning lot, as defined
herein.



         PUBLIC WAY. Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other
public thoroughfare.



         RAVINE AREA. Includes all property within or adjacent to a
ravine beginning at the point of intersection of a line with the table land,
said line extending from the toe of the slope upward at a vertical angle of
22 degrees.



         RAVINE EDGE. The point on the ravine side of the table land
where the slope of the land first exceeds 10%.



         RESERVOIR PARKING FACILITIES. Those off-street parking
spaces allocated to automobiles awaiting entrance to a particular
establishment.



         RESIDENTIAL BOUTIQUES AND HANDMADE CRAFT SALES. A form of
home occupation, as defined herein, and shall be defined as any retail sale
of goods, whether hand crafted in the residence of commercially produced, or
any demonstration of available goods and services for the purpose of taking
orders that are conducted in a residence and advertised to and held for the
benefit of attracting the general public to the premises for the sale.



         RESTAURANT.



            1.   Any building or part thereof, other than a
boarding house, where food ready for consumption is sold at retail to the
public.



            2.   This shall include:



               a.   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS. Operated for
the sale, dispensing or serving of food, frozen desserts or beverages, as
defined in the definition for restaurant above.



               b.   FAST FOOD RESTAURANT. Any restaurant
which does not meet the criteria for a STANDARD RESTAURANT or DRIVE-IN
ESTABLISHMENT as herein defined, provided, however, that the foregoing
definition shall not apply to the operation of a retail food store which
incidentally prepares individual food orders such as sandwiches, meats,
cheeses, salads or similar items.



               c.   STANDARD RESTAURANT.



                  i.   Any establishment where food,
frozen desserts or beverages are available in a ready to consume state and
where customers are normally provided with an individual menu, are served
their food or beverages from a kitchen fully equipped for the preparation of
complete meals by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which
said items are consumed, and typically the food, frozen dessert or beverage
are served with reusable dishes and utensils. The fact that a STANDARD
RESTAURANT shall incidentally prepare food for off premises consumption in
disposable containers shall not prevent it from being classified as a
standard restaurant.



                  ii.   A STANDARD RESTAURANT shall
include a cafeteria type operation where food or beverage served with
reusable dishes and utensils is generally consumed on the premises.



         SETBACK LINE, BUILDING. The minimum horizontal distance
between the front line of a building or structure and the street right-of-way
line. In cases of pie-shaped lots where street frontage is less than the
required lot width minimum, the front yard setback line shall be at the point
where the lot width conforms to the minimum required.



         SENIOR COTTAGE. Any dwelling unit authorized as part of a
senior cottage development.



         SENIOR COTTAGE DEVELOPMENT. Any development of senior
cottages pursuant to the standards found in § 159.045(L)(14).



         STABLE. A structure for housing a horse or horses.



         STORY. The portion of a building, other than a basement,
included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next
above it or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor
and the ceiling next above. A HALF STORY is a space under a sloping roof
which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall facing not more
than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than
60% of the floor area is finished for use.



         STREET. Public land improved or unimproved, which affords a
primary means of access to abutting property, whether designated as a street,
avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, throughway, right-of-way or other
wise, but does not include private roads and driveways to buildings.



         STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of
which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or which is
attached to something having a permanent location on the ground.



         STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members
of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or
girders, or any change in the roof or in the exterior walls, excepting such
repair or replacement as may be required for the safety of the building.



         SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL. Any swimming or wading
pool of over two feet in depth or with a surface area exceeding 250 square
feet located on private residential property including portable or temporary
type pools installed entirely above ground elevation.



         TABLE LAND. Land where the slope in any direction does not
exceed 10%.



         TOE OF SLOPE. The toe of the ravine or bluff slope is that
point in the ravine or bluff where the slope is less than 22 degrees or where
the slope reverses direction. On compound slopes where there may be more than
one possible toe location, the controlling point shall be whichever toe
location provides the greater ravine or bluff area.



         USE, OF PROPERTY. The purpose or activity for which the
land or building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it
is occupied or maintained.



         USE, PERMITTED. A use which conforms with all requirements,
regulations and standards of a particular district.



         USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or buildings as
distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. A PRINCIPAL USE may be
permitted or special.



         USE, SPECIAL. A use, either public or private, which,
because of its unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a
permitted use in a particular district or districts.



         YARD. An open space at grade between a building and the
adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portions of a
structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted in §§
159.040 through 159.052. In measuring a YARD for the purpose of determining
the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear
yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main
building shall be used. A YARD extends along a lot line, and to a depth or
width specified in the yard requirements for the zoning district in which the
zoning lot is located. (See Appendix C.)



         YARD, FRONT. The area extending across the full width of
the lot and lying between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto, and
having a distance between them equal to the required front yard depth as
prescribed for each zoning district. FRONT YARDS shall be measured by a line
at right angles to the front lot line, or by the radial line in the case of a
curved front lot line. On corner lots, the FRONT YARD shall be considered to
be the yard which abuts on the narrowest street frontage of the lot. When a
lot lies partially within a planned street or way indicated on the official
map, as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan, and where such planned street or
way is of the type that will afford legal access to such lot, the depth of
the front yard shall be measured from the contiguous edge of such planned
street or way in the manner prescribed in this definition.



         YARD, REAR. The area extending across the rear of a lot and
being the required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
the rear of the main building or any projection thereof other than the
projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches.
On all lots, the REAR YARD shall be in the rear of the yard. (See Appendix C.)



         YARD, SIDE. The area between the main building and the side
line of the lot, and extending from the required front yard to the required
rear yard, and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line
and the side of the main buildings or any projections thereto. (See Appendix
C.)



         YARD, TRANSITIONAL. The yard which must be provided on a
zoning lot in a B-1 or B-2 District when adjacent to a R or GR District. (See
Appendix C.)



(Prior Code, § 46-2)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 92-14, passed 4-16-1992; Ord. 92-35, passed 7-7-1992; Ord. 92-58, passed
11-2-1992; Ord. 01-17, passed 6-21-2001; Ord. 03-39, passed 6-19-2003; Ord.
2013-20, passed 5-6-2013)



§ 159.003  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
preservation of the present character of the city and the public improvements
therein, for the conservation of the taxable value of land and buildings
throughout the city, for the lessening or avoidance of congestion in the
public streets, for securing the adequate light, pure air and safety from
fire, flood and other dangers and for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, morals and welfare of the citizens of the city.



   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter,
upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings, are either
more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by
any other provision of this chapter or of any other law, order, resolution,
rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or
which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.



   (C)   This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement,
covenant or any other private agreement, provided that where the regulations
of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easements, covenants or other private agreements, the
requirements of this chapter shall govern.



   (D)   No building, structure or use which did not lawfully exist at
the time of the adoption of this chapter or any amendment hereto shall become
or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this chapter and to the
extent that, and in any manner that, such unlawful building, structure or use
is in conflict with the requirements of this chapter, such building,
structure or use remains unlawful hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 46-3)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.004  SEPARABILITY.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city, that the several
provisions of this chapter are separable, in accordance with the following:



   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any
provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any
other provisions of this chapter not specifically included in such judgment;
and



   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid
the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property,
building or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application
of such provision to any other property, building or structure not
specifically included in such judgment.



(Prior Code, § 46-4)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.005  SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings
established hereafter, and any structural alteration or relocation of
existing buildings occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of
this chapter which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such
buildings, uses or land shall be located.



   (B)   However, where a building permit for a building or structure
has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment hereto, and provided that construction is begun
within 90 days of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to
completion, such building or structure may be completed in accordance with
the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit has been issued,
and further, may upon completion be occupied under a certificate of occupancy
(see § 159.050) by the use for which originally designated, subject
thereafter to the provisions of §§ 159.025 through 159.027.



   (C)   Where a lot is to be occupied for a permitted use without
buildings, the side yards and front yard required for such lot shall be
provided and maintained unless otherwise stipulated in this chapter except
that side yards shall not be required on lots used for garden purposes
without buildings or structures, nor on lots used for public recreation areas
without structures.



   (D)   No land which is located in a residence district shall be used
for driveway, walkway or access purposes to any land which is located in an
office or business district.



(Prior Code, § 46-5)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.006  NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT.



   Except in the ROS, RE and OR-2 Districts or as otherwise permitted by a
special use, not more than one principal detached building or structure shall
be located on a zoning lot.



(Prior Code, § 46-6)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.007  MINIMUM LOT SIZE.



   Subsequent to the effective date of this chapter (January 15, 1972), no
dwelling shall be erected except upon a lot or parcel of land in accordance
with the lot size requirements of the district within which it is located,
provided, however, that in single-family residence or general residence
districts a lot or parcel may be used to build a single-family residence if
it is a lot of record regardless of the lot or parcel dimensions or lot area
and provided further that all then current yard requirements of the
applicable zoning district are met.



(Prior Code, § 46-7)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.008  LOT-IN-DEPTH SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The regulations contained in this section have been
created to minimize any adverse impact that subdivisions containing
lots-in-depth may have on surrounding properties and existing developments.



   (B)   Applicability. The regulations contained in this section are
applicable only to lot-in-depth subdivisions approved after May 7, 1979,
except for the provisions of division (D) below which shall apply to all
lots-of-record unless otherwise designated on the plat of subdivision.



   (C)   In order to provide setbacks as required in division (D)(2)
below and still retain a comparable building area as typically exists in
standard subdivisions, the following minimum lot area and widths shall be
required.



 


Zoning District

 
Minimum Lot Area (Sq. Ft.)
 
Minimum Lot Width (At the Front Building Setback Line)


R-5
 
130,000
 
250 ft.


R-4
 
66,000
 
170 ft.


R-3
 
44,000
 
150 ft.


R-2
 
23,000
 
150 ft.


R-1
 
16,250
 
130 ft.



 



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   For a lot-in-depth, the minimum front yard setbacks for
the zoning district in which the property is located shall be required from
all property lines and from the edge of any contiguous access area abutting
the lot as measured from the easement line of said access area.



      (2)   For a front lot within a lot-in-depth subdivision the
setbacks shall be as required in the applicable zoning district except that
the yard adjacent to the contiguous access area shall also meet the required
front yard setback of the applicable zoning district as measured from the
easement line of said access area.



   (E)   Access to lot-in-depth subdivisions.



      (1)   No more than three lots-in-depth or five total lots may
be served by a new private road created by a subdivision approved after May
7, 1979. Approval of the further subdivision of an existing lot-in-depth
where the number of lots exceeds the limits established above may be granted
under unusual circumstances if it is determined that approval of such
subdivision is consistent with the purpose of this section.



      (2)   In subdivisions containing more than five lots, no
lot-in-depth shall be allowed, except as provided in division (E)(1) above,
and no oversized lots shall be allowed wherein the lot thus created could
only be further subdivided under this section.



      (3)   The access area shall be part of the lot-in-depth, but
said access area shall not be counted as part of the area necessary to
satisfy the minimum lot area requirements.



      (4)   Any portion of a driveway which is used to provide
access for more than one lot shall be built in conformance with the standards
set forth in the City Engineering and Construction Standards Manual.



      (5)   In a subdivision containing more than one lot-in-depth:



         (a)   A named private road within the subdivision shall
be used for ingress and egress. Such road shall be built in conformance with
the standards set forth in the City Engineering and Construction Standards
Manual;



         (b)   All lots in a lot-in-depth subdivision shall be
provided with all necessary easement rights;



         (c)   All lots-in-depth shall be served from the public
street by a single private road; and



         (d)   Two adjacent lot-in-depth subdivisions, each of
which consists of one front lot and one lot-in-depth, may share a single
private roadway located in either subdivision or partly on both.



      (6)   A front lot within a lot-in-depth subdivision shall gain
access to the public street from the contiguous private road; provided,
however, that upon recommendation of the Plan Commission, the City Council
may waive such requirement if it finds that because of the topography of the
area, existing development of the property or other unique circumstances such
requirement would result in a hardship and waiver of the requirement would
not produce adverse effects on adjacent properties, neighborhood or the city.
If a waiver is granted and individual access is provided to a lot-in-depth,
said access may comply with private driveway standards.



      (7)   (a)   The pavement of a private road or driveway
shall be located so as to have minimal impact on adjacent properties and
existing vegetation. To provide for the access area necessary to allow for
the installation of the required public improvements and pavement and to
achieve the desired pavement location, the minimum width of the access area
for a new private road or driveway shall be as follows:



 

Private driveway access area width
 

33 ft.



Private road access area width
 

40 ft.




 



         (b)   Further subdivision of an existing lot in a
lot-in-depth subdivision where the access area widths do not comply with the
widths required above may be granted if it is determined that approval of
such subdivision is consistent with the purpose of this section and that
sufficient improvements can be made to adequately serve the lots created and
protect adjacent property from adverse effects.



      (8)   No buildings or structures except fences, walls and
other similar landscaping materials shall be placed or constructed within the
boundary lines of the access area.



   (F)   Landscape screening.



      (1)   Landscaping, or other suitable screening, shall be
required so as to minimize the visual impact on the surrounding properties
and the property being subdivided.



      (2)   Existing natural vegetation may be used either totally
or in part to fulfill the above landscape requirements.



      (3)   A landscape plan showing existing and planned vegetation
and screening, the exact location of the roadway and/or driveway, topography
to two-foot intervals, and all nearby improvements on subject and adjoining
properties shall be required. Detailed specifications for landscape plan
shall be determined by, and the resulting plan submitted to, the Director of
Parks, Forestry and Public Works and approved by the Plan Commission.



(Prior Code, § 46-8)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.009  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Time of construction. No accessory building or structure
constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal
building to which it is accessory shall be used for living purposes.



   (B)   Percentage of required yard occupied. No detached accessory
building or buildings or structures permitted by this section shall occupy
more than 40% of the area of a required yard in a residence or general
residence district.



   (C)   Height. No detached accessory building or structure shall
exceed the height of 25 feet in a residence or general residence district.



   (D)   On corner lots.



      (1)   On a reversed corner lot in a residence or general
residence district, and within 15 feet of any adjacent property to the rear
in a residence or general residence district, no accessory building or
portion thereof located in a required rear yard shall be closer to the side
lot line abutting the street than a distance equal to the required corner
side yard of the principal building. Further, in the above instance, no such
accessory buildings shall be located within five feet of any part of a rear
lot line which coincides with the side lot line or portion thereof of
property in any residence or general residence district.



      (2)   No accessory building shall be erected in or encroach
upon the required side yard of a corner lot which is adjacent to the street,
nor upon the required side yard of a reversed corner lot which is adjacent to
the street.



   (E)   Distance from principal building or structure. An accessory
building or structure located closer than ten feet to the principal building
or structure shall be considered to be part of such principal building or
structure and shall comply with the yard and construction requirements for
such principal building or structure.



   (F)   In the R-1 and R-2 Districts. Detached accessory buildings
shall not be constructed between the front lot line and the front of the
principal building on the lot.



(Prior Code, § 46-9)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.010  BULK REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Continued conformity with bulk regulations. The maintenance of
yards and other open space and minimum lot area required for a building shall
be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building as long as the
building is in existence.



   (B)   Division of zoning lots. No improved zoning lot shall
hereafter be divided into two or more zoning lots and no portion of any
improved zoning lot shall be sold, unless all improved zoning lots resulting
from each such division or sale shall conform with all the applicable bulk
regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located, the
provisions of Chapter 156 and § 150.148 of this city code.



   (C)   Required yards; existing buildings. No yards, now or hereafter
provided for a building existing on the effective date of this chapter, shall
subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced if already less than, the
minimum yard requirements of this chapter for equivalent new construction.



   (D)   Permitted structures in required yards. The following
structures shall be permitted in the required yard of all lots:



      (1)   In all yards.



         (a)   Open patios or terraces not over eight inches
above the average level of the adjoining ground;



         (b)   Open steps and platforms which are necessary for
access to a permitted building;



         (c)   Window unit air conditioners projecting not more
than 18 inches into the required yard; and



         (d)   Fences, walls and plantings subject to the
limitations contained in this section.



      (2)   In front yards. Eaves and gutters projecting not more
than 18 inches into the required yard.



      (3)   In rear yards.



         (a)   Open off-street parking spaces;



         (b)   Fallout shelters;



         (c)   Outside elements of air conditioning systems
located within the setback requirements of accessory buildings;



         (d)   Eaves and gutters projecting 18 inches or less
into the yard;



         (e)   Swimming pools and appurtenances thereto, tennis
courts and dog runs, provided such uses are not located within 20 feet of any
property line; and



         (f)   Swimming pool cabanas may be located within the
setback requirements for accessory buildings for the zoning district.



   (E)   Fence, wall and planting location and height limitations.



      (1)   General limitations.



         (a)   No fence or wall erected after July 6, 1981, and
located in any required yard shall exceed seven feet in height, except in
cases of variations in topography. The Director of Community Development may
modify such height limitation so as to permit a uniform fence top height
throughout the length of the fence. Gates and gateposts exceeding this height
limit and transitional fencing on either side of the gateposts necessary to
make the transition to the higher gatepost may be approved by the Director of
Community Development in those instances when the architecture of structure
of the gate and/or gateposts, in conjunction with the primary residence
structure on the property, necessitates more than seven feet of height.



         (b)   All fences or walls erected in any required yard
after May 16, 1996 shall have their finished side facing the street or the
abutting property, as applicable. However the Director of Community
Development may approve exceptions to this requirement when compelling
evidence is presented showing that the intent of this requirement would still
be served if the exception is granted. Such exceptions shall in no case be
granted without prior written consent from the effected neighbor, and the
Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals.



      (2)   Along major arterials. Fences or walls may be erected
along major arterial streets, as indicated below, in conjunction with earthen
mounds or berms (unless specifically prohibited by the city through
subdivision or special use permit approval process) so as to create a sight
and/or sound barrier between such major arterial streets and the adjoining
residential properties:



         (a)   Skokie Highway (U.S. Route 41);



         (b)   Waukegan Road (Illinois Route 43);



         (c)   Kennedy Road (Illinois Route 60);



         (d)   Tollway (Toll Highway 94); and



         (e)   McKinley Road, from Westleigh Road to south city
limits.



      (3)   In any yard required by the Zoning Code, unless
otherwise provided herein.



         (a)   Fences and walls up to four feet in height need
not be set back from property lines.



         (b)   Fences and walls up to seven feet in height may be
located on any rear property line and interior side property line to a point
within three feet of the front property line and need not be set back from
said rear or interior side property line.



         (c)   Fences or walls from four to seven feet in height
may be located in any front yard or corner side yard provided such fences or
walls are set back at least three feet from the right-of-way. (Fences less
than for four feet in height may be located on the front property line.) The
Director of Community Development may approve replacement fences or walls
from four to seven feet in height to be located less than the required three
feet from the front property line setback, should the location of the
replacement fence or wall at three feet from the front property line require
the removal or destruction of significant mature landscaping or interfere
with a pre-established line of fences or walls in the subject property’s
immediate area. For new or replacement fences or walls, landscape planting is
to be placed between the fence or wall and said street right-of-way. At the
end of two growing seasons, the planting shall consist of landscape material
that will provide a consistent year-round coverage of at least 30% of the
fence or wall area. A cash bond in an amount as set by Council per lineal
foot of fence to be landscaped shall be posted with the Building Department.
Said bond shall be returned when the Director of Community Development finds
that the landscaping requirements of this division (E)(3) have been met.



      (4)   Sight and view restrictions.



         (a)   At all street intersections, no fence, wall or
planting exceeding three and one-half feet in height above the established
street roadway grade shall be erected or maintained after July 6, 1981,
within the triangle formed by the intersecting street right-of-way lines and
a line joining the points a distance of 25 feet from the point of street
intersection.



         (b)   Gates or gaps in fences or walls located in front
or corner side yards which are used for driveway access must be set back a
minimum of 20 feet from the street edge-of-pavement, and fences or walls
connecting to the gate or gap shall be set back or angled for sufficient
distance to provide safe sight for vehicles emerging to the street from the
driveway.



         (c)   Fences or walls located in proximity to principal
structures on adjacent lots shall be set back from said structures a distance
equal to the height of the fence.



      (5)   Ravines and bluffs.



         (a)   Prohibition. Fences are not permitted on slopes
beyond ravine or bluff edges as defined in § 159.002.



         (b)   Variance criteria. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
consider requests for variances from the requirements of this section to
allow fences on slopes beyond ravine or bluff edges. In consideration of such
variances, the Zoning Board of Appeals, in addition to the standards for
variances in § 159.042(F)(4), shall require evidence demonstrating the
following:



            1.   The slope of the ravine or bluff area to be
impacted by the proposed fence is stable as demonstrated by a slope stability
analysis and report prepared by a licensed engineer;



            2.   Neither the construction of the fence, nor
the ongoing maintenance of the fence will negatively impact the stability of
the slope or existing vegetation or trees. This does not include trees or
vegetation that may otherwise be approved for removal consistent with the
code;



            3.   The proposed location of the fence does not
impede overland drainage routes;



            4.   The proposed location does not require the
removal or negatively impact any heritage trees; and



            5.   The fence is black or dark green open chain
link or a similar minimally sight obscuring material approved by the city
which preserves the overall natural appearance of the ravine or bluff.



         (c)   Fences located on slopes beyond ravine or bluff
edges at the time of adoption of this provision. Fences located on slopes
beyond ravine or bluff edges at the time of adoption of this provision may
remain for a period not to exceed 25 years from the date of adoption of this
provision, until May 20, 2038 (the “amortization period”); provided,
however, that such fences may only be allowed to remain during the
amortization period under the following conditions:



            1.   The fence creates no material impairment to
natural drainage, public safety or the stability of neighboring property; and



            2.   The fence is maintained in good repair and in
an upright position, but repairs shall not include or permit excavation or
the setting of new posts on the slope of the ravine or bluff.



   (F)   Height exceptions. The height limitations of this chapter
shall not apply to:



      (1)   Church spires and belfries;



      (2)   Water towers, fire towers, chimneys and flag poles;



      (3)   Cooling towers, elevator bulkheads and elements of air
conditioning systems, which do not exceed the height limitation by more than
four feet; and



      (4)   Radio and television antennas or aerials, noncommercial.



   (G)   Area regulations. In any district, no building, used or
designed for use as a dwelling, and its accessory buildings, shall occupy in
excess of 30% of the lot.



(Prior Code, § 46-10)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 94-10, passed 4-21-1994; Ord. 96-15, passed 4-1-1996; Ord. 96-18, passed
5-16-1996; Ord. 2013-27, passed 5-20-2013)



§ 159.011  EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS TO USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Existing railroads and utilities may continue to be operated
and maintained in any district, but no new railroad or utility structure
other than the usual poles, wires and underground utilities shall be
established in any district except when so authorized by the City Council by
special use permit.



   (B)   Field offices, construction and storage buildings, see §
154.15 of this city code.



(Prior Code, § 46-11)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 92-35, passed 7-7-1992)



§ 159.012  BUILDING SETBACK LINES.



   Irrespective of any less restrictive requirements contained elsewhere
in this chapter, no permit shall be issued for the construction, relocation,
enlargement or extension of any building, or concrete or masonry wall within
the following distances from certain highways or streets within the city:



   (A)   Within 70 feet of the established centerline of the
right-of-way of that portion of Waukegan Road (Illinois State Highway Route
43) that is located within the corporate limits of the city;



   (B)   Within 30 feet of the westerly line of the existing
right-of-way of that portion of Skokie Highway extending from Buena Road
northerly to Old Elm Road;



   (C)   Within 53 feet of the established centerline of the
right-of-way of Everett Road, Telegraph Road, Conway Road, Old Elm Road and
Buena Road;



   (D)   Within 24 feet and six inches of the established centerline of
Bank Lane between the southerly line of Illinois Road and the northerly line
of Vine Avenue; and



   (E)   Within 28 feet and six inches of the established centerline of
Forest Avenue between the southerly line of Westminster and the northerly
line of Deerpath.



(Prior Code, § 46-12)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.013  EXISTING SPECIAL USES.



   (A)   Where a use is classified as special use under this chapter
and existed as a permitted, special or lawful nonconforming use of the date
of the adoption of this chapter (January 15, 1972), it shall be considered a
lawful special use subject to the following:



      (1)   A special use authorized by ordinance of the City
Council prior to the adoption of this chapter (January 15, 1972) may continue
to exist subject to the provisions of such ordinance and may be expanded or
extended only as provided therein, or in accordance with § 159.045; and



      (2)   A use formerly considered a permitted or lawful
nonconforming use and made a special use by the adoption of this chapter
(January 15, 1972) may continue in existence after the date of adoption of
this chapter but may not be expanded without first obtaining a special use
permit for any proposed expansion in accordance with § 159.045.



   (B)   Where a use is not allowed as a special or permitted use under
this chapter or any amendments hereto, and exists as a special use at the
date of the adoption of this chapter, it shall be considered to be a
nonconforming use and shall be subject to the applicable nonconforming use
provisions of §§ 159.025 through 159.027.



(Prior Code, § 46-13)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.014  FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS.



   See § 152.30 of the city code.



(Prior Code, § 46-14)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 92-35, passed 7-7-1992)



§ 159.015  STEEP SLOPES.



   (A)   Purpose. The provisions contained herein are adopted to
protect public and private property from damage or destruction resulting from
the natural erosion processes occurring within the ravines and bluffs along
the shore of Lake Michigan, or abnormal or accelerated ravine and bluff
erosion resulting from land development and construction activities occurring
on adjacent or nearby properties, and to protect the fragile ravine and bluff
ecosystem from unwarranted damage or destruction caused by land development
and construction activities.



   (B)   Applicability. The provisions contained herein shall apply to
all land development construction



activities on all properties abutting ravines and bluffs as delineated by
hashed lines on Exhibit A, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part
hereof.



   (C)   Requirements and restrictions.



      (1)   Building setbacks.



         (a)   From ravines. All building construction shall be
on table land, but in no case shall any structure or building foundation be
located closer than 20 feet to the ravine area.



         (b)   From bluffs. All building construction shall be on
table land, but in no case shall any structure or building foundation be
located closer than 75 feet to the bluff area.



      (2)   Construction activity.



         (a)   Adjacent to ravines. All construction activity;
i.e., grading, excavating, filling, terracing, tree removal, stockpiling of
excavated material, is prohibited within 20 feet of the ravine area, except
as may be necessary to provide site drainage improvements, as may be approved
and/or required by the City Engineer.



         (b)   Adjacent to bluffs. All construction activity,
i.e., grading, excavating, filling, terracing, tree removal, stockpiling of
excavated material, is prohibited within 50 feet of the bluff edge, except as
may be necessary to provide site drainage improvements, as may be approved
and/or required by the City Engineer.



      (3)   Site landscaping. Upon completion of construction
activities, minimal grading and clearing of existing vegetation may be
allowed within the bluff or ravine area in order to install new vegetation
and lawn landscaping. However, no such grading, clearing or landscaping will
be permitted within 20 feet of the ravine edge or within 50 feet of the bluff
edge.



      (4)   Site drainage. A site grading permit, approved by the
City Engineer, shall be required before any site grading work may take place.
Measures shall be required to control stormwater runoff from impervious
areas, lawns and footing drains. Wherever feasible, such runoff shall be
collected and carried to established storm drainage facilities located away
from the ravine or bluff area as the case may be. If discharge into an
established storm drainage structure is not feasible, drainage shall be
collected and discharged into the ravine channel or from the top of the bluff
to its base in a manner which minimizes disruption of the ravine or bluff
slope and potential erosion of the bluff slope and potential erosion of the
bluff toe or the ravine toe and channel, subject to the specific approval of
the City Engineer.



      (5)   Channel modification. Where the City Engineer finds that
an unstable ravine or bluff slope or toe exists or is likely, or where the
configuration of the ravine channel has resulted in erosion or suggests the
probability of future erosion, channel, toe or slope stabilization measures
may be required by the City Engineer.



      (6)   Required information. Prior to submission to the city of
a request for tentative approval of a plat of subdivision or review of an
application for a building permit, the owner or agent of the owner of
property, subject to this section, shall submit to the City Engineer all
applicable site information, including, but not limited to, topography,
existing trees and vegetation, ravine and/or bluff conditions (including
establishment of the limits of the ravine or bluff area), geological and soil
conditions, proposed plans for landscaping and lawn installation, and such
other information as may be deemed necessary by the City Engineer in order to
implement the policy and requirements of this section.



   (D)   Review guidelines and approval procedures.



      (1)   The City Surveyor and Engineer may approve encroachments
into the bluff or ravine setback area for the construction of landscape
features, auxiliary buildings (slab foundation), bridges, wood decks or other
similar facilities, if the City Surveyor and Engineer finds that:



         (a)   The proposed construction is appropriate only for
the requested location;



         (b)   The proposed construction will have no significant
impact on the ravine or bluff area; and



         (c)   The proposed construction is of relatively low
value, except for items related to ravines such as vehicular bridges.



      (2)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may consider variations from
the requirements of this section for construction of habitable facilities
such as room additions or new residences, and construction of significant
auxiliary buildings. In considering such variations, the following
guidelines, in addition to the four findings of fact as set forth in §
159.042(F)(4)(b) shall be considered:



         (a)   Construction in the 20 foot setback for the 22
degree slope intersect could be recommended if there exists adequate toe of
slope improvements;



         (b)   Construction in the 22 degree slope angle could be
recommended if there exists adequate slope or other improvements that
effectively increase the stable slope angle;



         (c)   Variation from building on land that exceeds 10%
slope but is outside of the 20 foot setback from the 22 degree slope angle
could be recommended if entire slope shows no indication of instability; and



         (d)   Variation from any restriction could be
recommended if the requested construction is less nonconforming than the
existing residence and the ravine or bluff slope does not show any indication
of instability; or if the applicant submits evidence based on current
geotechnical engineering practices such as the Simplified Bishop Method of
stability analysis whereby variables of soil shear strength, ground water
level, unit weight of soil and slope angles are considered which result in
the determination that the particular slope is stable at an angle greater
than 22 degrees.



(Prior Code, § 46-15)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES



§ 159.025  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter establishes separate districts, each of which is
an appropriate area for the location of the uses which are permitted in that
district. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of those
districts that nonconforming buildings, structures and uses not be permitted
to continue without restriction.



   (B)   The purpose of §§ 159.025 through 159.027 is to provide for
the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses, and to
specify those circumstances and conditions under which those nonconforming
buildings, structures and uses shall be permitted to continue.



(Prior Code, § 46-16)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.026  AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND
USES.



   Any nonconforming building, structure or use which existed lawfully at
the time of the adoption of this chapter, or of any amendment hereto, and
which remains nonconforming, and any building, structure or use which became
or shall become nonconforming upon the adoption of this chapter or any
amendment hereto, may be continued subject to the following regulations.



(Prior Code, § 46-17)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.027  RESTRICTIONS ON NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.



   Any lawfully existing building, structure or use which does not conform
to the regulations of the district in which it is located may be continued,
subject to the provisions of this section.



   (A)   Repairs and alterations to buildings and structures.



      (1)   Building or structure designed or intended for a
nonconforming use. Repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming
building or structure, all or substantially all of which building or
structure is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in
which it is located, provided that no structural alterations shall be made,
which increase the bulk of the building or structure. Repairs and alterations
may be made which are required by law or which make the building or
structure, or the use thereof, conform to the regulations of the district in
which it is located.



      (2)   Building or structure designed for a permitted use.
Repairs and alterations, including structural changes, may be made to a
building or structure in which is located a nonconforming use, all or
substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for
a use permitted in the district in which it is located, provided such repairs
and alterations conform to the regulations of the district in which such
building or structure is located.



   (B)   Additions and enlargements to nonconforming buildings or
structures. A nonconforming building or structure which is nonconforming as
to bulk, and is designed or intended for a permitted use, shall not be added
to or enlarged in any manner unless such additions or enlargements thereto
are required by law or conform to all of the regulations of the district in
which it is located.



   (C)   Restoration of damaged budding or structure.



      (1)   Restoration of damaged building or structure designed or
intended for a nonconforming use. A nonconforming building or structure which
is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God to the extent
that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before the
occurrence shall exceed 50% of the cost to the restoration of the entire
building new, shall not be restored unless said building or structure, and
the use thereof, shall conform to all of the regulations of the district in
which it is located, except as provided in § 159.131(G). In the event such
damage or destruction is less than 50% of the cost of restoration of the
entire building new, repairs or reconstruction shall be started or positive
procedures commenced to start such repairs or reconstruction within six
months from the date of such damage or destruction. If the restoration is not
started within one year of such calamity and diligently prosecuted to
completion, the building or structure shall be removed and the area cleared.



      (2)   Restoration of damaged building or structure in the B-3
Traditional and B-4 Preservation Districts. A building that is nonconforming
to the floor area ratio requirements of the Traditional or Preservation
District Preservation District and is destroyed or damaged by fire or other
casualty or act of God to the extent of 50% or more of the cost of the
restoration of the entire building may be reconstructed at the floor area
ratio of the building prior to such damage or destruction if the following
criteria are met:



         (a)   The Historic Preservation Commission or the
Building Review Board has determined that the pre-existing building
contributed to the historic district and streetscape character of the Central
Business District; and



         (b)   The Historic Preservation Commission or the
Building Review Board determines that the exterior of the reconstructed
building, or the exterior of the reconstructed portion of the building, is
substantially the same as the original building, specifically with respect to
the following:



            1.   The configuration of the site, pedestrian
connections, open spaces and the relationship of the building to the
streetscape and surrounding buildings;



            2.   The scale, proportions, architectural
detailing, size and spacing of windows and doors and the roof elements; and



            3.   The type, quality, texture and color of
exterior materials.



   (D)   Discontinuance of nonconforming use. If the nonconforming use
of a building, structure or premises is discontinued for a continuous period
of two years it shall not be renewed, and any subsequent use of the building,
structure or premises shall conform to the use regulation of the district in
which such building, structures or premises is located.



   (E)   Expansion of nonconforming use.



      (1)   Building or structure designed or intended for
nonconforming use. The nonconforming use of part of a building or structure,
all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed or
intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located,
shall not be expanded or extended beyond the area in which it exists.



      (2)   Building or structure designed or intended for a
permitted use. The nonconforming use of part of a building or structure, all
or substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended
for a use permitted in the district in which it is located, shall not be
expanded or extended beyond the area in which it exists, nor changed to any
other nonconforming use.



      (3)   Land. The nonconforming use of land, not involving a
building or structure, or in connection with any building or structure
thereon, is incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land, shall
not be expanded or extended beyond the area it occupies.



   (F)   Change of nonconforming use.



      (1)   Buildings or structures designed or intended for
nonconforming use. The nonconforming use of a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which was designed or intended for a use not permitted
in the district in which it is located, shall not be changed to another use
except a use permitted in the district in which it is located. In an office
or business district a residence building or structure shall not be changed
to an office or business use unless such building or structure complies with
all city codes and ordinances pertaining to fire prevention and protection.



      (2)   Building or structure designed or intended for a
permitted use. The nonconforming use of a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for
a permitted use, shall not be changed to another use except a use permitted
in the district in which it is located.



      (3)   Land. The nonconforming use of land, not involving a
building or structure, or in connection with which any building or structure
thereon is incidental or accessory to the principal use of land, shall not be
changed to any other use, except to a use permitted in the district in which
the land is located.



   (G)   Elimination of certain uses. The use of vacant land for
storage purposes (where such use is not an adjunct of any structure) which
does not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be discontinued
within five years from the effective date of this chapter and the same uses
of land which become nonconforming by reasons of a subsequent amendment to
this chapter shall also be discontinued within five years from the date of
such amendment.



   (H)   Certificate of occupancy.



      (1)   A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all
lawful nonconforming business buildings or uses created by the adoption of
this chapter or amendments hereto.



      (2)   Upon notification by the Administrative Officer, an
application for a certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming building or
use shall be filed with the Administrative Officer by the owner or lessee of
the nonconforming building and the Administrative Officer shall issue such
certificate of occupancy within ten days of completion and filing of such
application.



      (3)   Failure to apply for a certificate of occupancy for a
nonconforming building or use following notification by the Administrative
Officer shall be evidence that such nonconforming building or use was either
illegal or did not lawfully exist on the effective date of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 46-18)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 91-76, passed 12-19-1991; Ord. 02-23, passed 7-1-2002)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 159.040  ORGANIZATION.



   The administration of this chapter is hereby vested in the following:



   (A)   Administrative Officer;



   (B)   Zoning Board of Appeals; and



   (C)   Plan Commission.



(Prior Code, § 46-19)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 2009-17, passed 4-20-2009)



§ 159.041  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.



   (A)   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by an
Administrative Officer who shall be the Director of Community Development or
such other officer as may be designated from time to time by the City Manager.



   (B)   The Administrative Officer, in furtherance of such authority,
shall:



      (1)   Issue all certificates of zoning compliance to authorize
any change of use, expansion of a use or issuance of building permits and
make and maintain records thereof;



      (2)   Issue all certificates of occupancy, and make and
maintain records;



      (3)   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and use of
land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;



      (4)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter
including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments, special uses, variances,
appeals and applications;



      (5)   Forward to the appropriate board or commission all
applications, including, but not limited to, those for special use permits,
variances, appeals and for amendments to this chapter that are initially
filed with the office of the Administrative Officer; and



      (6)   Initiate, direct and review, from time to time, the
provisions of this chapter, and make recommendations to the City Council
regarding amendments if determined to be necessary.



(Prior Code, § 46-20)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 94-49, passed 11-7-1994; Ord. 03-38, passed 6-19-2003; Ord. 2009-17,
passed 4-20-2009)



§ 159.042  ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   Creation, composition, term. There is hereby created the City
Zoning Board of Appeals herein referenced as “the Board.”



      (1)   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, shall appoint seven Board members with one of the members appointed
as Chairperson. Every member may serve a maximum of three two-year terms.



      (2)   Board members may continue to serve beyond the
expiration of the term if necessary until a replacement is appointed by the
Mayor.



      (3)   Four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.



      (4)   Members serve at the discretion of the Mayor.



      (5)   The Board shall include persons of diverse backgrounds,
to the extent possible, with each Board member demonstrating various skills,
knowledge and expertise that facilitate the review of matters that come
before the Board.



      (6)   One member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may serve
concurrently on the Plan Commission with the terms for each body being
distinct and separate.



      (7)   In the event of a vacancy, the Mayor, with the consent
of the City Council, shall appoint a new Board member to fill the remainder
of the term in question. Following completion of the term filled, said member
may be appointed to a full term consistent with the provisions of this
section.



   (B)   Purpose. The Zoning Board of Appeals serves as a recommending
body to the City Council on requests for variances from this chapter of the
city code as amended and on matters relating to special use permits
authorizing expansion of or changes to some existing special uses. With
respect to appeals of administrative decisions, the Zoning Board of Appeals
renders the final decision at the local level. The Zoning Board of Appeals
provides a public forum for input and deliberation on all of the above
matters.



   (C)   Powers and duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall discharge
the following duties under this chapter:



      (1)   Review and render a final decision on all appeals from
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Administrative
Officer, or the Officer’s designee, under this chapter. In rendering a
final decision on administrative appeals, the Board may affirm, affirm with
conditions, modify or reverse the decision of the Administrative Officer or
the Officer’s designee;



      (2)   Review and make a recommendation to the City Council on
all applications for variances from the requirements of this chapter;



      (3)   Review and make a recommendation to the City Council on
all applications for amendments to existing special use permits except those
required by § 159.048 and §§ 159.109 through 159.114, relating to the
various business districts which are the purview of the Plan Commission;



      (4)   Hold public hearings and make recommendations on other
matters as appropriate consistent with this chapter;



      (5)   Conduct special studies as directed from time to time by
the City Council; and



      (6)   All recommendations provided to the City Council with
respect to all of the duties listed above shall include written documentation
of the Board’s findings in support of the recommended action in the manner
prescribed herein.



   (D)   Meetings and rules of the Board. The Board shall conduct all
proceedings in accordance with the following.



      (1)   All meetings of the Board shall be held in accordance
with the meeting schedule adopted by the Board on an annual basis subject to
modification by the Chairperson.



      (2)   Decisions and recommendations of the Board shall be
reached only after a public hearing for which notice has been provided in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.



      (3)   All hearings shall be open to the public.



      (4)   At all hearings, any interested party may appear in
person, or by agent or attorney, and offer evidence and testimony and
cross-examine witnesses in accordance with the meeting procedures established
by the Board.



      (5)   The Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Acting
Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.



      (6)   All witnesses shall be sworn or shall affirm their
testimony in the manner required in courts of record.



      (7)   All evidence and testimony shall be presented publicly.
The Board may take judicial notice of facts to the same extent and in the
same manner as courts of record and may consider any relevant facts within
the personal knowledge of any member of the Board which are stated into the
record by such member.



      (8)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating that fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and
other official actions. No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the
Board being present, which shall consist of a majority of all the members
then in office.



   (E)   Administrative appeals.



      (1)   Scope of appeals. An appeal may be filed by any person
aggrieved by a decision of the Administrative Officer or the Officer’s
designee. Such appeal shall be submitted on a form provided by the city
within 45 days of the action complained of, by filing with the Administrative
Officer and with the Board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.



      (2)   Hearing and notice. The Board shall hear the appeal
within 60 days following the receipt of any appeal under this chapter, or at
the first regularly scheduled Zoning Board of Appeals meeting that has not
been fully subscribed or such further time to which the appellant may agree.
Notice of date, time and place of said hearing shall be provided to the
appellant and all parties who have heretofore indicated to the city an
interest in the decision.



      (3)   Transmission of record. Prior to the hearing, the
Administrative Officer shall transmit to the Board the complete record upon
which the action appealed was taken at least five working days prior to the
hearing.



      (4)   Findings on appeals. An appeal shall stay all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the Administrative
Officer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board, that a stay would
cause imminent peril to life or property. In this event the proceedings shall
not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by
the Board or by a Circuit Court on application and on notice to the
Administrative Officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.



      (5)   Disposition of appeals.



         (a)   The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as it deems
necessary and to that end has all powers of the Administrative Officer.



         (b)   The concurring vote of four members of the Board
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Administrative Officer.



      (6)   Report to City Council. The Board shall transmit to the
City Council a written report stating the Board’s decision on each appeal
from an order, requirement, decision or determination of the Administrative
Officer for information purposes.



      (7)   Administrative review. All final administrative
decisions of the Board shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the
provisions of the Administrative Review Act, being 735 ILCS 5/Art. III,
approved May 8, 1945, and all amendments and modifications thereof, and the
rules adopted pursuant thereto.



   (F)   Variances.



      (1)   Application for variance.



         (a)   An application for a variance shall be filed on a
form provided by the city. Such applications shall be filed by or on behalf
of the legal or beneficial owner of the property for which a variance is
sought.



         (b)   A complete application shall include all of the
following unless an item is specifically waived by the Administrative Officer.



            1.   A completed variance application form;



            2.   Disclosure of beneficial interests.



               a.   If the applicant is a corporation, the
application must be accompanied by a resolution of the corporation
authorizing the execution and submittal of the application. In addition, the
application shall indicate on its face the names of all directors and
corporate officers of the corporation and also the names of all shareholders
who own individually or beneficially 5% or more of the outstanding stock of
the corporation.



               b.   If the applicant is a general
partnership, the application shall contain a list of all general partners who
have a 5% or greater individual or beneficial interest in the partnership.



               c.   If the applicant is a limited
partnership, the application shall contain a list of all the names of general
partners and the names of all limited partners having a 5% or greater
individual or beneficial interest in the partnership.



            3.   Title report, warranty deed or similar
instrument;



            4.   Legal description of property and plat of
survey;



            5.   Statement of intent addressing variance
criteria;



            6.   Site plan, elevations, floor plans, roof
plans illustrating requested variance;



            7.   Tree removal, landscape and grading plans; and



            8.   Any other materials determined to be
necessary by the Administrative Officer.



      (2)   Notice of hearing. The Administrative Officer shall have
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice of the
time and place of a hearing on a variance and also shall mail notice thereof
to the residents and owners of record of all parcels of land, within the city
limits, to a depth of three ownerships, but not to exceed 1,320 feet from the
perimeter of the property being considered. The publication and mailing shall
be made not more than 30 days or less than 15 days before the date of the
hearing.



      (3)   Transmission of report and recommendation. Prior to the
hearing, the Administrative Officer shall transmit to the Board a report,
recommendation and background material upon which said report and
recommendation are based. The complete application shall be on file and
available for Board member and public review in the office of the Community
Development Department.



      (4)   Standards for variance.



         (a)   The Board, after a hearing, may recommend a
variance from the regulations of this chapter in cases where there are
practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the
strict letter of any of these regulations, but only when such variance is in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter.



         (b)   In reviewing a case, the Board shall require
evidence to the effect that:



            1.   The variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the subject property, the surrounding area or the
larger neighborhood in which the property is located;



            2.   The conditions upon which a petition for a
variance are based are unique to the property for which the variance is
sought, and are not applicable, generally, to other property with the same
zoning classification;



            3.   The alleged difficulty or hardship in
conforming with the requirements of this chapter is caused by this chapter
and has not been created by the actions of any persons presently or formerly
having an interest in the property; and



            4.   The proposed variance will not impair an
adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially
increase the congestion of the public streets, or increase the danger of
fire, or endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair
property values within the neighborhood.



   (G)   Disposition of variances.



      (1)   Recommendation by Board of Appeals. The Board shall
transmit its recommendation and written findings of fact to the City Council
within 30 days after the close of the hearing on a proposed variance. In its
recommendation, the Board may recommend that such conditions and restrictions
be placed upon the premises benefitted by a variance as may be necessary to
comply with the objectives of this chapter. The concurring vote of four
members of the Board shall be necessary to recommend the authorization of any
variance from this chapter.



      (2)   Disposition by City Council. Upon receipt of the
recommendation of the Board, the City Council shall place such recommendation
on its agenda within 30 days and may, by ordinance without further hearing,
grant variances from the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the
standards established in division (F)(4) above, or may refer it back to the
Board for further consideration. Every recommendation from the Board shall be
accompanied by written findings of fact specifying the reason for granting
such variance. Those applications which fail to receive the approval of the
Board shall not be passed by the Council except by the favorable vote of
two-thirds of the aldermen then holding office.



      (3)   Duration of variances. No ordinance of the City Council
granting a variance shall be valid for a period longer than two years from
the date of such ordinance unless within such period the building permit is
obtained and the erection or alteration of a building is started or the use
is commenced.



(Prior Code, § 46-21)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 94-49, passed 11-7-1994; Ord. 2009-17, passed 4-20-2009; Ord. 2013-21,
passed 5-6-2013; Ord. 2017-06, passed 2-6-2017)



§ 159.043  THE PLAN COMMISSION.



   (A)   Creation, composition, term. There is hereby created the City
Plan Commission herein referenced as “the Commission.”



      (1)   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, shall appoint seven Commissioners with one of the members appointed
as Chairperson. In order to maintain continuity among Commissioners, each
member may serve a maximum of three consecutive two-year terms with said
terms of the various Commissioners being set to expire on a staggered basis
relative to each other.



      (2)   Commissioners may continue to serve beyond the
expiration of the term until a replacement is appointed by the Mayor.



      (3)   Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.



      (4)   Members serve at the discretion of the Mayor.



      (5)   The Commission shall include persons of diverse
backgrounds with each Commissioner demonstrating various skills, knowledge
and expertise that facilitate the review of matters that come before the
Commission.



      (6)   One member of the Plan Commission may serve concurrently
on the Zoning Board of Appeals with the terms for each body being distinct
and separate.



      (7)   One member of the Plan Commission may serve concurrently
on the Historic Preservation Commission with the terms for each body being
distinct and separate.



      (8)   In the event of a vacancy, the Mayor, with the consent
of the City Council, shall appoint a new Commissioner to fill the remainder
of the term in question.



   (B)   Purpose. The Plan Commission serves as a recommending body to
the City Council on matters pertaining to land use and development including,
but not limited to, zone changes, code amendments, subdivisions, special use
permits, the Comprehensive Plan and special studies. The Plan Commission
provides a forum for public input and deliberation with a focus on long term
planning in a manner that safeguards the character, traditions, quality of
life and property values of the city.



   (C)   Powers and duties. The Plan Commission shall discharge the
following duties under this chapter:



      (1)   Review all applications for subdivisions, planned
preservation subdivisions and planned developments and for any other matters
prescribed by the terms of this chapter;



      (2)   Review all applications for special use permits for new
developments as required by § 159.048 and §§ 159.109 through 159.114,
relating to the various business districts;



      (3)   Review all applications for amendments to the official
city zoning map and to this chapter;



      (4)   On an annual basis, update the official city zoning map;



      (5)   Hold public hearings and make recommendations on other
matters as appropriate which it is required to consider under this chapter;



      (6)   Recommend to the City Council amendments to the
subdivision regulations and this chapter of the city code and the City
Comprehensive Plan as from time to time it deems appropriate after notice of
and hearings with respect thereto in accordance with § 159.044;



      (7)   Conduct special studies as directed from time to time by
the City Council; and



      (8)   Provide to the City Council recommendations with respect
to all of the duties listed above along with documentation of the
Commission’s findings in support of the recommended action in the manner
prescribed herein.



(Prior Code, § 46-22)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 94-49, passed 11-7-1994; Ord. 2009-03, passed 1-5-2009)



§ 159.044  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Intent. The regulations imposed and the districts created by
this chapter may be amended from time to time by ordinance after the
ordinance establishing same has gone into effect, but no amendments shall be
made without a hearing before the Plan Commission.



   (B)   Application for amendment. All applications for amendment to
this chapter shall be filed with the Administrative Officer in such form and
accompanied by such information as required by the Plan Commission and shall
include a disclosure of beneficial interests as required by § 159.046. In
the case of applications to amend the zoning district map, such applications
shall be filed by the legal or beneficial owner of the property for which an
amendment is sought. All such applications shall be forwarded to the Plan
Commission at the Plan Commission’s next available agenda after all
required notices have been provided in accordance with state statutes and
city ordinances.



   (C)   Hearing on application. Within 60 days of receipt of any
application by the Administrative Officer for an amendment, the Plan
Commission shall hold a hearing on such application at such time and place as
shall be established by the Plan Commission. The hearing shall be conducted
and a record of such proceedings shall be preserved in such manner as the
Plan Commission may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.



   (D)   Notice of hearing. Notice of time and place of such hearing
shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city not more than 30 nor less than 15 days before such hearing. Supplemental
or additional notices may be published or distributed as the Plan Commission
may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.



   (E)   Findings of fact and recommendation of the Plan Commission.



      (1)   The Plan Commission shall make written findings of fact
and shall submit same together with its recommendations to the City Council
within 30 days after the close of the hearing on a proposed amendment. The
Plan Commission’s report to the City Council shall indicate the vote of
each member present and voting upon every recommendation and shall contain a
statement of reasons why a member or members did not vote in favor of a
recommendation.



      (2)   Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment
is to change the zoning classification of a particular property, the Plan
Commission shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in
each specific case with respect to the following matters:



         (a)   The zoning classification of property within the
general area of the property in question;



         (b)   Existing uses of property within the general area
of the property in question;



         (c)   The suitability of the property in question to the
uses permitted under the existing zoning classification;



         (d)   The trend of development, if any, in the general
area of the property in question, including changes, if any, which have taken
place in its present zoning classification; and



         (e)   That there are chances of changing conditions in
the applicable area of the amendment, or in the city generally, that make the
proposed amendment reasonable necessary to the promotion of the public
health, safety or general welfare.



      (3)   The Plan Commission shall not recommend the adoption of
a proposed amendment unless it finds that the adoption of such amendment is
in the public interest and is not solely for the interest of the petitioner.
The Plan Commission may recommend the adoption of an amendment changing the
zoning classification of the property in question to any higher
classification than that requested by the petitioner. For the purpose of this
division (E)(3), the R-5 District shall be considered the highest
classification and the B-2 District shall be considered the lowest
classification.



   (F)   Action by the City Council.



      (1)   The City Council shall not act upon a proposed amendment
to this chapter until it shall have received a written report and
recommendation from the Plan Commission on the proposed amendment.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a written report and recommendation from
the Plan Commission the City Council shall place such report and
recommendation on its agenda within 30 days. The City Council may grant or
deny any application for an amendment, provided however, that in case of a
written protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations or
districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage
proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20% of the frontage immediately
adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20% of the
frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with
the Clerk of the city, the amendment shall not be passed except by a
favorable vote of two-thirds of the aldermen then holding office or such vote
as may be required by 65 ILCS 5/11.



   (G)   Repeal of amendment. In any case where a change of boundary
lines of the zoning district map has been granted, and where no development
has taken place within one and one-half years, the Plan Commission may, after
written notice to the owner of record of the property and after notice and
hearing as herein provided for amendments, recommend to the City Council that
such zoning be affirmed or repealed and rezoned to its most appropriate
district classification.



(Prior Code, § 46-23)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.045  SPECIAL USES.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The development and execution of this chapter is based
upon the division to the community into districts, within which districts the
use of land and buildings, and the bulk and location of buildings and
structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is
recognized, however, that there are certain uses which, because of their
unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular
district or districts, without consideration, in each case, of the impact of
those uses upon neighboring land and the public need for the particular use
in the particular location.



      (2)   Such special uses fall into two categories:



         (a)   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected
with a public interest; and



         (b)   Uses entirely private in character, but of such a
nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to
their impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.



   (B)   Application for special use permit. An application for a
special use permit shall be filed with the Administrative Officer on a form
prescribed by the Plan Commission if the special use permit is required for a
planned development and by the Zoning Board of Appeals in all other cases.
The application shall include a disclosure of beneficial interests as
required by § 159.046. Such application shall be filed by the legal or
beneficial owner of the property from which the special use permit is sought.
The application shall be accompanied by plans and data prescribed by the
appropriate Board or Commission, and shall include a statement in writing by
the applicant and adequate evidence that the proposed special use will
conform to the standards set forth in division (E) below. All such
applications shall be forwarded to the appropriate Board or Commission at the
next available agenda after all required notices have been provided in
accordance with state statutes and city ordinances.



   (C)   Hearing on application for special use permit. Within 60 days
of receipt of any application by the Administrative Officer for a special use
permit the appropriate Board or Commission shall hold a hearing of such
application at such time and place as shall be established by the appropriate
Board or Commission. The hearing shall be conducted and a record of such
proceedings shall be preserved in such manner as appropriate Board or
Commission shall prescribe.



   (D)   Notice of hearing. Notice of time and place of such hearing
shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city not more than 30 nor less than 15 days before such hearing. Supplemental
or additional notices may be published or distributed as the appropriate
Board or Commission may, by rule, prescribe form time to time.



   (E)   Findings of fact and recommendations of the Plan Commission.



      (1)   The appropriate board or commission shall make written
findings of fact and shall submit same together with its recommendations to
the City Council within 30 days after the close of the hearing on a special
use. The Board’s or Commission’s report to the City Council shall
indicate the vote of each member present and voting upon every recommendation
and shall contain a statement of reasons why a member or members did not vote
in favor of a recommendation.



      (2)   No special use shall be recommended by the Board or
Commission for approval by the City Council unless the Board or Commission
shall find that the petitioner has shown that:



         (a)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the
special use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort or general welfare;



         (b)   The special use will not be injurious to the use
and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted, not substantially diminish and impair property values
within the neighborhood;



         (c)   The establishment of the special use will not
impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding
property for uses permitted in the district, including in business districts,
the special use will not negatively affect the overall character of the area
or detract from the primary retail nature of the district;



         (d)   The exterior architectural appearance and
functional plan of any proposed structure will not be incompatible with
either the exterior architectural appearance functional plan of structures
already constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate
neighborhood or the character of the applicable district so as to cause a
substantial depreciation in the property values within the neighborhood;



         (e)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or
necessary facilities have been or are being provided;



         (f)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to
provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in
the public streets; and



         (g)   The special use shall conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the City Council.



   (F)   Conditions. The appropriate Board or Commission may recommend
and the City Council may require such conditions or restrictions upon the
construction, location and operation of a special use as shall be deemed
necessary to secure the general objectives of this chapter and maintain the
value of property in the neighborhood. Such conditions may include, but not
be limited to, provisions for the protection of adjacent property, the
expiration of such special use permit after a specified period of time, or
off-street parking and loading.



   (G)   Action by the City Council.



      (1)   The City Council shall not act upon a proposed special
use permit until it shall have received written findings of fact and a
recommendation from the appropriate Board or Commission on the special use
permit.



      (2)   Upon receipt of written findings of fact and
recommendation from the appropriate Board or Commission, the City Council
shall place such report on its agenda within 30 days. special use permits
shall be authorized by the City Council by ordinance.



   (H)   Effect of denial of a special use permit. No application for a
special use permit which has been denied wholly or partly by the City Council
shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of such denial,
except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to
be valid by the appropriate Board or Commission.



   (I)   Uses authorized. Within each zoning district a special use
permit may include one or more of the uses listed therein as special uses.



   (J)   Revocation and expiration. In any case where a special use has
not been established within one year after the date of granting hereof, the
appropriate Board or Commission shall review the special use permit and
recommend to the City Council whether or not the special use permit should be
revoked. Should a special use or uses authorized by special use permit cease
to exist for more than one year, the special use permit shall automatically
expire and may be renewed only by complying with the provisions of this
section.



   (K)   Special use development standards. Except as herein provided,
the minimum size for each zoning lot designed or used for a special use and
the minimum yard requirements shall be recommended by the appropriate Board
or Commission and specified by the City Council.



   (L)   Uses requiring a special use permit; residence and general
residence districts. The following may be allowed by special use permit in
any residence or general residence district, as provided in this section:



      (1)   Cemeteries, but not on zoning lots of less than ten
acres in area with a minimum frontage of 500 feet;



      (2)   Memorial garden;



      (3)   Excavations and filling as follows:



         (a)   Artificial lakes and ponds not associated with the
subdivision of an existing zoning lot in which a lake and/or and may be
developed as a part of a drainage system for the subdivision and surrounding
area;



         (b)   Borrow pits; and



         (c)   Artificial mounds or berms for landscaping
purposes exceeding seven feet in height above the natural elevation of the
surrounding land.



      (4)   Funeral homes and mortuaries on zoning lots of ten acres
or more with a minimum frontage of 500 feet;



      (5)   Governmental structures and facilities;



      (6)   Institutions, but not on zoning lots of less than 40,000
square feet, including all uses, structures and facilities customarily
incidental to their operation, as follows:



         (a)   Colleges and universities;



         (b)   Elementary and high schools, private or public;



         (c)   Institutions for the mentally handicapped;



         (d)   Day, nursery and other schools for the care and
instruction of children except as permitted in the OR-2 District;



         (e)   Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues,
including associated rectories, parsonages and parish houses;



         (f)   Hospitals and related health care facilities;



         (g)   Nursing homes;



         (h)   Libraries, art galleries and museums open to the
public;



         (i)   Philanthropic and charitable institutions, but not
including businesses sponsored by such institutions except such as are
accessory or incidental to and located in the same building as such
institution proper; and



         (j)   Continuing care retirement communities.



      (7)   Planned developments, in accordance with §§ 159.047
and 159.048, as follows:



         (a)   Planned preservation subdivisions in all
districts; and



         (b)   Planned apartment developments in GR-4, GR-3, GR-2
and GR-1 Districts.



      (8)   Private guest houses and detached living quarters in the
R-5, R-4 and R-3 Districts for persons employed on the premises and their
immediate family, but only when associated with a single-family dwelling
located on a zoning lot with twice the minimum area required by the zoning
district in which the single-family detached dwelling is located;



      (9)   Private recreational and social clubs and civic and
fraternal organizations on zoning lots of ten acres or more with a minimum
frontage of 500 feet except as permitted in the ROS, OR and OR-2 Districts;



      (10)   Public utility, service and equipment facilities,
including, but not limited to, telephone exchanges, electric substations and
gas regulator stations;



      (11)   Natural preservation areas, provided that such property
must exist and remain in an undeveloped state as a nature preserve devoted
exclusively to scientific and educational purposes, shall not be used for any
residential, commercial or industrial purposes and that public access be
provided directly to the property or to adjoining property for which similar
use is permitted;



      (12)   Residential developments in existing buildings having
historic architectural or aesthetic significance, of educational institutions
on zoning lots of ten acres or more in existence on May 13, 1978, which
historically have provided complete residence and educational facilities for
its faculty and students. The residential densities in such existing
buildings may exceed those permitted for the underlying classification only
when it is determined to be necessary to accomplish the objectives and intent
of this section. However, no new residential structures or additions may be
constructed on the site which will further increase the density beyond that
permitted by the zoning classification. No new accessory facilities or
additions may be permitted on the site which are not in harmony with the
intent of this section to preserve the historical and architectural,
aesthetic significance of existing structures and sites. In evaluating the
appropriateness of the number of dwelling units proposed for such
development, the following items, among other things, shall be considered:
the historical residential population and use of the site during
institutional use, the character of the surrounding area, the topography of
the area, the bulk of the buildings existing on the site, and the extent of
the benefit to the welfare of the community to be derived from preserving the
existing aesthetic appearance of the site;



      (13)   Non-school related uses of public and private
elementary and high school buildings and facilities which either are
temporarily or permanently not needed or required for school purposes;



      (14)   Senior cottage developments, as this term is defined in
§ 159.002, shall only be permitted pursuant to a special use permit, which
permit may authorize variances from the floor area, setback and other bulk
and yard requirements of the zoning district in which the property in
question is located. No such special use permit shall be granted unless the
applicant demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the City Council that, in
addition to the standards otherwise required for special permit uses found in
division (E) above, the following standards are also satisfied.



         (a)   There is a demonstrable and immediate need for
affordable, rental, senior housing units, as evidenced in a market analysis
or other competent evidence, within the city and its immediate vicinity.



         (b)   The proposed senior cottage development is
reasonably accessible to commercial areas, public and private services,
public transportation routes or other identified senior magnets, including:



            1.   Market Square;



            2.   Settlers’ Square;



            3.   Lake Forest High School;



            4.   District 67 Schools;



            5.   Barat Campus and Lake Forest College;



            6.   Parks and open lands;



            7.   Grove School; and



            8.   The Lake Forest Library.



         (c)   The proposed senior cottage development is to be
located on property owned by either the city, the City Housing Foundation or
some other similarly situated not-for-profit corporation involved in the
development and management of affordable senior housing for the city
community. Where the property is owned by a not-for-profit corporation other
than the City Housing Foundation, the not-for-profit corporation shall
produce evidence, satisfactory in form and substance to the City Manager in
consultation with the City Attorney, that it owns the property in fee simple.
Notwithstanding anything provided in this division (L)(14)(c), senior cottage
developments may be proposed on property where neither the city, the City
Housing Foundation, nor another similarly situated not-for-profit corporation
has a fee simple or lesser interest in the property; provided, however, that
the owner of the property is prepared to transfer ownership in fee simple to
either the city, the City Housing Foundation or a similarly situated
not-for-profit corporation as a condition of the special use permit.



         (d)   The proposed senior cottage development is
designed to be architecturally and structurally compatible and consonant in
overall site design with surrounding properties. The determination as to
whether a senior cottage development is architecturally and structurally
compatible and consonant with surrounding properties shall be made by the
Building Review Board, and where appropriate, the Historic Preservation
Committee.



         (e)   Each senior cottage within a proposed senior
cottage development shall be designed to accommodate the independent living
requirements of persons at least 65 years of age, and shall contain no more
than 1,300 square feet of space with no more than one bedroom. Each senior
cottage shall have an attached or detached single car garage or carport that
shall contain no more than 330 square feet. All square footage calculation
for senior cottages shall be based on the city’s building scale ordinance.
In addition, the senior cottage development shall contain at least one senior
cottage, but in no instance more than five senior cottages, and shall provide
direct connection to public sidewalks.



         (f)   Each senior cottage within a proposed senior
cottage development shall be made available exclusively for rental occupancy
by a family of not more than two people, provided that at least one of the
family-members is at least 65 years of age and the other family-member is at
least 21 years of age.



         (g)   Any senior cottage development shall have a
restrictive covenant recorded against its property. The restrictive covenant
shall be in a form and substance acceptable to the City Attorney and shall
contain such terms to assure compliance with the requirements of this code,
and include the following provisions:



            1.   The senior cottage development within a
proposed senior cottage development shall be made available exclusively for
rental occupancy by a family in accordance with the limitations of division
(L)(14)(f) above; and



            2.   The senior cottage development serves a
demonstrable sector of the community in need of affordable, rental housing
units that qualify as “low income housing” under the “safe harbor”
provisions, adopted as Rev. Proc. 96-32, 1996-1 C.B. 717, by the Internal
Revenue Services, (as it may be amended from time to time).



         (h)   Any applicant for a senior cottage development
special use permit must demonstrate the financial capability, in form and
substance satisfactory to the City Manager to undertake and operate such
development in compliance with the requirements of this code. In evaluating
such financial capability, the city shall consider whether the senior
cottages and their residents would be eligible to participate in rental
subsidy programs designed to serve person of limited income.



         (i)   Notwithstanding any contrary regulations of this
code, special use permits issued for any senior cottage development may
multiple senior cottages on one zoning lot.



      (15)   In the R-4 zoning district an adaptive reuse
residential development may be authorized as a type of planned development
through a special use permit in accordance with the provisions of this
division (L)(15) and subject to the determination by the city that the
following criteria are satisfied.



         (a)   Minimum size. No development area consisting of
fewer than 20 acres shall be considered for an adaptive reuse special use
permit.



         (b)   Previous use. Previous use or uses of the proposed
development area were uses other than single-family residential authorized
through a special use permit.



         (c)   Historic significance. One or more structures of
historic significance are located on the development area. Historic
significance shall be deemed to exist if the structure(s) are included in one
or more local or national historic districts or if the structure(s) are
locally designated as individual historic landmarks.



         (d)   Adjacencies. The development area is adjacent to
or located within 200 feet of at least one other zoning district and the
density of the adaptive reuse development does not exceed the maximum density
permitted in the most permissive of those districts.



         (e)   Regulations for adaptive reuse developments.



            1.   Lot size, building coverage, total impervious
surface and open space. All adaptive reuse developments shall be subject to
the lot size, building coverage, total impervious surface and open space
requirements set forth in the ordinance approving the special use permit.



            2.   Building footprints. All adaptive reuse
developments shall be subject to the building locations and configurations
set forth in the ordinance approving the special use permit.



            3.   Setback requirements. All adaptive reuse
developments shall be subject to the setbacks set forth in the ordinance
approving the special use permit.



            4.   Height requirements. All adaptive reuse
residential developments shall be subject to the height requirements set
forth in the ordinance approving the special use permit.



            5.   Number of buildings on a zoning lot. Multiple
principal buildings are allowed on a zoning lot, subject to the limitations
set forth in the ordinance approving the special use permit.



            6.   Parking and loading. All adaptive reuse
residential developments shall be subject to the parking and loading
requirements applicable to the R-4 District as set forth § 159.080(H) and
(I), unless otherwise provided in the ordinance approving the special use
permit.



            7.   Signs. Signs incorporated into adaptive reuse
residential developments shall, unless otherwise provided in the ordinance
approving the special use permit comply with the sign requirements applicable
to the R-4 District as set forth in § 159.080(G).



         (f)   Procedure for approval of a special use permit for
an adaptive reuse residential development.



            1.   Application. The owner shall submit to the
city a written application for approval of an adaptive reuse residential
development plan on forms supplied by the city. The application shall be
accompanied by payment of requisite filing fees and a development plan, as
described in division (L)(15)(f)3. below.



            2.   Tentative development plan. A tentative
development plan shall be prepared by a licensed architect, land surveyor,
civil engineer, or planning consultant and shall include the following:



               a.   A survey showing existing features of
the property, including contours, buildings, structures, conditions and
species of trees over four inches in trunk diameter, streets, utility
easements, right of way, land use and other data required by the city’s
subdivision ordinance for tentative plat approval, the tree preservation and
landscape ordinance and other applicable city codes, ordinances and
regulations;



               b.   A site plan showing proposed building
location and land use areas on the property in question. The site plan shall
identify all bulk, space, and yard information relating to the property in
question;



               c.   An area map identifying uses and
showing the buildings, natural features, roadways, pedestrian ways, and other
significant characteristics of the land lying adjacent to and within at least
500 feet of the property in question. In addition, the area map shall
identify the nearest adjacent zoning districts to the various areas of the
property in question;



               d.   Traffic circulation, parking areas,
sidewalks and pedestrian walks;



               e.   Landscaping plans, including site
grading, tree preservation and landscaping design;



               f.   Preliminary drawings for buildings to
be constructed in each phase, including floor plans, exterior elevations and
sections, and an artist’s renderings thereof, all of which shall have been
submitted to appropriate City Board or Commission for its report and
recommendation prior to the final consideration of the development plan
pursuant to the applicable sections of this code, unless otherwise approved
in the ordinance approving the special use. A copy of the report and
recommendation of the appropriate Board or Commission shall be submitted with
the final development plan; and



               g.   Preliminary engineering plans,
including street, yard and open space lighting, street improvements, drainage
system, sewer system and public utility extensions, shall be prepared. Such
preliminary engineering plans shall demonstrate compliance, or the ability to
comply with, the requirements of the subdivision ordinance, the watershed
development ordinance and all other applicable regulations and shall address
top of foundation heights, base flood elevations, off-site stormwater
impacts, wetland and other buffering requirements, and tree removal and tree
preservation activities.



            3.   Review of tentative development plan;
hearing. The Plan Commission shall hold a public meeting on an application
for approval of a tentative development plan for the adaptive reuse
development. In the course of its review, the Plan Commission may require the
owner to supplement the information provided, including without limitation
the preparation and delivery of engineering or other feasibility studies on
the handling of anticipated problems arising out of or in connection with the
development. The Plan Commission, following its review of a tentative
development plan, shall recommend to the City Council approval, approval with
modifications or disapproval of the tentative development plan. Any approval
may be with conditions, but it shall be recommended only upon findings that:



               a.   The proposed uses will not be
detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses;



               b.   The building massing, building
footprints and open space reflected in the tentative development plan are
consistent with those in adjoining zoning districts;



               c.   The proposed development is consistent
with the general intent of the Comprehensive Plan, with consideration to the
natural features on, development adjacent to, and the ingress to and egress
from, the property. Alternatively, a finding that an amendment to the
Comprehensive Plan consistent with the proposed adaptive reuse residential
development is warranted;



               d.   Existing and proposed streets are
suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic within the proposed
development and in the vicinity of the proposed development, as well as to
avoid conflicts in the character and patterns of traffic. To the extent
private streets are included in the tentative development plan, adequate
provisions must be made for the long-term maintenance of such streets to
ensure that they do not become a financial burden on the city. Provision in
deed restrictions acceptable to the city requiring that such maintenance be
performed and paid for by a mandatory owners association is deemed adequate
provision;



               e.   Existing and proposed utility services
are adequate for the proposed development;



               f.   The proposed development, or each phase
of the proposed development if construction will be in stages, will contain
the required parking spaces, landscape and utility areas necessary for
creating and sustaining a desirable and suitable environment;



               g.   Construction, installation or
performance of all mass grading, stormwater facilities, all underground
utility mains and appurtenances, private roads or public streets (through
first lift) and sidewalks, and major landscaping elements is capable of
completion within two years unless a longer time frame is specified in the
ordinance; and



               h.   The tentative development plan complies
with all other criteria and the stated purpose set forth in this section.



            4.   Consideration of tentative development plan.
The City Council shall, within 60 days after receipt of the recommendation
from the Plan Commission on the tentative development plan, approve, approve
with modifications or disapprove the tentative development plan; any approval
may be with conditions. If the Council fails to act within such 60-day
period, the tentative development plan shall be deemed disapproved; provided
that, if the applicant requests an extension to such period, then the period
will be so extended until the Council takes action on the tentative
development plan.



            5.   Ordinance approving tentative development
plan. Upon approval of a tentative development plan for an adaptive reuse
development, the City Council shall pass an ordinance approving the tentative
development plan. No ordinance approving a tentative development plan shall
be effective unless all of its terms and conditions are accepted and agreed
to by the owner within ten days after its passage by the City Council (unless
a longer period is provided in the ordinance approving the tentative
development plan). Such ordinance approving the tentative development plan
shall constitute tentative plat approval. The city may grant the tentative
development plan approval contemporaneously with the special use permit
ordinance; provided, however, that there shall be no right to proceed with
implementation of a development plan unless and until final development plan
approval is granted.



            6.   Final development plan; special use permit
approval.



               a.   The Plan Commission shall hold a public
hearing on an application for approval of a final development plan. Notice
shall be given in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code relating
to special uses. The owner shall submit a final development plan in
accordance with the ordinance approving the tentative development plan and
the final platting requirements in the city’s subdivision ordinance. The
final development plan shall be processed contemporaneously with, and in
accordance with, the procedures for a final plat and for a special use
permit, and shall include at least the following information:



                  i.   All submittal requirements for a
final plat under the subdivision ordinance; the watershed development
ordinance; and other applicable city codes, ordinances and regulations
(including the ordinance approving the development plan). The information
required for all of the foregoing, and demonstration of compliance, shall be
fully presented, including without limitation provision for construction of
underground electrical and telephone service. Final engineering plans,
including street, yard and open space lighting, street improvements, drainage
system, sewer system and public utility extensions shall be prepared.
Location of garbage and refuse collection points and of mail pickup points
shall also be specified;



                  ii.   Any required declarations of
covenants shall be presented for review and approval by the City Attorney;



                  iii.   Construction sequence and time
schedule for completion of improvements, infrastructure, buildings, parking
spaces and landscaped areas within the adaptive reuse residential development
shall be set forth as part of the final development plan; and



                  iv.   Any information required
pursuant to the ordinance approving the tentative development plan.



               b.   Following the public hearing, the Plan
Commission shall recommend the terms for approval or amendment of the special
use permit in connection with for the final development plan. Thereafter,
such Plan Commission recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Council
for consideration of the approval of the final development plan pursuant to a
special use permit ordinance, which shall also serve as the final plat
approval for the property. Until a final development plan designating the
land subdivided into lots, if any, as well as the division of other lands not
so subdivided into common open areas and building sites is recorded with the
County Recorder of Deeds, no development activity on the property in question
shall be permitted unless expressly authorized in the ordinance approving the
tentative development plan. The recording of the special use permit ordinance
and final development plan (including the final plat) shall inform all who
deal with adaptive reuse residential development of the restrictions placed
upon the land and act as a zoning control device. The final development plan
for the adaptive reuse development shall contain appropriate legends or
notations on its face reflecting the special use permit ordinance and all of
the covenants, restrictions, dedications, regulations and requirements of and
for the plan and pertaining to the development, and shall be certified by the
Plan Commission as being in compliance with this subchapter prior to its
being recorded. No building permit shall be issued for any structure until
the certification and recording of the final development plan has been
completed.



            7.   Contemporaneous approvals. Nothing in this
section shall prevent an owner from seeking and obtaining contemporaneous
approvals, such as those for architectural elements and landscaping, provided
that all elements of a development plan and other matters requiring approval
are in a form acceptable to the city. To the extent feasible, contemporaneous
reviews and approvals of development plans and other matters should be
encouraged.



            8.   Modifications to the final development plan.



               a.   Minor modifications. The City Engineer,
in his or her discretion and with the consent of the Director of Community
Development, may authorize in writing minor modifications to a particular
final development plan if such adjustments are necessary in light of
technical or engineering considerations first discovered during actual
development and do not materially affect the nature or character of the
approved final development plans. Other changes necessitated by engineering
considerations that may affect the nature or character of the final
development plans may also be so approved by the City Engineer, within the
Engineer’s sole discretion, pursuant to this division (L)(15)(f)8.a.;
provided, however, that such minor modifications shall be limited to the
following:



                  i.   Altering the location or
dimensions of any structure, group of structures or vehicular drive by not
more than five feet;



                  ii.   Altering the location of any
open space by not more than five feet; and



                  iii.   Altering the final grade by not
more than 5% of the originally planned grade.



               b.   Major modifications. Any modification
to a particular final development plan not specifically authorized in
division (L)(15)(f)8.a. above shall be considered to be a major modification
and shall be granted only upon application to, and approval by the City
Council, by resolution duly adopted. The City Council may, but shall have no
obligation to, require that the application for a major modification be
considered at a public hearing before the City Council or such other board or
commission as the City Council shall require.



   (M)   Uses requiring a special use permit; Office District. The
following uses may be allowed by special use permit in the Office District,
as provided in this section:



      (1)   Multiple-family dwellings, independent structures with a
minimum zoning lot area per dwelling unit of 2,000 square feet and planned
apartment developments, in accordance with § 159.047;



      (2)   Governmental structures and facilities, except offices;
and



      (3)   Public utilities, service and equipment facilities,
including, but not limited to, telephone exchanges, electric substations and
gas regulator stations.



   (N)   Uses requiring a special use permit; OR-2 Office Research
District. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in the OR-2
Office Research District, as provided in this section:



      (1)   Medical laboratories and scientific research
laboratories (including, but not limited to, pure research, product
development and research manufacturing facilities) not otherwise permitted;



      (2)   Sports complex and related facilities for indoor and
outdoor athletic training, contests, events, exhibitions and other uses
customarily associated with a professional football organization; and



      (3)   Governmental structures and facilities, including
offices owned by municipal corporations as authorized in a special use
permit, excluding active park and recreation facilities.



   (O)   Temporary uses in any district.



      (1)   The City Council may, after providing public notice as
required by law, and after conducting a public hearing, direct the City
Manager to grant approval of a temporary use of property or structures in any
zoning district by charitable and not-for-profit entities for public or
quasi-public educational, recreational or cultural uses including, but not
limited to, the Lake Forest Symphony, the Deerpath Art League and the
Historical Society, if determined by the City Council to be in the public
interest.



      (2)   Such temporary uses shall be approved for a period of
not more than two years.



      (3)   (a)   Established annual community events, that occur
for not more than five consecutive days, once a year, may be approved by the
City Manager without a public notice, a public hearing or direction from the
City Council.



         (b)   A newly proposed annual community event requires
review and approval by the City Council prior to City Manager approval.



   (P)   Uses requiring a special use permit; TD Transitional District.



      (1)   The following uses may be allowed by special use permit
in the TD Transitional District, as provided in this section:



         (a)   Single-family residential dwellings that do not
meet the requirements of the R-5 Zoning District;



         (b)   Multiple-family dwellings;



         (c)   Office buildings, including accessory commercial
uses for the convenience of the office building occupants;



         (d)   Adaptive re-use buildings that may contain
restaurants, educational facilities, daycare facilities, clubhouses, offices
and any other use approved by ordinance duly adopted by the City Council;



         (e)   Civic, religious, institutional, recreational and
cultural uses; and



         (f)   Financial institutions.



      (2)   Special uses proposed for any area within the TD
Transitional District shall be consistent with the city’s Comprehensive
Plan, with consideration to the natural features on, and development adjacent
to, the property.



(Prior Code, § 46-24)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 92-58, passed 11-2-1992; Ord. 94-49, passed 11-7-1994; Ord. 95-2, passed
2-16-1995; Ord. 95-26, passed 8-7-1995; Ord. 95-41, passed 11-6-1995; Ord.
96-23, passed 7-1-1996; Ord. 98-52, passed 9-17-1998; Ord. 01-17, passed
6-21-2001; Ord. 03-39, passed 6-19-2003; Ord. 2005-41, passed 10-3-2005; Ord.
06-46, passed 8-7-2006; Ord. 2007-18, passed 5-7-2007)



§ 159.046  APPLICATION; DISCLOSURE OF INTERESTS.



   All applications for variations (§ 159.042(F)(1)), amendments (§
159.044(E)), and special use permits (§ 159.045(B)), shall set forth on
their face the following information:



   (A)   If the applicant is a corporation, the application must be
accompanied by a resolution of the corporation authorizing the execution and
submittal of the instant application. In addition, the application shall
indicate on its face the names of all directors and corporate officers of the
corporation and also the names of all shareholders who own individually or
beneficially 5% or more of the outstanding stock of the corporation;



   (B)   If the applicant is a general partnership, the application
shall contain a list of all general partners who have a 5% or greater
individual or beneficial interest in the partnership;



   (C)   If the applicant is a limited partnership, the application
shall contain a list of all the names of general partners and the names of
all limited partners having a 5% or greater individual or beneficial interest
in the partnership; and



   (D)   If the applicant is a land trust or any other trust, the
application shall contain the names and addresses of all beneficiaries of the
trust together with their respective interests in the trusts. The application
shall be further verified by the applicant in his or her capacity of trustee
or by the beneficiary as a beneficial owner of an interest in the trust and
the application shall be signed individually by as many beneficiaries as are
necessary to constitute greater than 50% ownership of the beneficial interest
of the trust.



(Prior Code, § 46-25)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.047  PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The regulations contained in this section are
established to achieve or otherwise promote one or more of the following
amenities or objectives in a new development: (a) imaginative design; (b)
preservation of natural features such as floodplains, woodlands, wetlands,
bluffs and ravines; (c) open space; (d) landscaped berms and buffers; (e)
recreational facilities; (f) stormwater retention facilities; (g) diverse
housing types and housing types that are available only in limited supplies
in the community; (h) housing that supports alternative modes of
fransportation through proximity to train stations, bicycle and pedestrian
paths and similar facilities; (i) development that supports and brings
vitality to the business districts; and (j) housing near community
institutions or (k) such other amenities as the City Council may determine
will serve the purposes of this section and be in the public interest. The
standards contained in this section and § 159.048 are intended to provide a
development alternative to the zoning standards applicable to the underlying
zoning for the property. To be eligible for approval, proposed developments
must, in the determination of the City Council based on consideration of the
findings and recommendation of the Plan Commission: (a) serve the purposes
stated in this division (A); (b) comply with all applicable requirements of
this § 159.047, including the standards stated in the appropriate section of
division (A)(2), below; (c) be in the public interest; (d) be compatible with
the character of the city; and (e) be in accord with the principles set forth
in the Comprehensive Plan of the city.



      (2)   Additionally, each of the individual types of planned
developments was created for the following purposes:



         (a)   Planned preservation subdivision development. The
planned preservation subdivision provisions, as further set forth in §
159.048, permit creation of developments which preserve and protect
architecturally significant homes and estates, significant parts of the
landscape heritage of the city or significant natural resources including,
but not limited to, woodlands, prairies, wetlands, flood plains, and
environmentally sensitive or significant open space, through the dedication
or establishment of common open space and the use of innovative subdivision
design techniques for single-family dwellings in residential disfricts.
Notwithstanding anything in this section or § 159.048 to the contrary, the
City Council may approve a planned preservation subdivision design that
deviates from the generally applicable development standards of Chapters 156
and 159 of the city code (including, but not limited to, standards pertaining
to the size, shape, and number of lots; density; setbacks; and building
areas) if the City Council determines that such design will serve one or more
of the purposes described in this paragraph.



         (b)   Planned multi-family development. The planned
multi-family development provisions are established to provide a safe and
desirable living environment characterized by a unified building and site
development plan, to preserve natural features of the site, to provide
adequate open space for passive recreation and other outdoor living purposes
and to offer diverse housing within walking distance of restaurants, stores
and services.



         (c)   Planned business development. The planned business
development provisions are established to provide opportunities to strengthen
the economic viability and enhance the aesthetic qualities of the business
districts through the promotion of larger scale (rather than parcel by
parcel) developments of a unified design, which may include shared parking
and other amenities. Such developments are intended to provide economic
benefit to the community, property owners, and businesses, which benefits may
be achieved by various means including by encouraging investment in the
community and providing goods and services to support the overall welfare of
the community.



   (B)   Design standards. The design standards and definitions set
forth in § 156.002 and §§ 156.070 through 156.080 of the subdivision
regulations shall be applicable to all planned residential developments,
unless otherwise approved by the City Council.



   (C)   Planned multi-family development.



      (1)    Permissible zones. A planned multi-family development
shall be permitted only in the GR-4, GR-3, GR-2 and GR-1 General Residence
Districts and in the O-1, Office District.



      (2)   Site standards - general. Planned multi-family
developments shall:



         (a)   Be permitted on zoning lots the minimum size of
which are in accordance with the provisions of each district.



         (b)   Be served by public water supply and be connected
to the public sanitary sewer system.



         (c)   Have adequate public street frontage to construct
the necessary road or roads needed to serve such development.



      (3)   Development standards - specific.



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the maximum
number of dwelling units permitted shall be determined by dividing the net
development area by the minimum lot area per dwelling unit required by the
district or districts in which the development is located. Net development
area shall be determined by subtracting from the goss development area the
area set aside for nonresidential uses and the area devoted to public or
private streets or roads. The area of land set aside for common open space or
recreational use and off-street parking may be included in determining the
number of dwelling units permitted.



         (b)   The land area covered by the main building or
buildings shall not exceed 30% of the net development area.



         (c)   Along the periphery, yards shall be provided as
required by the regulations of the district in which such development is
located; provided, however, that such requirement might be modified on a
showing by the applicant of a more workable or compatible arrangement.



         (d)   The spacing between principal buildings shall be
at least equivalent to such spacing as would be required between buildings
similarly developed under the terms of this chapter on separate zoning lots.



         (e)   Upon recommendation of the Plan Commission and
approval by the City Council the lot area provided for each dwelling unit may
be reduced to 2,650 square feet in the GR-2 District.



         (f)   Upon recommendation of the Plan Commission and
approval by the City Council the lot area provided for each dwelling unit may
be reduced to 1,700 square feet in the GR-1 District if underground parking
is provided for at least 75% of all parking on the site.



      (4)   Open space regulations and maintenance. In planned
multi-family developments, where ownership rests with those who reside within
the development, the developers shall prepare and file with the city, for
review by the City Attorney, documents establishing a homeowner’s
association composed of all future owners ofthe development with the
responsibility of continuously regulating and maintaining all open space and
other common elements of the development.



      (5)   Required plans, plats and procedures.



         (a)   Any applicant for a planned multi-family
development under these regulations shall file with the Community Development
Departnent, an application including the following information:



            1.   A statement describing the general character
or the intended development together with such pertinent information as may
be necessary to determine whether the contemplated development conforms to
the requirements of this section and the general and specific standards
established herein;



            2.   A site plan indicating the arrangement and
tentative location of buildings, uses pennitted, land to be preserved as
permanent common open space, parking and loading spaces and other special
features of the development plan;



            3.   A draft of the proposed protective covenants
whereby the owner proposes to regulate land use and otherwise protect the
development;



            4.   A draft of any proposed incorporation
agreement and a draft of any bylaws or easement declaration conceming
maintenance of open space and other common facilities;



            5.   Architectural elevation and perspective
drawings of all proposed structures and improvements;



            6.   A development schedule indicating:



               a.   The approximate date when constuction
of the project can be expected to begin;



               b.   The stages in which the project will be
built and the approximate dates when construction of each stage can be
expected to begin;



               c.   The anticipated rate of development;



               d.   The approximate dates when development
of each of the stages will be completed; and



               e.   The area and location of common open
space that will be provided at each stage.



            7.   A landscaping plan including a comprehensive
drainage plan;



            8.   A statement of proposed financing and
financial assurance acceptable to the City Council, in consultation with the
City Attorney guaranteeing that once any stage of a development is started it
will be completed; and



            9.   A tentative plat of subdivision prepared in
accordance with all provisions of Chapter 156 of this city code.



         (b)   The planned multi-family development shall be
examined and evaluated by the Plan Commission in terms of the statement of
purpose contained herein, and may be recommended for approval only after a
determination has been made that the proposed development does in fact serve
such purpose.



         (c)   No planned multi-family development shall be
recommended by the Plan Commission for approval by the City Council unless
such complies with all of the other standards provided in Chapter 156 of this
city code unless a variance is specifically recommended.



   (D)   Planned business development.



      (1)   Permissible zones. A planned business development shall
be permitted only in the B-l, Neighborhood Business Distict; B-2, Community
Business District, B-3, Traditional Business District; or B-4, Preservation
Business District.



      (2)   Site standards. A planned business development shall be
permitted only on zoning lots of 40,000 square feet or more.



      (3)   Development standards.



         (a)   In a planned business development, the total goss
floor area shall not exceed three times the area of the zoning lot on which
the planned business development is located.



         (b)   In a planned business development, the bulk
requirements of the applicable zoning district may be modified in accordance
with a comprehensive site development plan.



         (c)   In a planned business development, if 75% or more
of all on site off-street parking is located undergound or in a basement
substantially screened from view from the outside, the total goss floor area
specified in division (D)(3)(a) above, may be increased by 15%.



         (d)   In a planned business development, if a 20-foot
setback is provided along one or more streets on which the planned business
development fronts, the total gross floor area specified in division
(D)(3)(a) above, may be increased by 5% for each such street setback.



         (e)   In a planned business development, multiple-family
dwellings may be permitted with a minimum zoning lot area per dwelling unit
of 2,000 square feet.



         Additionally, the gross floor area devoted to dwelling
units shall not exceed the gross floor area devoted to business uses.



      (4)   Required plans, plats and procedures.



         (a)   Any applicant for a planned business development
under these regulations shall file with the Plan Commission an application,
including the following information:



            1.   A statement describing the general character
of the intended development together with such pertinent information as may
be necessary to determine whether the contemplated development conforms to
the requirements of this section and the general and specific standards
established herein;



            2.   A site plan indicating the arrangement and
tentative location of buildings, uses permitted, open space and landscaped
areas, pedestrian walkway areas, parking and loading spaces and facilities,
and other special features of the development plan;



            3.   Architectural elevations and perspective
drawings of all proposed structures and improvements;



            4.   A development schedule indicating:



               a.   The approximate date when construction
of the project can be expected to begin;



               b.   The stages, if any, in which the
project will be built and the approximate dates when construction of each
stage can be expected to begin;



               c.   The anticipated rate of development; and



               d.   The approximate dates when development
of each of the stages will be completed.



            5.   A landscape plan including a comprehensive
drainage plan;



            6.   A statement of proposed financing and
financial assurances acceptable to the City Council in consultation with the
City Attorney guaranteeing that once any stage of a development is started it
will be completed; and



            7.   A tentative plat of subdivision prepared in
accordance with all provisions of Chapter 156.



               a.   The planned business development shall
be examined and evaluated by the Plan Commission in terms of the statement of
purpose contained herein, and the Plan Commission may recommend such planned
business development for approval by the City Council only after a
determination has been made that the proposed development does in fact serve
such purpose.



               b.   No planned business development shall
be recommended by the Plan Commission for approval by the City Council unless
such complies with all of the standards provided in Chapter 156 of the city
code unless a variance is specifically recommended.



   (E)   Overriding authority. Notwithstanding any deviation from the
provisions otherwise set forth in this section, § 159.048, or other
applicable provisions of this Chapter 159 or Chapter 156 of the city code,
the City Council may approve any planned development regardless of type that
will, in the Council’s legislative judgment, promote the public health,
safety, or welfare of the city and its residents.



(Prior Code, § 46-26)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 95-26, passed 8-7-1995; Ord. 2017-08, passed 2-21-2017)



§ 159.048  HISTORIC RESIDENTIAL AND OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The regulations contained herein are adopted pursuant to
the 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1, to ensure and facilitate the preservation of sites,
areas, buildings, structures, landscaping, woods and other natural terrain
features, and the character of surrounding areas which are individually
and/or collectively of special historical, architectural, aesthetic, cultural
and/or ecological significance to the city and its citizens, and are
desirable in order to maintain the value of property within the city and the
distinct urban ambiance that characterizes the city as a unique community in
the United States. Because of the collective significance of the properties
within the district, special use permits, demolition of structures and
subdivisions of land within the district are of special concern to the city
and its citizens, thereby necessitating special standards and procedures for
review and approval. To be eligible for approval under this section, proposed
uses, actions and developments must comply with all provisions of this
section and be compatible with the character of the city ambiance of the
Historic Residential and Open Space Preservation District.



      (2)   It is a further purpose of this section to preserve the
architecturally significant homes and estate properties concentrated in the
city, and rarely found elsewhere in this state or the Midwest, because such
homes and properties comprise an irreplaceable historic resource embodying
high standards of architectural design and craftsmanship that represent a
significant period of residential development, which is important and rare in
American history and whose continued existence is desirable in order to
maintain the distinct urban ambiance that characterizes the city as a unique
community in the United States; provided that such preservation can be
accomplished without any material adverse effect upon the particular property
involved.



      (3)   It is also the purpose of this section to protect those
areas or portions of property identified on the historic residential and open
space preservation map as significant parts of the landscape heritage of the
city, such as wetlands, floodplains, poor soils, woodlands, meadows,
prairies, savannas, environmentally sensitive and/or significant open space,
from increasing development pressures while being sensitive to the rights of
individual property owners to develop their properties in accordance with the
rules and regulations as set forth by city standards. Innovative design and
site planning solutions are encouraged when contemplating development to
achieve the purposes of this section. It is not the primary intent of this
section to allow density transfers, thus preserving large areas of open
space, for properties that would not otherwise be buildable, such as those
areas listed above in this division (A)(3).



   (B)   Designation and definition of the Historic Residential and
Open Space Preservation District and general provisions.



      (1)   A Historic Residential and Open Space Preservation
District is hereby created as a special district which is to function as a
secondary zoning district superimposed on the existing zoning districts
contained in the official map of the city.



      (2)   The Historic Residential and Open Space Preservation
District which may comprise separate and distinct areas shall be labeled on
the district map of the city the Historic Residential and Open Space
Preservation District, as provided in § 159.066. The locations and
boundaries of the district shall be as set forth on said district map, as
amended from time to time by the City Council.



      (3)   The City Council may, from time to time, add to or
delete from the Historic Residential and Open Space Preservation District.



      (4)   In revising the boundaries of the district and in the
Historic Residential and Open Space Preservation District map, the following
criteria shall be considered:



         (a)   The historic, architectural, aesthetic and/or
cultural significance or value of any area, site, building, structure and/or
landscaping, streetscape, road frontage, vistas or terrain feature, either
individually or in relation to each other or to natural or physical
boundaries;



         (b)   The visual, geographic and density relationship of
any such site, building, structure or feature to its surrounding area;



         (c)   The age, history, architectural or historical
style or period, construction, craftsmanship, uniqueness, ecological value,
topographical significance or irreplaceability of any such building,
structure or feature, considered individually or collectively;



         (d)   The designation by governmental bodies of any
area, site, building, structure or feature, having any historic,
architectural, aesthetic, ecological and/or cultural significance or value to
the community;



         (e)   The establishment of naturally definable
boundaries and buffer areas necessary to prevent encroachment of uses,
development or other influences potentially adverse to the preservation
purpose of this section; and



         (f)   Natural features on the site deemed worthy of
preservation in accordance with standards set forth in the environmental plan
and open space plan for the preservation of streams, floodway and floodplain
areas, wetlands, woodlands, savannas, prairie, bluffs and ravines.



      (5)   All property and structures contained within the
Historic Residential and Open Space Preservation District are collectively
significant and are hereby declared to be of a special historic,
architectural, cultural, ecological and/or aesthetic significance to the city
by their very inclusion since each individually contributes to the ambiance
existing within the District which is an irreplaceable resource.



   (C)   Applications requiring special review.



      (1)   Applications. Applications for any of the following
actions within the Historic Residential and Open Space Preservation District
are subject to this division (C) and the division (D) below and the
submission and approval requirements designated:



         (a)   Application for subdivision of any land; or



         (b)   Application for a special use permit as permitted
according to the underlying zoning. Any application for a permit for the
demolition of any structure within the Historic Residential and Open Space
Reservation District is subject to the provisions of § 150.148(E) of this
city code.



      (2)   Special use permit required for subdivision. All
applications for subdivision of land within the District shall be considered
as a special use permit application, pursuant to this code, and be processed
as a planned preservation subdivision in accordance with the rules and
procedures contained in §§ 159.045 and 159.047, provided, however, that:



         (a)   Section 159.045(G)(2) shall not apply to planned
preservation subdivisions considered under this section;



         (b)   No minimum acreage shall be required for a
subdivision to be considered as a planned preservation subdivision;



         (c)   The underlying zoning of the subject property
shall govern the number of lots permitted within any subdivision approved
under this section, provided that the area of any street, road or access
easement, on or across such property, shall be excluded, as in the
conventional subdivision process;



         (d)   The size of lots in such subdivisions shall be
determined based upon the purposes of this section. The lot area on which an
existing structure is to be located may be required to be greater than the
minimum allowed in order to preserve its aesthetic or environmental
relationship to surrounding properties and or to significant accessory
structures, gardens, landscaped areas and natural terrain features of the
property or adjacent structures and property. Similarly, the areas of the
remaining lots may individually be required to be greater or smaller that the
minimum lot size allowed under the existing zoning classification for the
purpose of protecting significant structural, architectural or environmental
features on the property or adjacent properties, provided that no more than
the number of lots calculated in division (C)(2)(c) above, shall be
permitted; and



         (e)   The city may approve a “conventional
subdivision” plan in lieu of a planned preservation subdivision if it finds
that such subdivision more fully and appropriately meets the intent and
purpose of this section.



      (3)   All other special use permits in district. Special use
permits allowed in the underlying zoning shall be processed in accordance
with the rules and procedures contained in § 159.045, in addition to any
requirements and/or criteria in this section which may be more restrictive.



   (D)   Review criteria.



      (1)   Review requirements. Any property within the Historic
Residential and Open Space Preservation District may be subdivided and/or
used for any special use that is permitted under the underlying zoning upon
approval of the City Council, after the review and consideration by the Plan
Commission of the appropriateness of any such subdivision or special use,
based on the criteria established in this section and in other applicable
sections of the city code.



      (2)   Submission documents required. The following information
shall be filed with the Administrative Officer together with any other
documentation requested by the Plan Commission or City Manager unless waived
in whole or in part by the City Manager. The developer shall bear all costs
associated with providing these items:



         (a)   A full statement of reasons and purposes for which
the application is made, a description of the action proposed to be taken and
the manner and timing in which it is to be implemented, if approved;



         (b)   An inventory of features or elements worthy of
preservation on the subject property may be required and, if required, shall
include any features or elements having any historical, architectural,
aesthetic, cultural and/or ecological value such as the main house, formal
gardens, outbuildings, walls, reflecting pools or fountains, wetlands,
floodplains, woodlands and other such similar creatures or elements;



         (c)   An assessment of the subject property by a
qualified specialist(s) demonstrating whether adjoining ecosystems may be
adversely affected. The developer shall provide to the city a detailed
listing of the professional qualifications of all specialists to be used
along with any other information deemed necessary; and



         (d)   All other information required for the review of
conventional development pursuant to applicable city requirements.



      (3)   Determining appropriateness. In considering the
appropriateness of an application under this section, findings must be made,
in addition to the findings required in other applicable sections of the city
code, that the application would not:



         (a)   Adversely affect the subject property and/or any
structure. Adversely affect the residential value, use or character of the
property or structure nor deprive the structure or grounds of size,
configuration and relative proportions necessary to preserve the integrity,
value and character of the structure and to maintain its relationship with
its surroundings;



         (b)   Adversely affect other property or structures. Be
significantly detrimental to the residential value, character or use of any
sites, streets or areas within the Historic Residential and Open Space
Preservation District visually related to or surrounding the site or
structure which is the subject of the special use permit; and/or



         (c)   Materially damage, destroy, change or neglect.



            1.   Materially damage, destroy, change or neglect:



               a.   Those primary elements or features of a
structure which enhance such structure’s residential value, use or
character; or



               b.   Any other significant elements or
features of the property that contribute to the ambiance of the Historic
Residential and Open Space Preservation District.



            2.   If such damage, destruction, change or
neglect was effected in anticipation of said submission, or while said
submission is under review, so as to avoid the requirements of this section,
the application shall be construed by the Plan Commission and the City
Council as proposing such damage, destruction, change or neglect just as
though it had not occurred. Further, the Plan Commission and the City Council
may require repair, renovation, restoration or reconstruction of any damaged,
destroyed or changed matter at the expense of the owner of and/or applicant
for such property, if the city finds that said matter is a material element
of the property in question and is necessary to meet the purpose of this
section.



   (E)   Variations. Under special or unusual circumstances the City
Council may grant variations to this section, or any other city codes, that
are found to be consistent with the purposes of this section and necessary to
meet or fully realize said purposes provided that the underlying density is
maintained and that new structures shall be in accordance with the existing
zoning; provided, that the Construction Codes Commission shall consider any
variances to the construction codes of the city pursuant to Chapter 150 of
the city code.



   (F)   Open space preservation, regulation and maintenance.



      (1)   Any planned preservation subdivision open space shall be
common open space for the enjoyment or benefit of all residents. Each
building site need not abut common open space; however, convenient access
through permanent easement must be provided and perpetually guaranteed to all
building sites not abutting common open space.



      (2)   Common open space areas may be devoted to the following
purposes, provided, however, that all such facilities have been approved by
the City Council as part of a detailed landscape and amenities plan:



         (a)   Natural areas, consisting of existing or restored
native vegetation, such as floodplains, woodlands, wetlands, savannas,
prairies, ravines and bluffs and/or landscape areas, including landscaped
berms;



         (b)   Active or passive recreational facilities or
amenities; and



         (c)   Farming and agricultural uses, such as pastures,
meadows and crop fields, consistent with the permitted uses as set forth by
the underlying zoning district.



      (3)   Common open space shall not be subject to further
subdivision.



      (4)   It is encouraged that property located adjacent to
existing open space, during the design of any development, attempt to align
all proposed open space with existing open space.



      (5)   All or part of a common open space area may be required
to be dedicated to the city and operated as a city recreational or
educational facility, a stormwater detention facility or for other
appropriate public purposes.



      (6)   The required subdivision plat shall contain the
appropriate notations and clauses reflecting dedications, easements,
reservations, regulations and requirements concerning ownership and
responsibility for common space areas and facilities.



      (7)   When property is identified on the Historic Residential
and Open Space Preservation District map as having wetlands, mature
woodlands, significant road frontage or streetscape and/or other similar
features, the use of conservation easement, variations in lot sizes and set
backs above or below the minimums required by the District, may be encouraged
to help achieve the purposes of this section.



   (G)   Miscellaneous. Unless otherwise provided by this section, the
provisions set forth in the Building Code, Zoning Code, the subdivision
regulations and the regulations and policies of the city, shall be fully
applicable.



(Prior Code, § 46-27)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.049  ZONING CERTIFICATES.



   Except as hereinafter provided, no permit pertaining to the use of land
or buildings shall be issued by any officer, department or employee unless
the application for such permit has been examined by the Administrative
Officer and has affixed to it his or her certificate indicating that the
proposed building or structure or use of land complies with all the
provisions of this chapter. Any permit or certificate of occupancy issued in
conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.



(Prior Code, § 46-28)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.050  OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES.



   (A)   Certificates of occupancy.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any
building or premises or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed or
converted wholly or partly in its use or structure, until a certificate of
occupancy, to the effect that the building or premises or the part thereof so
created, erected, changed or converted, and the proposed use thereof, conform
to the provisions of this chapter, shall have been issued by the
Administrative Officer.



      (2)   No change or extension of use and no alterations shall
be made in a nonconforming use of premises without a certificate of occupancy
having first been issued that such change, extension or alteration is in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



      (3)   Copies of such certificates shall be furnished upon
request to any persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the
building affected.



   (B)   Temporary certificate. Pending the issuance of a regular
certificate, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a period
not exceeding six months during the completion of alterations or during
partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Such temporary
certificates shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective
rights, duties or obligations of the owners or of the city relating to the
use or occupation of the premises or any other matter covered by this
chapter, and such temporary certificate shall not be issued except under such
restriction and provisions as will adequately insure the safety of the
occupants.



(Prior Code, § 46-29)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed
1-7-1991)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.051  PLATS.



   (A)   Each application for zoning certificate or for a certificate
of occupancy shall be accompanied by a plat in duplicate, drawn to scale and
in such form as may be prescribed by the Administrative Officer, showing the
actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of the
building or buildings to be erected and such other information as may be
necessary to provide for the enforcement of the regulations contained in this
chapter.



   (B)   A careful record of such applications and plats shall be kept
in the office of the Administrative Officer.



(Prior Code, § 46-30)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.052  FEES.



   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall file an
application for amendment or for an appeal, variation or special use, or for
any other certificate or license required under the terms of this chapter,
shall be charged a fee in accordance with a schedule of fees established by
the City Council in order to defray the approximate cost of such review
procedures.



   (B)   In addition thereto, all applicants for zoning amendments
(text-map), appeals, variations or special uses, shall be required to pay all
costs for publishing legal notices. All such additional expenses shall be
paid to the Administrative Officer before any final action is taken b the
Board of Appeals or Plan Commission and before the Board or Plan Commission
shall transmit a recommendation to the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 46-31)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 159.065  DISTRICTS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the city is hereby organized into the
following zoning districts:



   (A)   Resident districts.



      (1)   R-5 Single-Family Residence District;



      (2)   R-4 Single-Family Residence District;



      (3)   R-3 Single-Family Residence District;



      (4)   R-2 Single-Family Residence District;



      (5)   R-1 Single-Family Residence District;



      (6)   GR-4 General Residence District;



      (7)   GR-3 General Residence District;



      (8)   GR-2 General Residence District;



      (9)   GR-1 General Residence District;



      (10)   ROS Residential Open Space District; and



      (11)   RE Single-Family Residence and Educational District.



   (B)   Business districts.



      (1)   O-1 Office District;



      (2)   OR Office Research District;



      (3)   OR-2 Office Research District;



      (4)   B-1 Neighborhood Business District;



      (5)   B-2 Community Business District;



      (6)   B-3 Preservation Business District; and



      (7)   B-4 Preservation Business District.



   (C)   Open space.   OA Open Area District; and



   (D)   Transitional districts. TD Transitional District



(Prior Code, § 46-33)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 2005-41, passed 10-3-2005)



§ 159.066  MAPS.



   (A)   The boundaries of the districts are shown on the map which is
made a part of this chapter, which map is designated as the “district
map.” The district map and all the notations references and other
information shown thereon are a part of this chapter and have the same force
and effect as if the district map and all the notations, references and other
information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein. The
original of the district map is properly attested and is on file with the
City Clerk.



   (B)   (1)   Any area not included within one of the districts as
shown on the district map is a public street or alley and whenever any
street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City
Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or
public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation
shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the
extended districts.



      (2)   Submerged land which may hereafter be reclaimed unless
otherwise indicated on the district map, shall be deemed to be in the same
district as premises not now submerged to which such submerged lands are
contiguous.



   (C)   Rules where uncertainty may arise: where uncertainty exists
with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the map
accompanying and made a part of this chapter, the following rules apply:



      (1)   The district boundaries are either streets or alleys
unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designed on the district map
are bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall
be construed to be the boundary of the district;



      (2)   Where the district boundaries are not otherwise shown,
and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and
lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and
where the districts designated on the district map are bounded approximately
by lot lines, shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless
the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map;



      (3)   In any unsubdivided property, the district boundary
lines on the district map shall be determined by use of scale appearing on
the map; and



      (4)   The spaces above the surface of streets or alleys are to
be regarded merely as explanatory of the map and shall not be deemed to be a
part of the district to which it is adjacent.



(Prior Code, § 46-34)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 90-35, passed 6-16-1990;
Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991; Ord. 98-53, passed 10-5-1998; Ord. passed
11-5-2001; Ord. 03-16, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 04-14, passed 2-19-2004; Ord.
05-04, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 2006-07, passed 2-23-2006; Ord. 07-06, passed
2-20-2007; Ord. 2016-36, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 159.067  ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND.



   On land hereafter annexed to, or consolidated with the city, no
building or structure shall be erected, enlarge or moved and no change in the
use of land or existing buildings or structures shall be made until an
ordinance designating the zoning district classification of such annexed land
is duly adopted by the City Council. Within 30 days of the annexation, the
Plan Commission shall file an application for an amendment to establish the
zoning district classification of such land. However, if no action is taken
regarding the classification of annexed land within 90 days of the date of
annexation, such land shall acquire the R-5 District classification and shall
remain so zoned until properly reclassified.



(Prior Code, § 46-35)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



RESIDENCE AND GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICTS



§ 159.080  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Permitted uses of land or buildings, as herein listed,
shall be permitted in the districts indicated under the conditions specified.
No building or land shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in
the zoning district in which such building or land is located, with the
following exceptions:



         (a)   Uses lawfully established on or before the
effective date of this chapter (January 15, 1972) or any amendment hereto; and



         (b)   Special uses, allowed in accordance with the
provisions of division (B) below.



      (2)   Uses established on or before the effective date of this
chapter, January 15, 1972, or any amendment hereto and rendered nonconforming
by the provisions hereof, shall be subject to the regulations of §§ 159.025
through 159.027.



   (B)   Regulation of nonresidential uses and activities. The
following nonresidential uses and activities are permitted in the R-1 through
R-5 Single-Family Residence Districts, subject to the regulations and
limitations as follows:



      (1)   Designer showcase display homes. Designer showcase
display home, or other similar events, may be conducted within the city, if
the City Manager determines that the conduct of the event is in full
conformance with the following standards:



         (a)   The petitioner is a not-for-profit entity;



         (b)   The majority of the Board of Directors of the
not-for-profit entity are city residents;



         (c)   The majority of the neighbors in the immediate
area (three deep) of the designer showcase home must indicate by written
statements their approval of the proposed use;



         (d)   The City Manager must receive an application for
the date of the proposed designer showcase home six months prior to the
proposed event and must receive the application for the specific location of
the proposed home no less than three months prior to the event; and



         (e)   Such other conditions as the City Manager may deem
appropriate and reasonable.



      (2)   Residential boutiques and handmade craft sales.



         (a)   Purpose. It is the intent of this chapter to
regulate residential boutique and handmade craft sales in such a way so as to
only permit activity that is deemed to be compatible with the character of a
residential neighborhood.



         (b)   Conduct of sales. Residential boutiques and
handmade craft sales may be conducted only by institutions such as churches,
temples, community centers or other institutional public or private
properties. Such institutions may hold or allow their premises to be used for
sales for the benefit of city not-for-profit organizations; provided, however
that prior to any sale, a permit must be obtained from the Building
Department of the city, in accordance with the provisions of division
(B)(4)(j) below, except that each sale shall be limited to not more than
three consecutive days.



      (3)   Home occupations.



         (a)   Purpose. It is the intent of this chapter to
permit as home occupations all uses that conform to the standards set forth
herein. The standards for home occupations are intended to ensure
compatibility with other permitted uses and with the residential character of
the neighborhood, and to clearly establish such home occupations as secondary
and incidental in relation to the residential use of the property.



         (b)   Performance standards. All home occupations must
be conducted in compliance with the following standards and limitations:



            1.   The primary use of the dwelling unit shall
remain residential;



            2.   The home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to the primary residential use of the dwelling.
The home occupation shall be conducted within the limits of the dwelling
unit, but no more than 30% of the total square footage of the dwelling unit,
not to exceed 600 square feet, shall be used in the conduct of the home
occupation. In calculating the square footage being used in the conduct of
the home occupation, all area of the dwelling unit and accessory buildings
which are in any way used toward the operation or conduct of the home
occupation shall be included. If more than one home occupation is operated in
the residence, the combined total square footage devoted to all such home
occupations shall not exceed 30% of the total square footage, or 600 square
feet, whichever is less. The use of accessory buildings for home occupation
purposes may be approved by the City Manager if he or she finds such use
consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter and in compliance with
applicable performance standards;



            3.   The operator or operators of the home
occupation shall make the dwelling unit within which the home occupation is
conducted his or her legal and primary place of residence;



            4.   No one may participate in or assist with the
conduct or operation of a home occupation except:



               a.   Individuals who meet the same residence
requirements, set forth in division (B)(3)(b)3. above, as must be met by the
operator of the home occupation;



               b.   A nonresident assistant, subject to the
following requirements and limitations:



                  i.   Participation by the nonresident
assistant shall be in a subordinate capacity only, incidental to the conduct
of the home occupation as for example, the services of a nurse, receptionist
or clerical assistant in the home occupation of a physician;



                  ii.   The nonresident assistant shall
not participate, totally or partially, in the capacity as an additional
operator of the home occupation, as an additional practitioner of the
professional, craft or occupational service of the operator, or as a partner
or professional associate thereof;



                  iii.   Participation by the
nonresident assistant shall be limited to 45 hours per week. More than one
person may be used as a nonresident assistant provided that no more than one
is on the premises at any time and further provided that the total hours of
all such nonresident assistants do not exceed 45 hours as permitted herein;
and



                  iv.   If more than one home occupation
is conducted in the same dwelling unit, nonresident assistants may be used in
all such home occupations, provided that no more than one is on the premises
at any time and further provided that the total hours of all such nonresident
assistants do not exceed the 45 hours as permitted herein.



            5.   There shall be no change in the outside
appearance of the building or premises or other visible evidence of the
conduct of such home occupation;



            6.   Alterations shall not be made to the interior
of the dwelling which would render it undesirable for residential use;



            7.   Additions, enlargements or exterior
alterations that change the residential appearance of the dwelling or lot
shall not be permitted. Any proposed exterior changes shall be subject to
Building Review Board approval;



            8.   No additional or separate exterior entrance
that will cause a net increase in the number of entrances shall be
constructed for the purpose of conducting the home occupation;



            9.   Limited amounts of goods, commodities or
stock in trade shall be received, retained, used or stored on or physically
transferred from the premises;



            10.   Except as provided in (B)(3)(b)13. below, no
more than four individual clients, customers, patrons or service or delivery
men may occupy the premises simultaneously. No vehicular traffic
substantially greater than normal in the adjacent residential area is
permitted;



            11.   The use of electrical or mechanical
equipment that would change the fire rating of the structure, create visible
or audible interference in radio and television receivers or cause
fluctuations in line voltage outside the dwelling units prohibited;



            12.   No permitted home occupation(s) shall
interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent residential
properties;



            13.   No permitted home occupation shall be
allowed at any time to offer any goods for retail sale to the general public
from the location of the home occupation except as provided for in
(B)(3)(b)10. above, or except as follows:



               a.   No more than one private sale may be
conducted at each home occupation location in any calendar year and may
continue for a period not to exceed four days, provided, however, that such
four-day period may run consecutively or may be broken into lesser
increments, but in no event shall the total exceed four days in any calendar
year;



               b.   Notification of the sale shall be by
personally addressed, private invitation. Sales shall not be offered to the
general public. The use of general media advertising or by general
distribution of sales information is prohibited;



               c.   i.   Grandfather clause: all home
occupations within the city shall conform to the standards set forth herein,
except that those home occupations in existence on the effective date of this
division (B)(3) that do not meet the criteria herein and meeting the
following criteria may continue in operation for up to five years after the
adoption of this division (B)(3), at which time they shall be terminated:



                     A.   The home occupation is
located in R-1 through R-5 zoning districts;



                     B.   The home occupation has
been in operation for a continuous period since July 1, 1972; and/or



                     C.   The operator of the home
occupation must provide the city with documentation of its operations dating
back to July 1, 1972.



               ii.   Home occupations which do not meet the
performance standards or the foregoing criteria shall be terminated not less
than 60 days after passage and publication of this chapter.



      (4)   Garage sales and house sales; performance standards. All
garage sales and house sales shall be conducted in compliance with the
following standards and limitations:



         (a)   No more than one sale may be conducted during a
calendar year at any one residence;



         (b)   Not more than three households may conduct a sale
at any one residence. When members of more than one residence join in holding
a sale, the sale shall be considered to have been held at the residence of
each participating member;



         (c)   Each sale shall be limited to not more than two
consecutive days;



         (d)   The hours of operation shall be limited from 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m.;



         (e)   No items for sale may be displayed in a required
yard, as defined in § 159.002, nor shall any items for sale be displayed on
the lawn area between the house and a public or private street;



         (f)   1.   Signs: one sign, not to exceed four square
feet in area, may be located on the property where the sale is to take place.
In addition, not more than three off-premises directional ground signs may be
placed in the public parkway at local intersections, provided the signs:



               a.   Are made of an all-weather material and
secured to the ground;



               b.   Contain only the wording necessary to
describe the sale (i.e., garage sale, house sale), the address where the sale
is to be conducted and an arrow;



               c.   Are white with red lettering; and



               d.   Are not more than four square feet in
size and four feet in height.



            2.   Such signs may only be displayed during the
hours of the sale. No signs may be attached to any street poles, trees, fire
hydrants, sign poles, light poles or similar structures.



         (g)   Publicity in advance of permitted sales shall be
limited to the local press and shall be only such publicity as is the minimum
reasonable amount necessary to notify the local public or local desired
clientele of the specifics regarding the sale;



         (h)   The City Manager or his or her designate shall
have sole discretion to determine whether the advance publicity printed in
conjunction with the sale is in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance;



         (i)   In addition to the conditions specifically noted
herein, the City Manager may require any other conditions necessary to
properly regulate the proposed sale to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the area; and



         (j)   Approval procedure.



            1.   A person proposing to conduct a sale, as
defined herein, shall submit an application for such sale not less than 48
hours prior to the proposed sale. There is no fee for obtaining a permit for
the conduct of a sale. The applicant(s) shall certify that they will abide by
the rules and regulations set forth above, and by all other applicable rules
and regulations of the city and any special conditions as may be required in
accordance with (B)(4)(i) above. The applicant shall provide names and
addresses of all persons and/or households who are to participate in said
sale. The application shall be on file in the office of the Administrative
Officer, and he or she shall review all such requests and approve conforming
sales. A placard will be issued by the Building Department and shall be
displayed at the site of the sale so as to be visible from the street.



            2.   The Administrative Officer shall issue a stop
order for sales which do not meet the performance standards or foregoing
criteria. When a stop order is issued, such sales shall cease immediately.



   (C)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in each district as
provided in § 159.045.



   (D)   Lot size requirements. Lot size requirements shall be as
herein specified for each zoning district.



   (E)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   Yard requirements shall be as set forth under each
zoning district. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance
with these regulations and shall be unobstructed from the ground level to the
sky, except as allowed in § 159.010(D).



      (2)   All accessory buildings which are attached to principal
buildings (e.g., attached garages) shall comply with the yard requirements of
the principal building.



   (F)   Height requirements. The requirements established under each
zoning district in this subchapter shall determine the maximum building
height allowable within each district.



   (G)   Signs. Signs regulated as provided in Chapter 153 of the city
code.



   (H)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking accessory to uses
allowed in single-family residence and general residence districts shall be
provided as required in §§ 159.130 through 159.139.



   (I)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading accessory to uses
allowed in single-family residence and general residence districts shall be
provided as required in §§ 159.130 through 159.139.



   (J)   Inclusionary housing. In addition to the requirements of this
section and the respective district requirements, certain developments shall
be subject to the inclusionary housing requirements of Chapter 158 of the
city code, which requirements shall be satisfied in addition the provisions
of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 46-36)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 159.081  R-5 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-5
District:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by
municipal agencies;



      (3)   Farms, providing that no building in which farm animals
and poultry are housed shall be located within 200 feet of any lot in any
“R” District;



      (4)   Stables and kennels, provided that no such stables or
kennels shall be within 200 feet of any lot in an “R” District, and
provided further that such stables or kennels shall not be operated and
maintained as a part of or in connection with a veterinary or animal hospital;



      (5)   Truck and flower gardens and nurseries, provided,
however, that the products shall not be sold at retail on the premises and no
building shall be erected upon the premises other than a dwelling and the
usual accessory buildings; and



      (6)   Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the
same zoning lot as a principal use.



      (7)   SECONDARY LIVING UNITS (defined as an accessory
residence located on the same lot as, and under the same ownership as the
principal single-family residence on such lot, including, but not limited to,
accessory suites, in-law suites, granny flats,  coach houses, garage
apartments, and cottages) are permitted subject to the following conditions
and performance standards:



         (a)   The principal residence is owner occupied.



         (b)   The accessory structure within which the secondary
living unit is located (the “accessory structure”) predates the date of
adoption of this code provision, November 17, 2014.



         (c)   Each secondary living unit meets the minimum
health and life safety requirements of the building codes adopted by the city.



         (d)   No more than two secondary living units are
permitted on a lot.



         (e)   A site plan is filed with the Director of
Community Development or the Director’s designee, demonstrating that
adequate on site parking, on a hard surface consistent with the requirements
of § 95.146 is provided for the occupants of each secondary living unit.



         (f)   Secondary living units must be accessible by way
of a driveway located on the property on which the accessory structure is
located unless an access easement across a neighboring property specifically
provides for access to the accessory structure and recognizes its use as a
secondary living unit.



         (g)   The accessory structure is a minimum distance of
20 feet from all property lines. A variance from the 20-foot setback
requirement may be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals with
consideration given to the proximity of neighboring structures and the
adequacy of landscape screening and the standard variance criteria in the
code.



         (h)   The lot owner registers the secondary living unit,
on a form provided by the city, with the Director of Community Development,
or the Director’s designee, on an annual basis.



         (i)   No secondary living unit shall have more than two
people unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption residing within that
secondary living unit at any given time.



         (j)   A nonconforming secondary living unit as of
November 17, 2014 shall be recognized as a conforming use regardless of the
setback distance from the property lines so long as the property owner
registers the unit with the city, on a form provided by the city, as required
by this division (A)(7) within one year of the date of adoption of these
provisions. Documentation of past use of the structure as a secondary living
unit is required.



   (B)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in R-5 Districts as
provided in § 159.045.



   (C)   Lot size requirements.



 




 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width



Farms
 

10 acres

 

500 ft.



Single-family detached dwellings
 

130,000 sq. ft.

 

250 ft.



Stables and kennels
 

10 acres

 

500 ft.



Truck and flower gardens and nurseries
 

5 acres

 

300 ft.




 



   (D)   Requirements. (Setbacks are given in linear feet.)



      (1)   Permitted uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard





Farm; permanent structures, excluding single-family detached dwellings and
fences
 

200

 

200*

 

200

 

200*



Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by municipal agencies;
permanent structures
 

50**

 

50**

 

50**

 

50**



Single-family detached dwellings
 

50

 

50

 

50

 

50



Stables and kennels
 

200

 

200*

 

200

 

200*



Truck or flower gardens and nurseries; permanent structures
 

100**

 

100**

 

100**

 

100**



*   When structures housing horses, dogs, poultry or farm animals are
established, otherwise 50 feet


**   If no structures are established, no yard requirements




 



      (2)   Accessory uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Buildings, accessory
 

50

 

50*

 

50

 

10



*   Unless an entire structure is located on the rear 25% of the lot; in
which case only 10 feet shall be required



 



   (E)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall be governed by § 150.148(B)(3) of the
Building Code and the maximum height of all accessory buildings and
structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



(Prior Code, § 46-37)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 92-14, passed 4-16-1992; Ord. 2014-43, passed 11-17-2014)



§ 159.082  R-4 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-4
District:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by
municipal agencies;



      (3)   Farms, providing that no building in which farm animals
and poultry are housed shall be within 200 feet of any lot in any “R”
District;



      (4)   Stables and kennels, provided that no such stables or
kennels shall be within 200 feet of any lot in an “R” District, and
provided further that such stables or kennels shall not be operated or
maintained as a part of or in connection with a veterinary or animal hospital;



      (5)   Truck and flower gardens and nurseries, provided,
however, that the products shall not be sold at retail on the premises and no
building shall be erected upon the premises other than a dwelling and the
usual accessory buildings; and



      (6)   Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the
same zoning lot as a principal use; and



      (7)   SECONDARY LIVING UNITS (defined as an accessory
residence located on the same lot as, and under the same ownership as the
principal single-family residence on such lot, including, but not limited to,
accessory suites, in-law suites, granny flats,  coach houses, garage
apartments, and cottages) are permitted subject to the following conditions
and performance standards:



         (a)   The principal residence is owner occupied.



         (b)   The accessory structure within which the secondary
living unit is located (the “accessory structure”) predates the date of
adoption of this code provision, November 17, 2014.



         (c)   Each secondary living unit meets the minimum
health and life safety requirements of the building codes adopted by the city.



         (d)   No more than two secondary living units are
permitted on a lot.



         (e)   A site plan is filed with the Director of
Community Development or the Director’s designee, demonstrating that
adequate on site parking, on a hard surface consistent with the requirements
of § 95.146 is provided for the occupants of each secondary living unit.



         (f)   Secondary living units must be accessible by way
of a driveway located on the property on which the accessory structure is
located unless an access easement across a neighboring property specifically
provides for access to the accessory structure and recognizes its use as a
secondary living unit.



         (g)   The accessory structure is a minimum distance of
20 feet from all property lines. A variance from the 20-foot setback
requirement may be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals with
consideration given to the proximity of neighboring structures and the
adequacy of landscape screening and the standard variance criteria in the
code.



         (h)   The lot owner registers the secondary living unit,
on a form provided by the city, with the Director of Community Development,
or the Director’s designee, on an annual basis.



         (i)   No secondary living unit shall have more than two
people unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption residing within that
secondary living unit at any given time.



         (j)   A nonconforming secondary living unit as of
November 17, 2014 shall be recognized as a conforming use regardless of the
setback distance from the property lines so long as the property owner
registers the unit with the city, on a form provided by the city, as required
by this division (A)(7) within one year of the date of adoption of these
provisions. Documentation of past use of the structure as a secondary living
unit is required.



   (B)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the R-4 District
as provided in § 159.045.



   (C)   Lot size requirements.



 




 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width



Farms
 

10 acres

 

500 ft.



Single-family detached dwellings
 

60,000 sq. ft.

 

150 ft.



Stables and kennels
 

10 acres

 

500 ft.



Truck and flower gardens and nurseries
 

5 acres

 

300 ft.




 



   (D)   Requirements. (Setbacks are given in linear feet.)



      (1)   Permitted uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard





Farm; permanent structures, excluding single-family detached dwellings and
fences
 

200

 

200*

 

200

 

200*



Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by municipal agencies;
permanent structures
 

50**

 

50**

 

50**

 

50**



Single-family detached dwellings
 

50

 

20

 

50

 

50



Stables and kennels
 

200

 

200*

 

200

 

200*



Truck or flower gardens and nurseries; permanent structures
 

100**

 

100**

 

100**

 

100*



*   When structures housing horses, dogs, poultry or farm animals are
established, otherwise 50 feet


**   If no structures are established, no yard requirements




 



      (2)   Accessory uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Buildings, accessory
 

50

 

20*

 

20

 

10



*   Unless an entire structure is located on the rear 25% of the lot; in
which case only 10 feet shall be required



 



   (E)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall be governed by § 150.148 and the maximum
height of all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



(Prior Code, § 46-38)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 92-14, passed 4-16-1992; Ord. 2014-43, passed 11-17-2014)



§ 159.083  R-3 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-3
District:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by
municipal agencies;



      (3)   Truck and flower gardens and nurseries, provided,
however, that the products shall not be sold at retail on the premises and no
building shall be erected upon the premises other than a dwelling and the
usual accessory buildings; and



      (4)   Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the
same zoning lot as the principal use.



   (B)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the R-3 District
as provided in § 159.045.



   (C)   Lot size requirements.



 




 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width



Single-family detached dwellings
 

40,000 sq. ft.

 

125 ft.



Truck and flower gardens and nurseries
 

5 acres

 

300 ft.




 



   (D)   Requirements. (Setbacks are given in linear feet.)



      (1)   Permitted uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Single-family detached dwellings
 

40

 

15

 

40

 

40



Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by municipal
agencies—perman ent structures
 

50*

 

50*

 

50*

 

50*



Truck or flower gardens and nurseries - permanent structures
 

100*

 

100*

 

100*

 

100*



*   If no structures are established, no yard requirements



 



      (2)   Accessory uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Buildings, accessory
 

40

 

15*

 

30

 

10



*   Unless an entire structure is located on the rear 25% of the lot; in
which case only ten feet shall be required



 



   (E)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall be governed by § 150.148 and the maximum
height of all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



(Prior Code, § 46-39)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 92-14, passed 4-16-1992)



§ 159.084  R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-2
District:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by
municipal agencies;



      (3)   Truck and flower gardens and nurseries, provided,
however, that the products shall not be sold at retail on the premises and no
building shall be erected upon the premises other than a dwelling and the
usual accessory buildings; and



      (4)   Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the
same zoning lot as the principal use.



   (B)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the R-2 District
as provided in § 159.045.



   (C)   Lot size requirements.



 




 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width



Single-family detached dwellings
 

20,000 sq. ft.

 

100 ft.



Truck and flower gardens and nurseries
 

5 acres

 

300 ft.




 



   (D)   Requirements. (Setbacks are given in linear feet.)



      (1)   Permitted uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by municipal agencies;
permanent structures
 

40*

 

20*

 

20*

 

40*



Single-family detached dwellings
 

40

 

12

 

40

 

35



Truck or flower gardens and nurseries; permanent structures
 

100*

 

100*

 

100*

 

100*



*   If no structures are established, no yard requirements



 



      (2)   Accessory uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Buildings, accessory
 

40

 

12*

 

30

 

10



*   Unless an entire structure is located on the rear 25% of the lot; in
which case only ten feet shall be required.



 



   (E)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall be governed by § 150.148 and the maximum
height of all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



(Prior Code, § 46-40)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 92-14, passed 4-16-1992)



§ 159.085  R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-1
District:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by
municipal agencies;



      (3)   Truck and flower gardens and nurseries, provided,
however, that the products shall not be sold at retail on the premises and no
building shall be erected upon the premises other than a dwelling and the
usual accessory buildings; and



      (4)   Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the
same zoning lot as the principal use.



   (B)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the R-1 District
as provided in § 159.045.



   (C)   Lot size requirements.



 




 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width



Single-family detached dwellings
 

9,375 sq. ft.

 

75 ft.



Truck and flower gardens and nurseries
 

5 acres

 

300 ft.




 



   (D)   Requirements. (Setbacks are given in linear feet.)



      (1)   Permitted uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by municipal agencies,
permanent structures
 

40*

 

20*

 

30*

 

40*



Single-family detached dwellings
 

40

 

10

 

40

 

35



Truck or flower gardens and nurseries, permanent structures
 

100*

 

100*

 

100*

 

100*



*   If no structures are established, no yard requirements.



 



      (2)   Accessory uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Buildings, accessory
 

40

 

5

 

30

 

5




 



   (E)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall be governed by § 150.148 and the maximum
height of all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



(Prior Code, § 46-41)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 92-14, passed 4-16-1992)



§ 159.086  GR-4 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The GR-4 General Residence District is a low density
residence district primarily intended to be used to create transitional land
use areas between business districts and surrounding single-family
residences; and for providing a zoning and land use alternative for parcels
or tracts of land in the community that, because of location and other
physical characteristics, and based on sound land planning principles, would
best be developed as single-family attached residences.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the GR-4
General Residence District:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Single-family attached dwellings. There shall be no more
than six attached dwelling units in any one structure, with no more than two
continuous, attached dwellings located on the same building line. The minimum
required jug in the building line shall be two feet. Each such single-family
attached dwelling shall have its own separate front and rear entrance and
have no floor area of an adjacent dwelling located above it;



      (3)   Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by
municipal agencies; and



      (4)   Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the
same zoning lot as a principal use. Recreational facilities, such as tennis
courts, swimming pools, club houses and other similar facilities, intended
for use by the occupants of the development, shall be permitted accessory
uses and/or buildings in a single-family attached dwelling development.



   (C)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the GR-4 General
Residence District as provided in § 159.045.



   (D)   Density. The gross density shall be not more than four
dwelling units per acre for all GR-4(a) zoned properties, and six dwelling
units per acre for all GR-4(b) zoned properties. Such densities shall be
calculated by dividing the gross land area (in square feet) of subject
property (excluding all exterior abutting public and private streets, public
access ways, access easements and rights-of-way regardless of any property
right the petitioner and/or owner may have to such property) by 10,890 for
all GR-4(a) zoned properties and 7,260 for all GR-4(b) zoned properties. If
the calculation results in a fraction, the permitted number of dwelling units
shall be the same as the lower whole number.



   (E)   Lot size requirements.



 




 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width



Single-family detached dwellings
 

20,000 sq. ft.

 

100 ft.



Truck and flower gardens and nurseries
 

–*

 

–*



*   There are no minimum lot area or width requirements for platting or
development purposes, provided however that the density shall not exceed the
maximums set forth in division (D) above



 



   (F)   Requirements. (Setbacks are given in linear feet.)



      (1)   External relationships. (Setbacks from perimeter
property line).



         (a)   Permitted uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Single-family attached dwellings
 

40

 

40

 

40

 

40



Single-family detached dwellings
 

40

 

12

 

40

 

40



All other permitted uses
 

40

 

20

 

40

 

40




 



         (b)   Accessory uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Buildings, accessory
 

40

 

10

 

40

 

10




 



      (2)   Internal relationships.



         (a)   A minimum setback of 20 feet (eaves to eaves)
shall be provided between all structures.



         (b)   Rear primary walls of structures shall have a
minimum setback of 100 feet to the nearest rear primary wall of another
structure, unless the line of sight between buildings is broken by
landscaping, building orientation and the like.



         (c)   Primary walls of structures shall have a minimum
setback of 20 feet to the edge of pavement from the nearest street, if
private, and from the right-of-way line, if dedicated.



   (G)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall be governed by § 150.148 and the maximum
height of all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



   (H)   Land coverage.



      (1)   No more than 25% of the land area shall be covered with
buildings.



      (2)   Not more than 50% of the land area shall be covered with
impervious surfaces. The remaining 50% of the property shall be preserved in
open space and appropriately landscaped.



   (I)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of § 159.136 of this chapter.



   (J)   Engineering standards.



      (1)   All main and/or through streets, sanitary sewers,
drainage and water distribution systems shall be built to the standards of
the city and dedicated to the city, unless otherwise approved.



      (2)   The plans and specifications for all public and private
roadway and utility improvements must be reviewed and approved by the City
Engineer, prior to any work on the site.



      (3)   Financial guarantees insuring proper installation of all
public and private roadway and utility improvements shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer and City Attorney prior to any work beginning
on the site.



   (K)   Design standards. The following standards shall be considered
in reviewing all site and building plans. These standards are intended to
provide a frame of reference for the applicant in the development of site and
building plans as well as to provide a method of review for the city.



      (1)   Topography. The topography shall be preserved wherever
possible in its natural state by minimizing grade changes and alterations.
The elevation of building sites and street locations should conform to
existing and contours, to the extent possible.



      (2)   Street layout.



         (a)   The streets shall be curved wherever possible to
provide a gentle curvilinear street pattern. The streets shall be located
wherever possible to preserve the natural elements of the site, as well as
those of surrounding properties. Further, the number of new intersections
with existing and/or proposed major or secondary arterials and/or
collector/distributor streets shall be kept to a minimum.



         (b)   The use of cul-de-sacs to provide access to the
residences is encouraged so as to provide better privacy for the units, more
variety in site planning and better views, oriented away from neighbors’
yards and units.



      (3)   Preservation of landscape. The landscape shall be
preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree
and soil removal, so that the resulting development will be in keeping with
the general appearance of neighboring developed areas and will not adversely
affect the ecology of the area. Wherever the natural landscape is not
preserved or no vegetation existed, mature landscape materials, emphasizing
the use of evergreens, shall be installed in accordance with a plan approved
by the Director of Parks, Forestry and Public Works.



      (4)   Relation of proposed building to environment and
existing development. Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to
the terrain and to existing structures that have visual relationship to the
proposed structures. Development shall be in harmony with the prevailing
development of the city, the existing development of the area and the
Comprehensive Plan.



      (5)   Utility services. Electric and telephone lines shall be
underground. Any utility installations remaining above ground shall be
located so as to have harmonious relation to neighboring properties and the
site.



      (6)   Parking areas. Garage units, preferably attached, shall
be provided for each residence. However, the garages shall be located and
varied so as to not have a row of garage doors facing the access street or
driveway. Visitors parking shall be provided in small groupings and be well
landscaped so as to fit into the area and to minimize the parking lot look.



      (7)   Site planning. The site planning shall provide, wherever
possible, separate front entryways, attached garages and variety in building
lines and heights.



(Prior Code, § 46-42)  (Ord. 1453, passed 1-7-1985; Ord. eff. 1-15-1972;
Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991; Ord. 92-14, passed 4-16-1992)



§ 159.087  GR-3 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The GR-3 District is a two-family residence district
used for the purpose of maintaining the character of those areas of the
community traditionally zoned for two-family dwellings, partially developed
by such uses, and in the best interests of the community, desirably
maintained for one-and two-family dwelling use.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the GR-3
District:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwelling;



      (2)   Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by
municipal agencies;



      (3)   Two-family dwellings;



      (4)   Truck and flower gardens and nurseries, provided, on the
premises and no building shall be erected upon the premises other than a
dwelling and the usual accessory buildings; and



      (5)   Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the
same zoning lot as a principal use.



   (C)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the GR-3 District
as provided in § 159.045.



   (D)   Lot size requirements.



 




 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width



Single-family detached dwellings
 

6,250 sq. ft.

 

50 ft.



Two-family detached dwellings
 

6,250 sq. ft. per dwelling

 

50 ft.




 



   (E)   Yard requirements. (Yard requirements are given in linear
feet.)



      (1)   Permitted uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Single-family attached dwellings
 

40

 

6

 

12

 

35



Single-family detached dwellings
 

40

 

6

 

12

 

30



All other permitted uses
 

40

 

6

 

12

 

35




 



      (2)   Accessory uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Buildings, accessory
 

40

 

6

 

12

 

10




 



   (F)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall be governed by § 150.148 and the maximum
height of all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



(Prior Code, § 46-43)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 92-14, passed 4-16-1992)



§ 159.088  GR-2 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The GR-2 District is a moderate density
multiple-family residence district to be used for the purpose of creating
transitional residence areas between business and commercial uses and
surrounding single-family residences; and providing an incentive for the
gradual redevelopment of older areas of the community presently restricted to
two-family residence development.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the GR-2
District:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by
municipal agencies;



      (3)   Two-family detached dwellings;



      (4)   Multiple-family dwellings, but only on zoning lots of
20,000 square feet or more;



      (5)   Truck and flower gardens and nurseries, provided,
however, that the products shall not be sold at retail on the premises and no
building shall be erected upon the premises other than a dwelling and the
usual accessory buildings; and



      (6)   Accessory uses and buildings incidental t and on the
same zoning lot as a principal use.



   (C)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the GR-2 District
as provided in § 159.045.



   (D)   Lot size requirements.



 




 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width



Multiple-family dwellings
 

3,125 sq. ft. per dwelling

 

100 ft.



Single-family detached dwellings
 

6,250 sq. ft.

 

50 ft.



Two-family detached dwellings
 

6,250 sq. ft. per dwelling

 

50 ft.




 



   (E)   Yard requirements. (Yard requirements are given in linear
feet.)



      (1)   Permitted uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Multiple-family dwellings
 

40

 

20 (2-story)

 

15

 

35




30 (3-story)



Single-family detached dwellings
 

40

 

6

 

12

 

30



Two-family attached dwellings
 

40

 

6

 

12

 

35



All other permitted uses
 

40

 

10

 

15

 

35




 



      (2)   Accessory uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Buildings, accessory
 

40

 

6

 

12

 

10




 



   (F)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall be governed by § 150.148 and the maximum
height of al accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



(Prior Code, § 46-44)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 92-14, passed 4-16-1992)



§ 159.089  GR-1 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The GR-1 District is a moderate density
multiple-family residence district to be used primarily for the purpose of
creating transitional residence areas between the business and commercial
uses of the Central Business District and the surrounding single-family and
lower density multiple-family residence areas; and providing a zoning and
land use alternative for areas of the community presently zoned for office,
business or service use but which in the interests of the general community
and sound community planning would more desirably and appropriately be
developed for residence purposes.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the GR-1
District:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by
municipal agencies;



      (3)   Two-family detached dwellings;



      (4)   Multiple-family dwellings;



      (5)   Truck and flower gardens and nurseries, provided,
however, that the products shall not be sold at retail on the premises and no
building shall be erected upon the premises other than a dwelling and the
usual accessory buildings; and



      (6)   Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the
same zoning lot as a principal use.



   (B)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the GR-1 District
as provided in § 159.045.



   (C)   Lot size requirements.



 




 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width



Multiple-family dwellings
 

2,000 sq. ft. per dwelling unit

 

50 ft.



Single-family detached dwellings
 

6,250 sq. ft.

 

50 ft.



Two-family detached dwellings
 

6,250 sq. ft. per dwelling

 

50 ft.




 



   (D)   Yard requirements. (Yard requirements are given in linear
feet.)



      (1)   Permitted uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Single-family detached dwellings
 

40

 

6

 

12

 

35



All other permitted uses
 

40

 

10

 

15

 

35




 



      (2)   Accessory uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Buildings, accessory
 

40

 

6

 

12

 

10




 



   (E)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall be governed by § 150.148 and the maximum
height of all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



(Prior Code, § 46-45)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 92-14, passed 4-16-1992)



§ 159.090  OA OPEN AREA DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The new zoning classification would be placed on
those parcels of land, identified as OA on the district map of the city
Zoning Code, whose character has already been established as open in nature
through private conservation easements, deed restrictions and plat covenants
and the like. The OA classification would be assigned to those parcels of
land that are owned and/or managed by any of the following:



      (1)   City;



      (2)   Lake Forest Open Lands Association;



      (3)   Lake County Forest Preserve; and



      (4)   Homeowner’s associations.



   (B)   General. No building or structure shall be used or erected,
enlarged or structurally altered on any parcel designated as OA, except as
specifically provided in this section.



   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the OA
Open Area District:



      (1)   Private parks and open space;



      (2)   Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by
municipal agencies;



      (3)   Golf courses and related buildings and facilities;



      (4)   Farms, providing that no building in winch farm animals
or poultry are housed shall be located within 200 feet of any lot in any
“R” District;



      (5)   Stables and kennels, provided that no such stables or
kennels shall be within 200 feet of any lot in an “R” District, and
further provided that such stables or kennels shall not be operated and
maintained as a part of, or in connection with, a veterinary or animal
hospital;



      (6)   Stormwater detention and retention facilities;



      (7)   Conservation areas, including wetlands, floodplains,
woodlands and similar areas;



      (8)   Hiking and horseback riding paths and trails; and



      (9)   Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the
same lot as a principal use or structure.



   (D)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the OA Open Area
District as provided in § 159.045.



   (E)   Parcel size requirements. No minimum requirement.



   (F)   Lot size requirements. No minimum requirement.



   (G)   Minimum yard requirements; permitted uses. (Setbacks are given
in linear feet.)



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



All structures intended to house farm animals
 

200

 

200

 

200

 

200



All other structures
 

50

 

50

 

50

 

50




 



   (H)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all buildings and
structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



(Prior Code, § 46-45A)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 94-39, passed 9-15-1994)



§ 159.091  ROS RESIDENTIAL OPEN SPACE.



   (A)   Purpose. The ROS Single-Family Residence and Open Space
District is to be used for the purpose of creating single-family residential
areas of varying types at overall low densities for the purpose of preserving
significant quantities of open space and allowing flexibility of residential
design.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the ROS
Single-Family Residence and Open Space District:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Attached dwellings, provided that such dwellings are of
superior design with the purpose of maximizing open space;



      (3)   Private parks and open space uses;



      (4)   Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by
municipal agencies;



      (5)   Golf course and related facilities and buildings;



      (6)   Farms, providing that no building in which farm animals
or poultry are housed shall be located within 200 feet of any lot in any
“R” District;



      (7)   Stables and kennels, provided that no such stables or
kennels shall be within 200 feet of any lot in a “R” District, and
provided further that such stables or kennels shall not be operated and
maintained as a part of, or in connection with, a veterinary or animal
hospital;



      (8)   Truck and flower gardens and nurseries, provided,
however that the products shall not be sold at retail on the premises and no
building shall be erected upon the premises other than a dwelling and the
usual accessory buildings;



      (9)   Railroad passenger commuter station and related parking
facilities;



      (10)   Detention and retention facilities;



      (11)   Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the
same zoning lot as a principal use; and



      (12)   In that portion of the ROS Single-Family Residence and
Open Space District located within 1,200 feet of the Illinois Route 60
right-of-way line, multiple-family dwellings are permitted, provided that:



         (a)   The dwelling units within any such multiple-family
dwelling are divided to allow the separate ownership under Illinois
Condominium Property Act, 765 ILCS 605 et seq.;



         (b)   No building in such portion of the ROS District
shall exceed 45 feet in height (excluding elevator, mechanical and utility
components, and notwithstanding any other height limitations in the ROS
District); and



         (c)   The multiple-family dwellings shall, in addition
to adhering to the design standards set forth in division (K) below, be of
superior architectural design and situated on its site to maximize open space.



   (C)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the ROS
Single-Family Residence and Open Space District as provided in § 159.045.



   (D)   Minimum parcel size. The minimum parcel size required to be
developed in the ROS Single-Family Residence and Open Space District is 300
acres.



   (E)   Minimum open space. The minimum open space required to be
preserved as permanent open space is 100 acres.



   (F)   Lot size requirements.



 




 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Minimum Lot Width





Attached dwellings
 

No minimum requirement



Detention and retention facilities
 

No minimum requirement



Farms
 

10 acres

 

500 ft.



Railroad commuter station
 

No minimum requirement



Single-family detached dwellings
 

No minimum requirement



Stables and kennels
 

10 acres

 

500 ft.



Truck and flower gardens and nurseries
 

5 acres

 

300 ft.





 



   (G)   Minimum yard requirements. (Given in linear feet.)



      (1)   Permitted uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard





Attached dwellings
 

25

 

No minimum requirement

 

10



Detention and retention
 

No yard requirements



Farm; permanent structures, excluding single-family detached dwellings and
fences
 

200

 

200***

 

200

 

200***



Parks, playgrounds and community buildings; permanent structures
 

50**

 

50**

 

50**

 

50**



Railroad commuter station
 

50

 

25

 

50

 

50



Single-family detached dwellings
 

25

 

5

 

25

 

10*



Stables and kennels
 

200

 

200***

 

200

 

200***



Truck or flower gardens and nurseries; permanent structures
 

100**

 

100**

 

100**

 

100**



*   Except on those lots abutting existing residential property


**   If no structures are established, no yard requirements


***   When structures housing horses, dogs, poultry or farm animals are
established, otherwise 50 feet




 



      (2)   Accessory uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Buildings, accessory
 

Not permitted

 

5

 

10

 

10




 



   (H)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall be governed by § 150.148 and the maximum
height of all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



   (I)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of § 159.136.



   (J)   Open space.



      (1)   Open space areas may be devoted to the following
purposes:



         (a)   Natural areas, such as floodplains, woodlands,
wetlands, ravines and bluffs and/or landscaped areas including landscaped
berms, trails and pathways;



         (b)   Recreational facilities or amenities; and



         (c)   Stormwater detention facilities.



      (2)   No open space land shall be utilized for future
residential building sites.



      (3)   The required subdivision plat shall contain the
appropriate notations and clauses reflecting dedications, easements,
reservation, regulations and requirements concerning ownership and
responsibility for common space areas and facilities.



      (4)   With respect to open space which is to be reserved for
use solely by resident property owners, the developer shall prepare and file
the following with the City Council and Plan Commission as companion
documents with the proposed residential areas:



         (a)   Proposed articles of incorporation of a
homeowner’s association or some comparable type of organization
establishing equal common ownership of and criteria for maintenance of all
common open space;



         (b)   Proposed declaration of covenants and restrictions
governing:



            1.   Property rights in the common properties;



            2.   Declaration of lands subject to such
covenants, including provisions for expansion where expansion is possible;



            3.   Voting rights of property owners;



            4.   Requirements pertaining to mandatory
membership in the homeowner’s association and criteria for assessing and
collecting maintenance fees;



            5.   Exterior maintenance requirements, if any;



            6.   Architectural control committee functions,
powers, duties and procedures, if any; and other general provisions, e.g.,
duration of covenants, notices, enforcement and severability clauses and the
like;



            7.   Through the operation of all provisions
required under division (J)(4)(b)6. above, the developer or subdivider shall
maintain control of all such common open space(s) and be responsible for
required maintenance until it has been determined that development sufficient
to support the homeowner’s association has taken place. Such determination
shall be provided for as a part of, and in accordance with, the declaration
of covenants and restrictions; and



            8.   If, in the opinion of the appropriate city
official, a public nuisance is created on any part of the aforementioned
common open space, the city shall then place the developer, subdivider or
homeowner’s association on notice by registered mail and specify corrective
measures required. If, within ten days after said notice, no action has taken
place, the city may exercise its option to take corrective measures and
invoice the responsible party.



   (K)   Design standards. The following standards shall be used as a
framework for evaluating a proposed ROS District.



      (1)   Topography. The topography shall be preserved, wherever
possible, in its natural state by minimizing grade changes and alterations.
Building sites and street locations should conform to the extent possible to
existing land contours.



      (2)   Street layout.



         (a)   The streets shall be curved, wherever possible, to
provide gentle curvilinear street pattern. Streets shall be located, wherever
possible, to preserve the natural elements of the site, as well as those of
surrounding properties. Further, the number of new intersections with
existing and proposed major or secondary arterials and collector/distributor
streets shall be kept to a minimum.



         (b)   The use of cul-de-sacs to provide access to the
residences is encouraged so as to provide privacy for the units, more variety
in site planning, and views oriented away from neighbors’ yards and units.



         (c)   The property within the ROS Single-Family
Residence and Open Space District shall be developed in a manner consistent
with its rural nature. The roadway and drainage systems therein may be
developed with design appropriate to a county lane but shall meet the
engineering standards of the city. An adequate pedestrian circulation system
appropriately lighted shall be provided and the drainage system may
incorporate materials other than concrete curbs and gutters.



         (d)   Principal through-streets shall be developed in
accordance with the standards of the city and shall have a pavement width of
not less than 20 feet. Secondary streets shall have a pavement width of not
less than 16 feet. Streets serving six or fewer dwelling units shall have a
pavement width of not less than 14 feet.



      (3)   Preservation of landscape. The landscape shall be
preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree
and soil removal so that the resulting development will be in keeping with
the general appearance of neighboring developed areas and will be in keeping
with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas and will not
adversely affect the ecology of the area. Wherever the natural landscape is
not preserved or no vegetation existed, mature landscape materials,
emphasizing the use of evergreens, shall be installed in accordance with a
plan approved by the Director of Parks, Forestry and Public Works.



      (4)   Relation of proposed building to environment and
existing development. Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to
the terrain and to existing structures that have visual relationship to the
proposed structures.



      (5)   Utility services. Electric and telephone lines shall be
underground. Any utility installations remaining above ground shall be
located so as to have harmonious relation to neighboring properties and the
site.



   (L)   Modifications. The City Council may approve modifications in
connection with a particular development plan which are consistent with the
purposes of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 46-46)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 92-14, passed 4-16-1992; Ord. 02-49, passed 12-2-2002)



§ 159.092  RE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE AND EDUCATIONAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The RE Single-Family Residence and Educational
District is to be used for the purpose of creating single-family residential
areas of varying types at overall low densities in conjunction with the open
setting of an educational campus, and allowing flexibility of residential
design.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the RE
Single-Family Residence and Educational District:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Private parks and open space uses;



      (3)   Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by
municipal agencies; and



      (4)   Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the
same zoning lot as a principal use.



   (C)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the RE
Single-family Residence and Educational District, as provided in § 159.045.



   (D)   Minimum parcel size. The minimum parcel size required to be
developed in the RE Single-Family Residence and Educational District is 150
acres.



   (E)   Density standards. The overall density of the residential
development shall no exceed one dwelling



unit per 60,000 square feet of land area, based on a gross density
calculation, less 12%.



   (F)   Lot size requirements. No minimum requirement for lot area or
lot width.



   (G)   Minimum yard requirements.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Parks, playgrounds and community buildings; permanent structures
 

50

 

50

 

50

 

50



Single-family detached dwellings
 

Subject to city review and approval




 



      (2)   Accessory uses.



 




 

Required Setbacks






 

Front Yard

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard

 

Rear Yard



Buildings, accessory
 

Subject to city review and approval




 



   (H)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall be governed by § 150.148 and the maximum
height of all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



   (I)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of § 159.136.



   (J)   Open space. The open space preserved shall be subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   Open space areas may be devoted to the following
conditions:



         (a)   Natural areas, such as floodplains, woodlands,
wetlands, ravines and bluffs and/or landscaped areas including landscaped
berms, trails and pathways;



         (b)   Recreational facilities or amenities; and



         (c)   Stormwater detention facilities.



      (2)   No open space land used in calculation of residential
densities shall be utilized for future residential building sites.



      (3)   The required subdivision plat shall contain the
appropriate notations and clauses reflecting dedications, easements,
reservation, regulations and requirements concerning ownership and
responsibility for common space areas and facilities.



      (4)   With respect to open space which is to be reserved for
use solely by resident property owners, the developer shall prepare and file
the following with the City Council and Plan Commission as companion
documents with the proposed residential areas:



         (a)   Proposed articles of incorporation of a
homeowner’s association or some comparable type of organization
establishing equal common ownership of and criteria for maintenance of all
common open space; and



         (b)   Proposed declaration of covenants and restrictions
governing:



            1.   Property rights in the common properties;



            2.   Declaration of lands subject to such
covenants, including provisions for expansion where expansion is possible;



            3.   Voting rights of property owners;



            4.   Requirements pertaining to mandatory
membership in the homeowner’s association and criteria for assessing and
collecting maintenance fees;



            5.   Exterior maintenance requirements, if any;



            6.   Architectural control committee functions,
powers, duties and procedures, if any; and other general provisions, e.g.,
duration of covenants, notices, enforcement and severability clauses and the
like;



            7.   Through the operation of all provisions
required under division (J)(4)(b)6. above the developer or subdivider shall
maintain control of all such common open space(s) and be responsible for
required maintenance until it has been determined that development sufficient
to support the homeowner’s association has taken place. Such determination
shall be provided for as a part of, and in accordance with, the declaration
of covenants and restrictions; and



            8.   If, in the opinion of the appropriate city
official, a public nuisance is created on any part of the aforementioned
common open space, the city shall then place the developer, subdivider or
homeowner’s association on notice by registered mail and specify corrective
measures required. If, within ten days after said notice, no action has taken
place, the city may exercise its option to take corrective measures and
invoice the responsible party.



   (K)   Design standards. The following standards shall be used as a
framework for evaluating a proposed RE District.



      (1)   Topography. The topography shall be preserved, wherever
possible, in its natural state by minimizing grade changes and alterations.
Building sites and street locations should conform to the extent possible to
existing land contours.



      (2)   Street layout.



         (a)   The streets shall be curved, wherever possible, to
provide gentle curvilinear street patterns. Streets shall be located,
wherever possible, to preserve the natural elements of the site, as well as
those of surrounding properties. Further, the number of new intersections
with existing and proposed major or secondary arterials and
collector/distributor streets shall be kept to a minimum.



         (b)   The use of cul-de-sacs to provide access to the
residences is encouraged so as to provide privacy for the units, more variety
in site planning, and views oriented away from neighbors’ yards and units.



      (3)   Preservation of landscape. The landscape shall be
preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree
and soil removal so that the resulting development will be in keeping with
the general appearance of neighboring developed areas and will not adversely
affect the ecology of the area. Wherever the natural landscape is not
preserved or no vegetation existed, mature landscape materials, emphasizing
the use of evergreens, shall be installed in accordance with a plan approved
by the Director of Parks, Forestry and Public Works.



      (4)   Relation of proposed building to environment and
existing development. Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to
the terrain and to the existing structures that have visual relationship to
the proposed structures.



      (5)   Utility services. Electric and telephone lines shall be
underground. Any utility installations remaining above ground shall be
located so as to have harmonious relation to neighboring properties and the
site.



   (L)   Modifications. The City Council may approve modifications in
connection with a particular development plan which are consistent with the
purposes of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 46-47)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 90-59, passed 10-13-1990;
Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991; Ord. 92-14, passed 4-16-1992)



OFFICE AND BUSINESS DISTRICTS



§ 159.105  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Permitted uses of land or buildings, as herein listed,
shall be permitted in the districts indicated under the conditions specified.
No buildings or land shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted
in the zoning district in which such building or land is located, with the
exception of the following:



         (a)   Uses lawfully established on the effective date of
this chapter or any amendment hereto; and



         (b)   Special uses allowed in accordance with the
provisions of division (B) below.



      (2)   Uses already established on the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment hereto, and rendered nonconforming by the provisions
hereof, shall be subject to the regulations of §§ 159.025 through 159.027.



   (B)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the district as
provided in § 159.045.



   (C)   Lot size requirements. Lot size requirements shall be as set
forth under each zoning district.



   (D)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   Yard requirements shall be as set forth under each
zoning district in this subchapter for all buildings, structures and uses,
except as provided §§ 159.003 through 159.015.



      (2)   If the property on a street frontage between
intersecting streets is zoned partially residence, or general residence and
partially business, the front yard requirement of the residence or general
residence district shall be applied to the entire street frontage.



      (3)   Fuel pumps with a height of not over six feet shall be
exempt from the established front yard or corner side yard requirements, but
all such dispensing devices shall be set back from the front lot line and the
corner side lot line a distance of not less than 15 feet.



      (4)   All accessory buildings when attached to principal
buildings shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building.



   (E)   Height requirements. The requirements established under each
zoning district in this subchapter shall determine the maximum building
height allowable within each district.



   (F)   Signs. Signs regulated as provided in Chapter 153 of the city
code.



   (G)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking, accessory to uses
allowed in the office, neighborhood business and community business
districts, shall be provided as required in §§ 159.130 through 159.139.



   (H)   Inclusionary housing. In addition to the requirements of this
section and the respective district requirements, certain developments shall
be subject to the inclusionary housing requirements of Chapter 158 of the
city code, which requirements shall be satisfied in addition the provisions
of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 46-48)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 2005-45, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 159.106  O-1 OFFICE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The O-1 District is designed to accommodate offices,
institutional buildings and multiple-family structures in a mutually
advantageous setting.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the O-1
Office District:



      (1)   Offices, business, professional and governmental,
permitted only on ground floor, but not including offices used for other
display, sale, lease, delivery, processing, storage, manufacturing, servicing
or advertising of merchandise, commodities or other chattels;



      (2)   Clubs and lodges, private;



      (3)   Multiple-family dwelling units at ground level or above
ground floor office uses;



      (4)   Funeral homes and mortuaries;



      (5)   Institutions, as follows, including all uses, structures
and facilities customarily incidental to their operation:



         (a)   Colleges and universities;



         (b)   Elementary and high schools;



         (c)   Institutions for the mentally handicapped;



         (d)   Day, nursery and other schools for the care and
instruction of children;



         (e)   Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues,
including rectories, parsonages and parish houses;



         (f)   Hospitals and related health care facilities;



         (g)   Nursing homes;



         (h)   Libraries, art galleries and museums;



         (i)   Philanthropic and charitable institutions, but not
including businesses sponsored by such institutions, except such as are
accessory or incidental to and located in the same building as such
institution proper; and



         (j)   Single-family dwellings.



      (6)   Accessory uses.



   (C)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the O-1 Office
District as provided in § 159.045.



   (D)   Lot size requirements.



      (1)   No lot in an O-1 Office District shall contain an area
less than 6,250 square feet or have a width at the building line less than 50
feet.



      (2)   The setback, parking requirements and lot coverage (per
division (D)(3) below) must be met for all proposed dwelling units. There
shall be no minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirement in this district.



      (3)   If a lot or tract has less area or width than herein
required and was of record at the time of the effective date of this chapter,
that lot may be used for any purpose permitted in the O-1 Office District.



   (E)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth
of not less than 25 feet.



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   There shall be two side yards, one on each side of
the building, neither of which shall have a width of less than five feet.



         (b)   On a corner lot there shall be a front yard on
each street side of such lot.



      (3)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of
not less than 35 feet.



   (F)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall not exceed 35 feet and the maximum height of
all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



(Prior Code, § 46-49)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 93-4, passed 4-5-1993)



§ 159.107  OR OFFICE RESEARCH DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The OR Office Research District is designed to allow
for the establishment of corporate headquarters and research laboratories and
facilities in a spacious setting containing large amounts of open space,
which constitutes an appropriate entryway to the city from the west.



   (B)   Conditions of use. Uses allowed in the OR Office Research
District are subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   All business, servicing, processing and storage shall be
conducted within, and all equipment shall be located in, completely enclosed
buildings;



      (2)   No manufacturing or assembly shall be permitted, except
as is incidental to or accessory to the principal use of the premises;



      (3)   No merchandise shall be displayed or handled on the
premises, except such as is incidental or accessory to the principal use of
the premises; and



      (4)   No use established in the OR District shall produce any
noise, vibrations, smoke dust, odor or other similar noxious environmental
impacts which can be measured outside of any building.



   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the OR
Office Research District:



      (1)   Corporate headquarters;



      (2)   Offices: business, professional and governmental;



      (3)   Medical laboratories and scientific research
laboratories, including, but not limited to, pure research, product
development and research manufacturing facilities; provided, however, that no
such laboratories shall be utilized for animal research or experimentation
nor shall any use of such laboratories result in offensive noises or odors,
hazardous conditions or other similar noxious environmental impact;



      (4)   Accessory uses incidental to and located within an
office structure, and primarily for service to and use of the employees of
the office development as follows:



         (a)   Banks and other financial institutions, not
including drive-up facilities;



         (b)   Retail sales for the convenience of the occupants
of the development such as newsstands, tobacconists, drugstores and barber
shops;



         (c)   Recreational and health club facilities;



         (d)   Private clubs, employee cafeterias and standard
restaurant facilities;



         (e)   Such accessory uses shall be subject to the
following limitations:



            1.   Such establishments shall not have an outdoor
entrance or outdoor sign;



            2.   Not more than 10% of the total gross floor
area of any individual building may be devoted to such uses as set forth in
division (C)(4)(b) above; and



            3.   Not more than 25% of the total gross floor
area of any individual building may be devoted to such uses.



      (5)   Accessory buildings.



   (D)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the OR Office
Research District as provided in § 159.045.



   (E)   Lot size, coverage and open space requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot size. Each lot shall contain not less than
ten acres.



      (2)   Maximum coverage by structures. The sum total of the
ground area covered by all structures shall not exceed 25% of the zoning lot.



      (3)   Minimum open space. The sum total of the ground area
continuously maintained unobstructed by buildings or other structures of
off-street parking and loading and appropriately landscaped as permanent open
space shall not be less than 25% of the zoning lot. Walkways and bicycle
paths shall be counted as open space, even if covered with impervious
surfaces.



   (F)   Floor area ratio. The maximum gross square footage of building
area permitted on the site shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.25.



   (G)   Yard requirements. No principal or accessory building shall be
located closer to a property line than as follows:



      (1)   Front yard. One hundred feet, except 150 feet along
Illinois Route 60;



      (2)   Corner side yard. One hundred feet;



      (3)   Interior side yard. Forty feet;



      (4)   Rear yard. Twenty-five feet; and



      (5)   Transitional yards adjacent to residential districts.
One hundred fifty feet. In addition, parking shall not be permitted within 25
feet of a residential district and there shall be dense, year-round
landscaping of that 25-foot space.



   (H)   Height requirements. The maximum height of any building shall
not exceed 45 feet. Mechanical equipment or other utility components may be
located on the roof of a building above such height but shall be screened
from public view with materials harmonious with the building in order to
minimize the appearance of any such mechanical equipment or other utility
components, or they shall be located so as not to be visible form any public
street, residential area or right-of-way.



   (I)   Number of buildings on a zoning lot. The principal buildings
are allowed on a zoning lot, except that there shall be not less than 50 feet
between principal buildings, unless buildings are connected by pedestrian
bridges.



   (J)   Parking and loading requirements. Required off-street parking
and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
§§ 159.130 through 159.139. In addition, no off-street parking lot shall be
located within 15 feet of a side or rear lot line (25 feet adjacent to a
residential district lot line) and no parking structure shall be located in
any portion of any required yard.



      (1)   Land banking of required parking accessory to office
uses. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the total number
of off-street parking spaces required to be paved pursuant to § 159.136 for
office and research uses in the OR District may be reduced by up to 20%,
subject to acceptance of the following conditions by the property owner:



         (a)   The City Manager shall have the right to direct
and require the property owner or his or her successor, at any time
subsequent to the completion of the development, to increase the number of
parking spaces provided to serve said development up to the maximum required
by this chapter for the property in question as if no special permit for land
banking had been granted;



         (b)   An application for a reduction in parking spaces
pursuant to this division (J)(1) shall be accompanied by alternate detailed
parking plans. One plan shall show the full number of parking spaces required
pursuant to § 150.136; the other plan shall show the reduced number of
parking spaces proposed to be provided and shall also show the landscaping
treatment of areas proposed to be reserved for future parking requirements.
Both such plans shall show the location on the site of all parking areas, the
exact number of parking spaces to be provided, and complete details for wheel
stops, markings, drainage, surfacing, screening and landscaping, lighting and
access. The location, arrangement, access, surface drainage, wheel stops and
screening and landscaping, and illumination of such parking area shall be
subject to the approval of the approval of the City Engineer;



         (c)   As a condition of the grant of such reduction, the
applicant shall file with the City Clerk his or her unconditional agreement
that areas reserved for future parking shall be maintained as landscaped open
space until and unless required to be used for off-street parking pursuant to
such special permit. The agreement and covenant shall be recorded with the
Recorder of Deeds of the county.



      (2)   Loading requirements.



         (a)   For buildings with 50,000 to 250,000 square feet
(gross), one loading space is required.



         (b)   For buildings with more than 250,000 square feet
(gross), two loading spaces are required.



   (K)   Landscape plan. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for
any development in the OR Office Research District, a landscape plan shall be
submitted to and approved by the Director of Parks, Forestry and Public
Works. All open space areas (areas not developed with a building or an
impervious surface and not considered natural resources as described in
division (L) below) shall be appropriately landscaped in accordance with said
plan and shall include the following, which shall be considered minimum
requirements:



      (1)   All areas required to be landscaped shall be covered
with turf, ground cover and/or other plantings;



      (2)   Only those portions of the lot or building site which
are used directly for parking spaces, aisles, driveways or walkways, shall be
paved;



      (3)   One tree shall be provided for each 1,000 square feet of
required open space, which trees shall be not less than three and one-half
inches in caliper. All trees shall be of the type and variety specified in
the landscape plan and shall be located in general conformity with the
landscape plan. Credit shall be given for existing trees;



      (4)   In parking areas, at least 120 square feet of
landscaping shall be provided for every six required parking spaces; and



      (5)   Any earth berms included in the landscaping plan shall
be rounded and natural in character and shall be designed to obscure
automobiles. No such berm shall have a slope steeper than one foot of
vertical rise for every two feet or horizontal run.



   (L)   Natural resources. To the extent, possible, the development of
all site plans must incorporate the preservation of existing environmental
features on the site. Said features to be preserved shall include floodplain,
wetlands, woodlands and all other natural features worthy of preservation.



   (M)   Refuse collection areas. All refuse collection areas shall be
contained within the walls of the office structure and shall be refrigerated
if they contain food or other putrescible materials.



   (N)   Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.



   (O)   Telephone and electrical service. All on-site electrical lines
and telephone lines installed after the effective date of this chapter shall
be placed underground. Transformer or terminal equipment shall be visually
screened from view, from streets and adjacent properties.



   (P)   Modifications. The City Council may approve modifications in
connection with a particular development plan which are consistent with the
purposes of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 46-50)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.108  OR-2 OFFICE RESEARCH DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The OR-2 Office Research District is designed to
allow for the establishment of corporate headquarters, business offices,
research laboratories and other compatible facilities in a spacious setting
containing large amounts of open space, which can provide a land use buffer
between the Illinois Tollway on the west and the natural resource residential
areas to the east, and constitute an appropriate entryway to the city from
the west.



   (B)   Conditions of use. Uses allowed in the OR-2 Office Research
District are subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   All business, servicing, processing and storage shall be
conducted within and all equipment (except as otherwise provided in division
(H) below) shall be located in, completely enclosed buildings;



      (2)   No manufacturing or assembly shall be permitted, except
as is incidental to or accessory to the principal use of the premises;



      (3)   No merchandise shall be displayed or handled on the
premises, except as expressly permitted pursuant to division (C) below and
except such as is incidental or accessory to the principal use of the
premises; and



      (4)   No uses established in the OR-2 District shall produce
any unreasonably offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor or other
similar noxious environmental impact which can be detected beyond the
district boundary lines.



   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the OR-2
Office Research District:



      (1)   Corporate headquarters;



      (2)   Offices: business, professional and governmental;



      (3)   Medical laboratories and scientific research
laboratories including, but no limited to, pure research, product development
and research manufacturing facilities; provided, however, that no such
laboratories shall be utilized for animal research or experimentation;



      (4)   Day-care facilities;



      (5)   Hotel, motel and uses associated with such hotel or
motel use on the same site provided such use is developed in an OR-2 District
having a minimum gross area (including public and private rights-of-way) if
200 acres, and provided further that, except for restaurants, no outdoor
signage may identify any permitted associated use. The following are
specifically permitted associated uses:



         (a)   Restaurant;



         (b)   Banquet and ballroom facilities (including food
and/or liquor service when required);



         (c)   Liquor service, including lounge areas;



         (d)   Live entertainment;



         (e)   Recreational, health and social facilities or
clubs (including, but not limited to, game courts, swimming pools and
exercise areas limited to hotel guests or club members and their visitors);



         (f)   Meeting/conference rooms;



         (g)   Convenience item shops;



         (h)   Laundry and housekeeping facilities;



         (i)   Vending machines; and



         (j)   Retail business uses as listed in § 159.109(C),
provided that such uses occupy no more than 40% of the ground floor area on
such hotel site.



      (6)   Restaurants, recreational clubs and health clubs when
located within an office structure and not occupying more than 25% of the
floor area of such structure;



      (7)   Banks and other financial institutions not including
drive-up facilities when located in an office structure;



      (8)   Accessory uses incidental to, and located within, an
office structure, and primarily for service to, and use by, the employees
within the OR-2 District, as follows:



         (a)   Retail sales for the convenience of the occupants
of the district including, but not limited to, newsstands, tobacconists,
drugstores and office supply stores;



         (b)   Retail services for the convenience of the
occupants of the district including, but not limited to, dry cleaning,
tailoring, shoe repair, photocopying and blueprinting, travel bureaus and
barber shops;



         (c)   Private clubs and employee cafeterias;



         (d)   Such accessory uses shall be subject to the
following limitations:



            1.   Such establishments shall not have an outdoor
entrance or outdoor sign;



            2.   Not more than 10% of the total gross floor
area of any individual building may be devoted to uses listed in divisions
(C)(8)(a) and (C)(8)(b) above;



            3.   Not more than 25% of the total gross floor
area of any individual building may be devoted to such uses; and



            4.   Except for private clubs, the hours of
operation of such uses shall generally coincide with the office hours
maintained in the building.



      (9)   Accessory buildings;



      (10)   Temporary and permanent signs as permitted in Chapter
153 of the city code, except as follows:



         (a)   One freestanding sign per lot not exceeding 100
square feet in signage area may be erected provided that said sign shall:



            1.   Not exceed six feet in height, if lighted; and



            2.   Not exceed ten feet in height, if not lighted.



         (b)   One wall sign shall be permitted on the front
facade of a principal building having an area not exceeding twice the number
of lineal feet of such facade or 250 square feet, whichever is less.



      (11)   Parking lots as a stand alone use if located on parcels
in common ownership with an adjacent OR-2 property which is already developed
with a principal building in a manner consistent with the OR-2 zoning
district.



   (D)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed in the OR-2 Office
Research District as provided in § 159.045.



   (E)   District size, lot size, coverage and open space requirements.



      (1)   Minimum district size. No area consisting of fewer than
150 contiguous acres (including public and private rights-of-way) may be
classified in the OR-2 District.



      (2)   Minimum lot size. Each lot shall contain not less than
five acres.



         (a)   Except that a minimum lot size of two acres shall
be permitted for:



            1.   Property in common ownership with any
adjacent OR-2 property which is already developed in a manner consistent with
the OR-2 zoning district; or



            2.   The property is to be used solely for open
space.



      (3)   Maximum coverage by buildings. The sum total of the
ground area covered by all buildings shall not exceed 35% of the zoning lot.



      (4)   Minimum open space. The sum total of the ground area
continuously maintained unobstructed by buildings or other structures of
off-street parking and loading and appropriately landscaped as permanent open
space shall not be less than 25% of the zoning lot. Walkways, pedestrian
areas and bicycle paths shall be counted as open space, even if covered with
impervious surfaces.



   (F)   Floor area ratio.



      (1)   The maximum gross square footage of building area
permitted on a zoning lot shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.50.



      (2)   Only the lot area as reflected on a current property
survey shall be used to determine the maximum gross square footage of
building area permitted except in the event the land is dedicated for state
highway purposes and all of the following criteria are met.



         (a)   The property is zoned OR-2.



         (b)   The property has been developed at the time of the
right-of-way dedication.



         (c)   The right-of-way is required for improvements to a
state highway.



         (d)   The right-of-way dedication from a single zoning
lot does not exceed one acre.



         (e)   The dedication occurred after January 1, 2003.



   (G)   Yard requirements. Each principal or accessory building shall
provide minimum yards as follows:



      (1)   Front yard. One hundred feet, except 150 feet along
Illinois Route 60;



      (2)   Total side yards. One hundred feet, with not less than
25 feet for any side yard, except 150 feet along Illinois Route 60;



      (3)   Total side yards (corner lot). One hundred feet, with
not less than 25 feet for any interior side yard and not less than 50 feet
for any corner side yard, except 150 feet along Illinois Route 60;



      (4)   Rear yard. Twenty-five feet, except 150 feet along
Illinois Route 60; and



      (5)   Transitional yards adjacent to residential districts.
One hundred feet. In addition, parking shall not be permitted within 25 feet
of a residential district and there shall be dense, year-round landscaping of
that 25-foot space.



   (H)   Height requirements. The maximum height of any principal
building shall not exceed 75 feet, and no accessory building shall exceed 30
feet in height. Mechanical equipment or other utility components may be
located on the roof of a building above such height but shall be screened
from public view with materials harmonious with the building, or they shall
be located so as not to be visible from any public street or residential area.



   (I)   Number of buildings on a zoning lot. Multiple principal
buildings are allowed on a zoning lot, except that there shall be not less
than 50 feet between principal buildings, unless buildings are connected by
pedestrian bridges or parking decks.



   (J)   Parking and loading requirements.



      (1)   General. Required off-street parking and loading berths
shall be provided in accordance with §§ 159.130 through 159.139. In
addition, any off-street parking area shall be set back at least 50 feet from
any street line and no such parking area shall be located within 15 feet of a
side or rear lot line (25 feet adjacent to a lot line of an existing
residential use).



      (2)   Land banking of required parking accessory to office
uses. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the total number
of off-street parking spaces required to be paved pursuant to § 159.136 for
uses in the OR-2 District may be reduced by up to 20% subject to approval by
the City Manager and subject to the following:



         (a)   An application for a reduction in parking spaces
pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by alternate detailed parking
plans. One plan shall show the full number of parking spaces required
pursuant to § 159.136; the other plan shall show the reduced number of
parking spaces proposed to be provided and shall also show the landscaping
treatment of areas proposed to be reserved for future parking requirements.
Both such plans shall show the location on the site of all parking areas, the
exact number of parking spaces to be provided, and complete details for
markings, drainage, surfacing, screening and landscaping, lighting and
access. The location, arrangement, access, surface drainage, screening and
landscaping and illumination of such parking area shall be subject to the
approval of the City Engineer;



         (b)   As a condition of the approval of such reduction,
the applicant shall file with the City Clerk his or her unconditional
agreement and covenant, in form and substance approved by the City Attorney,
that areas reserved for future parking shall be maintained as landscaped open
space until and unless required to be used for off-street parking pursuant to
division (J)(2)(c) below. The agreement and covenant shall be recorded with
the Recorder of Deeds of the county; and



         (c)   At any time after the completion of the
development, the City Manager may, in order to promote the safety and
convenience of the public or to avoid parking congestion on the subject
property, require the property owner to increase the number of parking spaces
provided to serve said development up to the maximum required by this chapter
as if no approval for land banking had been granted.



   (K)   Landscape plan. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for any development in the OR-2 Office Research District, a
landscape plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Director of Parks,
Forestry and Public Works. All areas not developed with a building or an
impervious surface and not considered natural resources as described in
division (L) below, shall be appropriately landscaped in accordance with said
plan, but no such plan shall be disapproved that satisfies the following
requirements.



      (1)   All areas required to be landscaped shall be covered
with turf, ground cover and/or other plantings.



      (2)   Those portions of the lot that are used for parking
spaces, aisles or driveways shall be paved with a hard surface.



      (3)   Trees shall be provided on each lot with a total caliper
of three and one-half inches for each 1,000 square feet of required open
space; provided, however, that no required tree shall be less than two and
one-half inches in caliper. All trees shall be of the type and variety
specified in the landscape plan and shall be located in general conformity
with the landscape plan. Credit shall be given for existing trees.



      (4)   Except for structured or covered parking areas, at least
90 square feet of landscaping shall be provided for every six required
parking spaces within parking areas. A reasonable landscaped buffer shall be
provided adjacent to any freestanding parking structure.



      (5)   Any earth berms included in the landscaping plan shall
be rounded and natural in character. No such berm shall have a slope steeper
than one foot of vertical rise for every two feet of horizontal run.



      (6)   Landscaping shall be installed within a reasonable time
unless an extension is granted by the Director of Parks, Forestry and Public
Works, in which event a bond shall be posted to guarantee installation.



   (L)   Natural resources. To the extent possible, the development of
all zoning lot plans must incorporate the preservation of existing
environmental features on the lot, including floodplain, wetlands, woodlands
and all other natural features worthy of preservation. Such natural resource
areas shall be included as required open space, but in no event shall this
division (L) require that the area available for buildings and other
structures (including off-street parking and loading spaces) be reduced to
less than 60% of the gross lot area.



   (M)   Refuse collection areas. All refuse collection areas shall be
contained within the walls of the office structures and shall be refrigerated
if they contain food or other putrescible materials.



   (N)   Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.



   (O)   Telephone and electrical service. All on-site electrical lines
and telephone lines hereafter installed shall be placed underground.
Transformer or terminal equipment shall be visually screened from view from
streets and adjacent properties.



(Prior Code, § 46-51)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 05-30, passed 9-6-2005; Ord. 06-46, passed 8-7-2006)



§ 159.109  B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The B-1 Neighborhood Business District is designed to
accommodate small retail and service businesses required for the frequently
recurring needs of persons residing in adjacent or nearby residential areas.



   (B)   Conditions of use. Uses allowed in the B-1 District are
subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers and oriented to the needs of
residence in the surrounding neighborhoods. All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced;



      (2)   All business, servicing, processing and storage shall be
conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except for the following:
outdoor dining, produce or flower markets, the sale of gasoline, the sale of
items of a seasonal nature including Christmas trees, bedding plants and
small shrubs when authorized by a certificate of zoning compliance;



      (3)   Outdoor storage is permitted only when it is screened
from view. The required screening may be fencing, landscaping or walls, and
must be of sufficient height and density that the storage area is screened
from view, from ground level up to a point seven feet above the ground level
of the adjoining street or property. No outside storage is permitted to rise
above the screening;



      (4)   Outdoor uses, not including storage areas, must be
located wholly on private property, shall no impeded pedestrian or vehicle
circulation, and shall not eliminate or encroach upon required parking spaces
unless the parking spaces are designated only for employee parking. In
addition, no more than three required on-site parking spaces may be used, and
permits for off-site parking must be purchased prior to authorization of the
outdoor use to replace the lost spaces on a one to one basis. The Director of
Community Development may waive the requirement for purchase of permits for
off-site parking if documentation is submitted by the petitioner to
demonstrate that adequate on-site parking exists to meet the needs of the
business;



      (5)   No manufacturing or assembling shall be permitted,
except as incidental to the business occupying the premises;



      (6)   The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in
the conduct of a permitted business listed in this section, shall be limited
to vehicles of not over one and one-half ton capacity when located within 75
feet of a residence or general residence district boundary line;



      (7)   A certificate of zoning compliance must be obtained
consistent with the provisions of § 159.041 prior to any change of use,
expansion of uses on a site, and prior to the issuance of a building permit;



      (8)   The uses and development shall be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan; and



      (9)   Appearance of vacant storefront windows.



         (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division
(B)(9), the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.



            GROUND FLOOR SPACE. Any space on the ground floor
having frontage on a street, alley or outdoor pedestrian walkway.



            STOREFRONT WINDOW. One or more windows for the
display of goods or wares on the facade(s) of a ground floor space.



            VACANCY. A space not regularly occupied and open for
business a minimum of four days per week on a monthly basis. An exception to
allow for temporary business closure may be granted by the Director of
Community Development upon written request provided that office equipment and
furnishings will remain in the establishment and a date certain for reopening
of the establishment is provided.



         (b)   Temporary treatment of storefront windows during
vacancy or interior renovation.



            1.   Vacant; renovation. The storefront windows of
any ground floor space that is vacant or undergoing interior renovation shall
be treated using one of the following methods within 15 business days after
the date on which the space first becomes vacant, or for the total duration
of the interior renovation.



               a.   Storefront windows shall be painted a
solid black color or completely covered with a seamless black paper to
obscure view into the space; or



               b.   As an alternative, in order to
encourage storefront window displays that enrich the character of the
business district and enliven the streetscape, exhibits by a local
not-for-profit visual arts or historical organization in the form of
paintings, photos and sculptures may be displayed, painted or affixed on the
glass in vacant storefront windows with permission of the property owner. A
storefront window that displays an exhibit is permitted one informational
sign up to two square feet in total sign area, identifying the name and
contact information for each exhibit; and



               c.   Advertising for an existing local
business may be displayed in a vacant storefront window in a manner
consistent with the city’s sign code.



            2.   “Opening soon” announcement. No sooner
than 30 days prior to the opening of a new business, an unlighted temporary
sign announcing the name of the new business maybe displayed in one
storefront window per facade. The sign shall not exceed ten square feet in
sign area and may identify the name of the business in a graphic or text
format.



         (c)   Minimum appearance requirements.



            1.   Visible adhesive or tape may not be used to
affix any window display, decorative screening or signage to a storefront
window;



            2.   Storefronts may not use newspaper or soap to
obscure windows;



            3.   No plastic tarp of any kind may be used to
block the windows; and



            4.   No window display or covering shall contain
any matter, in writing or in a depiction, that, when considered as a whole,
predominantly appeals to prurient interests.



         (d)   Minimum maintenance requirements.



            1.   All window coverings must be kept in good
repair and shall not be torn, damaged or otherwise left in a state of
disrepair.



            2.   Building exteriors must be maintained in
accordance with the requirements of the city’s property maintenance code.



   (C)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Permitted uses in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District
are listed in § 159.116. If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of
the Director of Community Development that a use not specifically listed in
§ 159.116 is consistent with the intent of the zoning district, and is
similar and compatible with the listed permitted uses in the B-1 District,
the Director of Community Development may allow the new use. The Director of
Community Development shall document all such decisions in writing, provide a
copy of the decision to the Plan Commission for information, and make a copy
available for public review upon request.



      (2)   Applications for new developments for uses that are
permitted outright in the B-1 Zoning District, shall be forwarded to the
Building Review Board by the Director of Community Development after the
following review standard has been satisfied.



      (3)   The overall site plan and traffic study have been
reviewed and found by the Public Works Engineering and Public Safety
Departments to have no material adverse impacts upon the uses or users of the
site, upon any adjacent site or facility, or upon the surrounding business
district.



      (4)   Restaurants; performance standards: in addition to all
other applicable provisions of the code, all types of restaurants must be
found to be in compliance with the following performance standards prior to
the issuance of a building permit.



         (a)   Applicable parking requirements of the code must
be satisfied or any necessary variances must be approved by the appropriate
board or commission and the City Council.



         (b)   A parking plan detailing number of employees, the
location for employee parking, estimated customers at various times, the
location of customer parking and information on valet parking if provided or
required, must be submitted for review and approval.



         (c)   1.   The review and approval process of the
Building Review Board or Historic Preservation Commission must be completed.
The approval must include all required elements including, new construction,
storefront alterations, additions, demolitions, screening of mechanical
equipment.



            2.   Approval of landscaping, awnings, lighting
and signage by the appropriate Board or Commission must occur prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit.



         (d)   The City Council review and approval process for
any liquor license, if applicable, must be completed. The hours of operation
of the restaurant shall conform to any requirements of the liquor license.
For restaurants that do not require liquor licenses the hours of operation
shall conform to the hours of existing restaurants in the community.



         (e)   Details of the air filtration system and an
operation and maintenance schedule for the exhaust and filter systems must be
provided in the building permit submittal application. Issuance of the
building permit shall not occur until the systems along with the operation
and maintenance schedules have been approved.



         (f)   No loud speakers or amplification of sound are
permitted outside the building.



         (g)   Schedules for deliveries and trash pickup must be
submitted and found to be acceptable to the city.



         (h)   For all restaurants, egress and access to the site
and delivery areas shall be located to minimize the impact of traffic, light
and noise on the single-family homes.



   (D)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed consistent with the
provisions of § 159.045 upon the granting of a special use permit for the
specific use in accordance with the terms of a special use permit ordinance
therefore. Special uses in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District are set
forth in § 159.116, the Use Matrix. Special use permits may also be granted
to allow increased lot coverage or reduced open space requirements as
authorized by the B-1 Zoning District. In addition to the standard special
use permit criteria in § 159.045, the petitioner shall show that the
following criteria are also be satisfied.



      (1)   A traffic study in a form satisfactory to the City
Public Works, Engineering and Public Safety Departments shall be submitted
and shall establish that the proposed use and development will not materially
and adversely impair traffic convenience and safety.



      (2)   For drive-through facilities of any type:



         (a)   Ingress and egress points are located in a manner
that does not create safety hazards for pedestrians or other vehicles;



         (b)   Pedestrian pathways are provided in areas that are
separated from the drive-through facility and separated from the ingress and
egress points to the drive-through facility;



         (c)   Pedestrian access to automatic banking facilities
is provided to encourage pedestrian activity in the area; and



         (d)   The drive-through facility is sited, configured
and screened in a manner that is consistent with the character of the area
through landscaping, grade change, fences, walls or structures so as to
minimize the visual impacts on the streetscape.



      (3)   It has been demonstrated that the building can be
adapted to different additive uses in the future.



      (4)   For new buildings, the development provides pedestrian
links between the development and nearby retail uses.



      (5)   For new buildings and buildings over 500 square feet,
additive uses, as identified in § 159.116, the Use Matrix, are incorporated
into the development.



      (6)   If a determination is made by the Plan Commission that
the proposed development is a meritorious project that materially advances
the stated purposes of the B-1 District and provides specific and
identifiable long term benefits to the community, a special use permit may be
granted even if divisions (D)(4) and (D)(5 above are not fully satisfied.



   (E)   Lot size, coverage and open space requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot sizes. The zoning lot for each structure
containing a permitted use(s) shall contain not less than 5,000 square feet.



      (2)   Maximum coverage by structures. The sum total of the
ground area covered by all structures shall not exceed 30% of the zoning lot.
A development bonus allowing coverage of up to 45% of the zoning lot may be
requested through a special use permit.



   (F)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   Front yard. Except as otherwise herein provided, all
buildings and uses allowed in the B-1 District shall provide a front yard of
not less than 20 feet in depth.



      (2)   Transitional yards. In the B-1 District, the minimum
transitional yard requirements shall not be less than those specified below.



         (a)   Where a side lot line coincides with a side or
rear lot line in an adjacent residence or general residence district, a yard
shall be provided along such side lot line equal in dimension to the minimum
side yard which would be required under this chapter for a residential use on
the adjacent residential lot.



         (b)   Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot
line in an adjacent residence or general residence district, a yard shall be
provided along such a rear lot line equal in dimension to the minimum side
yard which would be required under this chapter for a residential use on the
adjacent residential lot.



         (c)   Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot
line in an adjacent residence or general residence district, a yard shall be
provided along such rear lot line equal in dimension to the minimum rear yard
which would be required for a residential use on the adjacent.



   (G)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall not exceed 35 feet and the maximum height of
all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



   (H)   Open space requirement. At least 15% of the zoning lot shall
remain as permanent open space configured on the site to provide a gathering
space to accommodate pedestrian uses associated with the use and other uses
in the area. Such open space shall be designed to enhance the visual
character of the streetscape in the vicinity of the lot. The open space shall
be landscaped in accordance with an approved plan and shall be continuous
ground area unobstructed by buildings or surface parking areas. Walkways,
pedestrian gathering areas and bicycle paths shall be counted as open space
even through they may be an impervious surface. A development bonus reducing
the required amount of open space to 10% of the zoning lot may be requested
through a special use permit.



   (I)   Site plan and design review. The unique character of the B-1
District is reflected by the orientation of buildings in relation to the
heavily traveled streets, Waukegan and Everett Roads, which run through this
area. Site plans are intended to allow and encourage customers to move
between uses on the same side of the street, without driving from use to use.
In order to ensure the orderly development of properties within the B-1
District in a manner consistent with the overall character of the District,
all proposed development within the B-1 District shall be subject to the site
plan and design review requirements of this division (I).



      (1)   Application requirements. All proposed developments
within the B-1 District, shall be subject to the following site plan and
design review standards. In addition to the application requirements for the
Building Review Board, the following information shall be provided as part of
the application; if applicable:



         (a)   Lot area;



         (b)   A site plan showing building foot prints,
landscaped areas, open space, locations of outdoor uses, parking areas and
walkways;



         (c)   A floor plan delineating the existing and proposed
floor area;



         (d)   Existing and proposed number of dwelling units;



         (e)   Parking calculations showing the number of spaces
required and the number of existing and proposed spaces. If parking
requirements are to be met through a variance or special use permit, this
request must accompany the development application;



         (f)   A narrative that explains how the proposed
development meets the district site plan and design review standards;



         (g)   A traffic study shall be submitted including, but
not limited to, the following information: the volume of traffic that will be
generated by the proposed uses, the traffic circulation patterns, a study of
how ingress and egress to parking lots and drive through facilities will
enhance or impair pedestrian activity, and how existing streets will be
impacted;



         (h)   A description of the proposed uses of the building
and information on covenants or restrictions that will be placed on the
development to ensure a mix of uses in the future;



         (i)   A plan illustrating how the building and overall
site can be adaptively reused in the future for an alternative use; and



         (j)   Such additional information as the Director of
Community Development deems necessary to properly review the application.



      (2)   Site plan and design review standards. All properties in
this district are under the purview of the Building Review Board. In addition
to the standard criteria used by the Building Review Board, development
proposals should be reviewed to ensure that they preserve and enhance the
character and value of the district, and are consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan direction for the Settler’s Square area. To make this
determination, the Building Review Board shall evaluate the petition subject
to the following standards.



         (a)   The front of buildings should be oriented to
Waukegan Road to create a continuous edge and a unified streetscape.



         (b)   Parking lots should be placed to the rear of the
building envelopes and should be screened through landscaping, grade changes
or other methods to minimize visibility from Waukegan Road.



         (c)   Two story buildings should be constructed to
provide a cohesive visual character along Waukegan Road.



         (d)   All elevations of the building visible from the
streetscape, pedestrian paths and gathering areas, or from adjacent
residential neighborhoods, should be detailed to a consistent level.



         (e)   Architectural styles, building elements,
proportions, massing, materials, detailing and signage should be consistent
with, and complimentary to, existing buildings in the district and the
overall character of Settler’s Square.



         (f)   The exterior of the building is designed in a
manner that lends itself to adaptive reuse in the future.



         (g)   Natural, high quality building materials should be
used fore the exterior of buildings.



         (h)   Landscape and streetscape treatments shall
include, but not limited, to burying utilities, screening all mechanical
equipment, planting street trees and foundation plantings, installing street
furniture, providing variety in building setbacks, constructing pedestrian
connections and creating open spaces.



         (i)   Pathways should be designed to support and
encourage pedestrian use and should provide the opportunity for pedestrians
to move from one use to another.



         (j)   In order to enhance the character of the district
and promote the commercial vitality of the area, outdoor dining and gathering
spaces, as well as other amenities that will promote evening activities,
should be incorporated into developments. In order to encourage additional
pedestrian activity to enhance the commercial vitality of the area, small
spaces such as gardens and courtyards should be designed and incorporated
into developments.



      (3)   Review of development proposals. Proposals for
development in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District shall be reviewed
consistent with the procedures for all properties reviewed by the Building
Review Board. In the event that variances are requested, or a special user
permit is required, the project shall be forwarded to the appropriate Board
or Commission prior to action by the Building Review Board.



(Prior Code, § 46-52)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 03-40, passed 6-19-2003; Ord. 04-02, passed 2-19-2004; Ord. 2010-24,
passed 4-7-2010)



§ 159.110  CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT ZONING PURPOSE.



   (A)   The B-2, B-3 and B-4 Zoning Districts comprise the Central
Business District of the city. As is the case in many other small cities, the
success of individual enterprises is intrinsically tied to the other
businesses within, and the overall quality of, the business core. Property
owners and businesses within the Central Business District benefit from the
synergies resulting from a well planned, appealing and customer-friendly
commercial center. In the city, this is especially true because of the
continued success that historic Market Square has demonstrated. Accordingly,
the purpose of the Central Business District regulations is to preserve and
enhance the elements of the city’s central business district that have
brought value to the property, success to the merchants and benefit to the
residents of the city.



   (B)   The planned development provision included in this section is
intended to allow flexibility in order to achieve the stated intent.



(Prior Code, § 46-53)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 02-01, passed 1-7-2002;
Ord. 03-39, passed 6-19-2003)



§ 159.111  B-2 COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The B-2 Community Commercial Business District is
oriented toward retail, service businesses and multi-family residential
development. All or a significant portion of parking for individual
developments is provided on site, no public parking lots are available in
this District. The B-2 District is located along Western Avenue at the north
and south ends of the Central Business District. There are fewer historic
buildings and there is less orientation to pedestrians than in the B-3 and
B-4 Districts. The District’s link to the other business districts is along
Western Avenue and Bank Lane. The B-2 District provides for a greater variety
of goods and services than permitted in the B-3 and B-4 Districts.



   (B)   Conditions of use. Uses allowed in the B-2 Community
Commercial Business District are subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   All business, servicing, processing, displays and
storage shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except for
the following: outdoor dining, produce or flower markets, the sale of new or
used automobiles, the sale of gasoline, the sale of items of a seasonal
nature including Christmas trees, bedding plants and small shrubs when
authorized by a certificate of zoning compliance;



      (2)   Outdoor storage is permitted only when it is screened
from view. The required screening may be fencing, landscaping or walls and
must be of sufficient height and density that the storage area is screened
from view from ground level up to a point seven feet above the ground level
of the adjoining street or property. No outside storage is permitted to rise
above the screening;



      (3)   Outdoor uses, not including storage areas, must be
located wholly on private property, shall not impede pedestrian or vehicle
circulation, and shall not eliminate or encroach upon required parking spaces
unless the parking spaces are designated only for employee parking. In
addition, no more than three of the required on-site parking spaces may be
used and permits for off-site parking must be purchased prior to
authorization of the outdoor use to replace the lost spaces. The Director of
Community Development may waive the requirement for purchase of permits for
off-site parking if documentation is submitted by the petitioner to
demonstrate that adequate on-site parking exists to meet the needs of the
business;



      (4)   No manufacturing or assembling shall be permitted except
as incidental to the business occupying the premises;



      (5)   A certificate of zoning compliance must be obtained
consistent with the provisions of § 159.041 prior to any change of use,
expansion of uses on a site, and prior to the issuance of a building permit;



      (6)   The uses and development shall be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan; and



      (7)   Appearance of vacant storefront windows.



         (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division
(B)(7), the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.



            GROUND FLOOR SPACE. Any space on the ground floor
having frontage on a street, alley or outdoor pedestrian walkway.



            STOREFRONT WINDOW. One or more windows for the
display of goods or wares on the facade(s) of a ground floor space.



            VACANCY. A space not regularly occupied and open for
business a minimum of four days per week on a monthly basis. An exception to
allow for temporary business closure may be granted by the Director of
Community Development upon written request provided that office equipment and
furnishings will remain in the establishment and a date certain for reopening
of the establishment is provided.



         (b)   Temporary treatment of storefront windows during
vacancy or interior renovation.



            1.   Vacant; renovation. The storefront windows of
any ground floor space that is vacant or undergoing interior renovation shall
be treated using one of the following methods within 15 business days after
the date on which the space first becomes vacant, or for the total duration
of the interior renovation.



               a.   Storefront windows shall be painted a
solid black color or completely covered with a seamless black paper to
obscure view into the space; or



               b.   As an alternative, in order to
encourage storefront window displays that enrich the character of the
business district and enliven the streetscape, exhibits by a local
not-for-profit visual arts or historical organization in the form of
paintings, photos and sculptures may be displayed, painted or affixed on the
glass in vacant storefront windows with permission of the property owner. A
storefront window that displays an exhibit is permitted one informational
sign up to two square feet in total sign area, identifying the name and
contact information for each exhibit; and



               c.   Advertising for an existing local
business may be displayed in a vacant storefront window in a manner
consistent with the city’s sign code.



            2.   “Opening soon” announcement. No sooner
than 30 days prior to the opening of a new business, an unlighted temporary
sign announcing the name of the new business maybe displayed in one
storefront window per facade. The sign shall not exceed ten square feet in
sign area and may identify the name of the business in a graphic or text
format.



         (c)   Minimum appearance requirements.



            1.   Visible adhesive or tape may not be used to
affix any window display, decorative screening or signage to a storefront
window;



            2.   Storefronts may not use newspaper or soap to
obscure windows;



            3.   No plastic tarp of any kind may be used to
block the windows; and



            4.   No window display or covering shall contain
any matter, in writing or in a depiction, that, when considered as a whole,
predominantly appeals to prurient interests.



         (d)   Minimum maintenance requirements.



            1.   All window coverings must be kept in good
repair and shall not be torn, damaged or otherwise left in a state of
disrepair.



            2.   Building exteriors must be maintained in
accordance with the requirements of the city’s property maintenance code.



   (C)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Generally. Permitted uses in the B-2 Community
Commercial Business District are listed in § 159.116. If an applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development,
that a use that is not specifically listed in § 159.116 is consistent with
the intent of the zoning district, and is similar and compatible with the
listed uses, the Director of Community Development may allow the new use. The
Director of Community Development shall document all such decisions in
writing, provide a copy of the decision to the Plan Commission for
information, and make a copy available for public review upon request.



      (2)   Restaurants; performance standards. In addition to all
other applicable provisions of the code, all types of restaurants must be
found to be in compliance with the following performance standards prior to
the issuance of a building permit.



         (a)   Applicable parking requirements of the code must
be satisfied or any necessary variances must be approved.



         (b)   A parking plan detailing number of employees, the
location for employee parking, estimated customers at various times, the
location of customer parking, and information on valet parking if provided or
required, must be submitted for review and approval.



         (c)   1.   The review and approval process of the
Building Review Board or Historic Preservation Commission must be completed.
The approval must include all required elements including new construction,
storefront alterations, additions, demolitions, screening of mechanical
equipment and trash enclosures.



            2.   Approval of landscaping, awnings, lighting
and signage by the appropriate Board or Commission must occur prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit.



         (d)   1.   The City Council review and approval
process for any liquor license, if applicable, must be completed. The hours
of operation of the restaurant shall conform to any requirements of the
liquor license.



            2.   For restaurants that do not require liquor
licenses, the hours of operation shall conform to the hours of existing
restaurants in the community.



         (e)   Details of the air filtration system and an
operation and maintenance schedule for the exhaust and filter systems must be
provided in the building permit submittal application. Issuance of the
building permit shall not occur until the systems along with the operation
and maintenance schedules have been approved.



         (f)   No loud speakers or amplification of sound are
permitted outside the building.



         (g)   Schedules for deliveries and trash pickup must be
submitted and found to be acceptable to the city.



         (h)   For all restaurants egress and access to the site
and delivery areas shall be located to minimize the impact of traffic, light
and noise on the single-family homes.



   (D)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed consistent with the
provisions of § 159.045 upon the granting of a special use permit for the
specific use in accordance with the terms of a special use permit ordinance
therefore. Special uses in the B-2 Community Business District are set forth
in § 159.116. Special use permits may also be granted to allow development
incentives as provided for in § 159.114. In addition to the standard special
use permit criteria in § 159.045, the petitioner shall show that the
following criteria are also be satisfied.



      (1)   A traffic study in a form satisfactory to the City
Public Works, Engineer and Public Safety Departments shall be submitted and
shall establish that the proposed use and development will not materially and
adversely impair traffic convenience and safety.



      (2)   For drive-through facilities of any type:



         (a)   Ingress and egress points are located in a manner
that does not create safety hazards for pedestrians or other vehicles;



         (b)   Pedestrian pathways are provided in areas that are
separated from the drive-through facility and separated from the ingress and
egress points to the drive-through facility;



         (c)   Pedestrian access to automatic banking facilities
is provided to encourage pedestrian activity in the area; and



         (d)   The drive-through facility is sited, configured
and screened in a manner that is consistent with the character of the area
through landscaping, grade change, fences, walls or structures so as to
minimize the visual impacts on the streetscape.



      (3)   It has been demonstrated that the building can be
adapted to different additive uses in the future.



      (4)   For new buildings, the development provides pedestrian
links between the development and nearby retail uses.



      (5)   For new buildings and buildings over 5,000 square feet,
additive uses, as identified in § 159.116 are incorporated into the
development.



      (6)   If a determination is made by the Plan Commission that
the proposed development is a meritorious project that materially advances
the stated purposes of the B-2 District and provides specific and
identifiable long term benefits to the community, a special use permit may be
granted even if divisions (D)(4) and (D)(5) above are not fully satisfied.



   (E)   Lot size and coverage. No specific requirements.



   (F)   Setback requirements.



      (1)   Front yard and corner side yard. A setback of five feet
from the front and corner side property lines shall be required for all newly
constructed and replacement buildings.



      (2)   Side lot line and side or rear lot line. Where a side
lot line of a property in the B-2 District coincides with a side or rear lot
line in an adjacent residence or general residence district, a setback equal
in dimension to the side yard setback required in the adjacent residential
district shall be required.



      (3)   Rear lot line and side lot line. Where a rear lot line
of a property in the B-2 District coincides with a side lot line in an
adjacent residence or general residence district, a setback equal in
dimension to the side yard setback required in the adjacent residential
district shall be required.



      (4)   Rear lot line and rear lot line. Where a rear lot line
of a property in the B-2 District coincides with a rear lot line in an
adjacent residence or general residence district, a setback equal in
dimension to the rear yard setback required in the adjacent residential
district shall be required.



   (G)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall not exceed 35 feet and the maximum height of
all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25 feet.



   (H)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio for the B-2 District is
0.50. A higher floor area ratio may be considered through the Central
Business District Planned Development procedures in § 159.114.



   (I)   Open space requirement. Ten percent of the zoning lot shall
remain as permanent open space configured on the site to provide a gathering
space to accommodate the pedestrian uses associated with the use and other
uses in the area. Such open space shall be designed to enhance the visual
character of the streetscape in the vicinity of the lot. The open space shall
be landscaped in accordance with an approved plan and shall be continuous
ground area unobstructed by buildings or surface parking areas. Walkways,
pedestrian gathering areas and bicycle paths shall be counted as open space
even though they may be an impervious surface.



   (J)   Site plan and design review. The unique character of the B-2
District is reflected not only in the orientation of buildings and
improvements as reflected on a traditional site plan, but also in the
vertical orientation of buildings and the inter-relationship of buildings,
landscaping, the streetscape and other features. In order to ensure the
orderly development of properties within the B-2 District in a manner
consistent with the overall character of the district, all proposed
development within the B-2 District shall be subject to the site plan and
design review requirements of this division (J).



      (1)   Application requirements. All proposed developments
within the B-2 District, shall be subject to site plan and design review
standards. In addition to the application requirements for the Building
Review Board, the following information shall be provided as part of the
application:



         (a)   Lot area;



         (b)   A site plan showing building foot prints,
landscaped areas, open space, locations of outdoor uses, parking areas and
walkways;



         (c)   A floor plan delineating the existing and proposed
floor area;



         (d)   Existing and proposed floor area ratio;



         (e)   Existing and proposed number of dwelling units;



         (f)   Parking calculations showing the number of spaces
required and the number of existing and proposed spaces. If parking
requirements are to be met through a variance or special use permit, this
request must accompany the development application;



         (g)   A narrative that explains how the proposed
development meets the district site plan and design review standards;



         (h)   A traffic study shall be submitted including, but
not limited to, the following information: the volume of traffic that will be
generated by the proposed uses, the traffic circulation patterns, a study of
how ingress and egress to parking lots and drive through facilities will
enhance or impair pedestrian activity and how existing streets will be
impacted;



         (i)   A description of the proposed uses of the building
and information on any covenants or restrictions that will be placed on the
development to ensure specific uses in the future;



         (j)   A plan illustrating how the building and overall
site can be adaptively reused in the future by an alternative use; and



         (k)   Such additional information as the Director of
Community Development deems necessary to properly review the application.



      (2)   Site plan and design review standards. All properties in
this district are under the purview of the Building Review Board. In addition
to the standard criteria used by the Building Review Board, development
proposals should be designed to preserve and enhance the character and value
of the district through the application of the following standards:



         (a)   Bank Lane is the pedestrian spine of the Central
Business District. Developments along Bank Lane should complement the
pedestrian elements of Bank Lane, both north and south of Market Square, and
south of Illinois Road, by incorporating the various standards listed below;



         (b)   Buildings should be of varying heights, roof lines
and architectural styles, facades shall be detailed with windows and offsets
of building elements, building setbacks, arcades, awnings and entryways to
achieve a human scale and pedestrian friendly street edges;



         (c)   All elevations of the building visible from the
streetscape or from adjacent residential neighborhoods, should be detailed to
a consistent level;



         (d)   Architectural styles, building elements,
proportions, massing, materials and detailing should be consistent with, and
complimentary to, the overall historic character of the Central Business
District;



         (e)   Natural, high quality building materials should be
used for the exterior of buildings;



         (f)   Landscape and streetscape treatments should
include, but not be limited to, burying utilities, screening all mechanical
equipment, planting street trees, foundation plantings, street furniture,
variety in building setbacks, pedestrian connections and open spaces;



         (g)   Architectural design elements and landscaping
should be incorporated to enhance the pedestrian nature and overall
streetscape of Western Avenue consistent with the other districts;



         (h)   Alleyways and pathways should be designed to
support and encourage pedestrian use;



         (i)   In order to enhance the character of the district
and promote the commercial vitality of the area, outdoor dining and gathering
spaces, as well as other amenities that will promote evening activities,
should be incorporated into developments. In order to encourage additional
pedestrian activity to enhance the commercial vitality of the area, small
spaces such as gardens and courtyards should be designed and incorporated
into developments;



         (j)   Retail uses should be located on the ground floor
and residential uses above the ground floor;



         (k)   Existing dwelling units throughout the district
should be maintained; and



         (l)   Landscaping and building design elements should be
incorporated into development adjacent to residential districts to create a
transition from commercial to residential development.



      (3)   Review of development proposals. Proposals for
development in the B-2 Community Commercial Business District shall be
reviewed consistent with the procedures for all properties reviewed by the
Building Review Board. In the event that variances are requested, the
variance shall be forwarded to the appropriate Board or Commission prior to
action by the Building Review Board.



(Prior Code, § 46-53.1)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 02-01, passed 1-7-2002;
Ord. 03-39, passed 6-19-2003; Ord. 04-02, passed 2-19-2004; Ord. 2010-24,
passed 4-7-2010)



§ 159.112  B-3 TRADITIONAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The B-3 Traditional Business District consists of the
blocks surrounding the Preservation District. To the north, it includes lots
on the north side of Wisconsin Avenue. To the south, it extends to Illinois
Road. These regulations are designed to preserve the community’s quality of
life and the “village” character of the area. In particular, these
regulations are intended to preserve the historic buildings, the variety of
building sizes and heights, various architectural styles and unique
detailing. In addition, the intent is to ensure the continued commercial
viability of the district by maintaining the use of quality building
materials, encouraging pedestrian traffic, providing generous green space and
preserving and enhancing the social gathering spaces in the district. The B-3
District is designed to accommodate a variety of uses in a mutually
advantageous setting. Multiple-family residential uses are encouraged in the
district.



   (B)   Conditions of use. Uses allowed in the B-3 Traditional
Business District are subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   All business, servicing, processing, displays and
storage shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except for
the following: outdoor dining, produce or flower markets, the sale of new or
used automobiles, the sale of gasoline, the sale of items of a seasonal
nature including Christmas trees, bedding plants and small shrubs when
authorized by a certificate of zoning compliance;



      (2)   Outdoor storage is permitted only when it is screened
from view. The required screening may be fencing, landscaping or walls and
must be of sufficient height and density that the storage area is screened
from view from ground level up to a point seven feet above the ground level
of the adjoining street or property. No outside storage is permitted to rise
above the screening;



      (3)   Outdoor uses, not including storage areas, must be
located wholly on private property, unless specifically authorized by permit
from the city. Outdoor uses shall not impede pedestrian or vehicle
circulation, and shall not eliminate or encroach upon required parking spaces
unless the parking spaces are designated only for employee parking. In
addition, no more than three of the required on-site parking spaces may be
used and permits for off-site parking must be purchased prior to
authorization of the outdoor use to replace the lost spaces. The Director of
Community Development may waive the requirement for purchase of permits for
off-site parking if documentation is submitted by the petitioner to
demonstrate that adequate on-site parking exists to meet the needs of the
business;



      (4)   No manufacturing or assembling shall be permitted except
as incidental to the business occupying the premises;



      (5)   A certificate of zoning compliance must be obtained
consistent with the provisions of § 159.041 prior to any change of use,
expansion of uses on a site and prior to the issuance of a building permit;



      (6)   The uses and development shall be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan;



      (7)   Non-retail percentage rule.



         (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this division (B)(7),
the following definitions shall apply.



            AREA A. The area bounded by Deerpath on the south,
Western Avenue on the east, the south side of Westminster on the north and
Forest Avenue on the west.



            GROUND FLOOR SPACE. Any space within Area A on the
ground floor having frontage on a street alley or outdoor pedestrian walkway.



            NON-RETAIL USE. Any use whose predominate activity
does not produce sales tax for the city, including, but not limited to,
banks, brokerage offices, real estate offices and other business or
professional offices. Governmental offices are excluded from the provisions
of this section.



            VACANCY. A space not regularly occupied and open for
business a minimum of four days per week on a monthly bases. An exception to
allow for temporary business closure may be granted by the Director of
Community Development upon written request provided that office equipment and
furnishings will remain in the establishment and a date certain for the
reopening of the establishment is provided.



         (b)   Limitations on ground floor space; Area A.
Non-retail uses are permitted in Area A; however, the aggregate total ground
floor space devoted to non-retail uses shall be limited to 10% of the net
rentable square footage of ground floor space within Area A and 10% of the
street frontage of ground floor space within Area A.



         (c)   Special use permit. Such uses on the ground floor
in Areas A in excess of the allowed percentages may be permitted by special
use permit.



         (d)   Non-retail use vacating a ground floor space.



            1.   When a non-retail use vacates a ground floor
space in Area A such ground floor space shall retain its non-retail status
for a period of six months, provided that written notice of the vacation is
delivered to the Director of Community Development within 30 days following
the vacancy. If written notice is received by the city within 30 days after
the vacancy, the space may be reoccupied by a non-retail use so long as a
certificate of zoning compliance is granted within six months of the date of
notification of the vacancy.



            2.   A three-month extension of this period may be
granted by the Director of Community Development based on a written request
from a property owner if building permits for interior renovations have been
issued and if the work is progressing. Any vacancy in a ground floor space
formerly occupied by a non-retail use for which the notice required in this
division (B)(7)(d) is not delivered shall lose its non-retail use status
after the expiration of the 30-day notice period.



      (8)   Appearance of vacant storefront windows.



         (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division
(B)(8), the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.



            GROUND FLOOR SPACE. Any space on the ground floor
having frontage on a street, alley or outdoor pedestrian walkway.



            STOREFRONT WINDOW. One or more windows for the
display of goods or wares on the facade(s) of a ground floor space.



            VACANCY. A space not regularly occupied and open for
business a minimum of four days per week on a monthly basis. An exception to
allow for temporary business closure may be granted by the Director of
Community Development upon written request provided that office equipment and
furnishings will remain in the establishment and a date certain for reopening
of the establishment is provided.



         (b)   Temporary treatment of storefront windows during
vacancy or interior renovation.



            1.   Vacant; renovation. The storefront windows of
any ground floor space that is vacant or undergoing interior renovation shall
be treated using one of the following methods within 15 business days after
the date on which the space first becomes vacant, or for the total duration
of the interior renovation.



               a.   Storefront windows shall be painted a
solid black color or completely covered with a seamless black paper to
obscure view into the space; or



               b.   As an alternative, in order to
encourage storefront window displays that enrich the character of the
business district and enliven the streetscape, exhibits by a local
not-for-profit visual arts or historical organization in the form of
paintings, photos and sculptures may be displayed, painted or affixed on the
glass in vacant storefront windows with permission of the property owner. A
storefront window that displays an exhibit is permitted one informational
sign up to two square feet in total sign area, identifying the name and
contact information for each exhibit; and



               c.   Advertising for an existing local
business may be displayed in a vacant storefront window in a manner
consistent with the city’s sign code.



            2.   “Opening soon” announcement. No sooner
than 30 days prior to the opening of a new business, an unlighted temporary
sign announcing the name of the new business maybe displayed in one
storefront window per facade. The sign shall not exceed ten square feet in
sign area and may identify the name of the business in a graphic or text
format.



         (c)   Minimum appearance requirements.



            1.   Visible adhesive or tape may not be used to
affix any window display, decorative screening or signage to a storefront
window;



            2.   Storefronts may not use newspaper or soap to
obscure windows;



            3.   No plastic tarp of any kind may be used to
block the windows; and



            4.   No window display or covering shall contain
any matter, in writing or in a depiction, that, when considered as a whole,
predominantly appeals to prurient interests.



         (d)   Minimum maintenance requirements.



            1.   All window coverings must be kept in good
repair and shall not be torn, damaged or otherwise left in a state of
disrepair.



            2.   Building exteriors must be maintained in
accordance with the requirements of the city’s property maintenance code.



   (C)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Generally. Permitted uses in the B-3 Community
Commercial Business District are listed in § 159.116. If an applicant
demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development,
that a use that is not specifically listed in § 159.116 is consistent with
the intent of the zoning district, and is similar and compatible with the
listed permitted uses, the Director of Community Development may allow the
new use. The Director of Community Development shall document all such
decisions in writing, provide a copy of the decision to the Plan Commission
for information and make a copy available for public review upon request.



      (2)   Restaurants; performance standards. In addition to all
other applicable provisions of the code, all types of restaurants must be
found to be in compliance with the following performance standards prior to
the issuance of a building permit.



         (a)   Applicable parking requirements of the code must
be satisfied or any necessary variances must be approved by the appropriate
Board or Commission and the City Council.



         (b)   A parking plan detailing number of employees, the
location for employee parking, estimated customers at various times, the
location of customer parking and information on valet parking if provided or
required, must be submitted for review and approval.



         (c)   1.   The review and approval process of the
Building Review Board or Historic Preservation Commission must be completed.
The approval must include all required elements including: new construction,
storefront alterations, additions, demolitions, screening of mechanical
equipment and trash enclosures.



            2.   Approval of landscaping, awnings, lighting
and signage by the appropriate Board or Commission must occur prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit.



         (d)   1.   The City Council review and approval
process for any liquor license, if applicable, must be completed. The hours
of operation of the restaurant shall conform to any requirements of the
liquor license.



            2.   For restaurants that do not require liquor
licenses, the hours of operation shall conform to the hours of existing
restaurants in the community.



         (e)   Details of the air filtration system and an
operation and maintenance schedule for the exhaust and filter systems must be
provided in the building permit submittal application. Issuance of the
building permit shall not occur until the systems along with the operation
and maintenance schedules have been approved.



         (f)   No loud speakers or amplification of sound are
permitted outside the building.



         (g)   Schedules for deliveries and trash pickup must be
submitted and found to be acceptable to the city.



         (h)   For all restaurants egress and access to the site,
trash enclosures and delivery areas shall be located to minimize the impact
of traffic, light and noise on the single-family homes.



   (D)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed consistent with the
provisions of § 159.045 upon the granting of a special use permit for the
specific use in accordance with the terms of a special use permit ordinance
therefore. Special uses in the B-3 Community Business District are set forth
in § 159.116. Special use permits may also be granted to allow development
incentives as provided for in § 159.114. In addition to the standard special
use permit criteria in § 159.045 of the code, the petitioner shall show that
the following criteria are also be satisfied.



      (1)   A traffic study in a form satisfactory to the City
Public Works, Engineer and Public Safety Departments shall be submitted and
shall establish that the proposed use and development will not materially and
adversely impair traffic convenience and safety.



      (2)   For drive-through facilities of any type:



         (a)   Ingress and egress points are located in a manner
that does not create safety hazards for pedestrians or other vehicles;



         (b)   Pedestrian pathways are provided in areas that are
separated from the drive-through facility and separated from the ingress and
egress points to the drive-through facility;



         (c)   Pedestrian access to automatic banking facilities
is provided to encourage pedestrian activity in the area; and



         (d)   The drive-through facility is sited, configured
and screened in a manner that is consistent with the character of the area
through landscaping, grade change, fences, walls or structures so as to
minimize the visual impacts on the streetscape.



      (3)   It has been demonstrated that the building can be
adapted to different additive uses in the future.



      (4)   For new buildings, the development provides pedestrian
links between the development and nearby retail uses.



      (5)   For new buildings and buildings over 5,000 square feet,
additive uses, as identified in § 159.116 are incorporated into the
development.



      (6)   If a determination is made by the Plan Commission that
the proposed development is a meritorious project that materially advances
the stated purposes of the B-3 District and provides specific and
identifiable long term benefits to the community, a special use permit may be
granted even if divisions (D)(4) and (D)(5) above are not fully satisfied.



   (E)   Lot size and coverage. No specific requirements.



   (F)   Setback requirements.



      (1)   Front yard and corner side yard. A setback of five feet
from the front and corner side property lines shall be required for all newly
constructed and replacement buildings.



      (2)   Side lot line and side or rear lot line. Where a side
lot line of a property in the B-3 District coincides with a side or rear lot
line in an adjacent residence or general residence district, a setback equal
in dimension to the side yard setback required in the adjacent residential
district shall be required.



      (3)   Rear lot line and side lot line. Where a rear lot line
of a property in the B-3 District coincides with a side lot line in an
adjacent residence or general residence district, a setback equal in
dimension to the side yard setback required in the adjacent residential
district shall be required.



      (4)   Rear lot line and rear lot line. Where a rear lot line
of a property in the B-3 District coincides with a rear lot line in an
adjacent residence or general residence district, a setback equal in
dimension to the rear yard setback required in the adjacent residential
district shall be required.



   (G)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall not exceed 35 feet, or three stories, and the
maximum height of all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25
feet.



   (H)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio for the B-3 District is
0.75. A higher floor area ratio may be considered through the Central
Business District Planned Development procedures in § 159.114.



   (I)   Site plan and design review. The unique character of the B-3
District is reflected not only in the orientation of buildings and
improvements as reflected on a traditional site plan, but also in the
vertical orientation of buildings and the inter-relationship of buildings,
landscaping, the streetscape and other features. In order to ensure the
orderly development of properties within the B-3 District in a manner
consistent with the overall character of the District, all proposed
development within the B-3 District shall be subject to the site plan and
design review requirements of this division (I).



      (1)   Application requirements. All proposed developments
within the B-3 District, shall be subject to site plan and design review
standards listed below. In addition to the application requirements for the
Building Review Board or the Historic Preservation Commission, the following
information shall be provided as part of the application.



         (a)   Lot area;



         (b)   A site plan showing building foot prints,
landscaped areas, open space, locations of outdoor uses, parking areas and
walkways;



         (c)   A floor plan delineating the existing and proposed
floor area;



         (d)   Existing and proposed floor area ratio;



         (e)   Existing and proposed number of dwelling units;



         (f)   Parking calculations showing the number of spaces
required and the number of existing and proposed spaces. If parking
requirements are to be met through a variance or special use permit, this
request must accompany the development application;



         (g)   A narrative that explains how the proposed
development meets the district site plan and design standards;



         (h)   A traffic study shall be submitted including, but
not limited to, the following information: the volume of traffic that will be
generated by the proposed uses, the traffic circulation patterns, a study of
how ingress and egress to parking lots and drive through facilities will
impact pedestrian enhance or impair activity, and how existing streets will
be impacted;



         (i)   A description of the proposed uses of the building
and information on any covenants or restrictions that will be placed on the
development to ensure specific uses in the future;



         (j)   A plan illustrating how the building and overall
site can be adaptively reused in the future by an alternative use; and



         (k)   Such additional information as the Director of
Community Development deems necessary to properly review the application.



      (2)   Site plan and design review standards; Historic
Preservation Commission. For properties under the purview of the Historic
Preservation Commission, in addition to the standards in the Historic
Preservation Ordinance, as codified in Chapter 155, development proposals
should be designed to preserve and enhance the character and value of the
district through the application of the following standards:



         (a)   Bank Lane is the pedestrian spine of the Central
Business District. Developments along Bank Lane should complement the
pedestrian elements of Bank Lane, both north and south of Market Square, by
incorporating the various elements listed below;



         (b)   Landscape and streetscape treatments shall
include, but not be limited to burying utilities, screening all mechanical
equipment, planting street trees, foundation plantings, street furniture,
variety in building setbacks, pedestrian connections and open spaces;



         (c)   Bank Lane should be maintained and enhanced as an
important pedestrian spine linking various elements of the Central Business
District and providing pedestrian access to retail, residential and office
uses from off-site parking areas;



         (d)   Alleyways and pathways designed to support and
encourage pedestrian use;



         (e)   In order to enhance the character of the district
and promote the commercial vitality of the area, outdoor dining and gathering
spaces, as well as other amenities that will promote evening activities,
should be incorporated into developments;



         (f)   In order to encourage additional pedestrian
activity to enhance the commercial vitality of the area, small spaces such as
gardens and courtyards should be designed and incorporated into developments;
and



         (g)   Retail uses on the ground floor and residential
uses above the ground floor.



      (3)   Site plan and design standards; Building Review Board.
For properties under the purview of the Building Review Board, in addition to
the standard criteria used by the Building Review Board, development
proposals shall be designed to preserve and enhance the character and value
of the district through the use of the following elements:



         (a)   Bank Lane is the pedestrian spine of the Central
Business District. Developments along Bank Lane should complement the
pedestrian elements of Bank Lane, both north and south of Market Square, by
incorporating the various elements listed below;



         (b)   Buildings shall be of varying heights, roof lines
and architectural styles, facades shall be detailed with windows and offsets
of building elements, building setbacks, arcades, awnings and entryways to
achieve a human scale and pedestrian friendly street edges;



         (c)   All elevations of the building visible from the
streetscape shall be detailed to a consistent level;



         (d)   Architectural styles, building elements,
proportions, massing, materials and detailing shall be consistent with, and
complimentary to, the historic character of the district;



         (e)   Natural, high quality building materials shall be
used for the exterior of buildings;



         (f)   Landscape and streetscape treatments shall
include, but not be limited to, burying utilities, screening all mechanical
equipment, planting street trees, foundation plantings, street furniture,
variety in building setbacks, pedestrian connections and open spaces;



         (g)   Bank Lane shall be maintained and enhanced as an
important pedestrian spine linking various elements of the Central Business
District and providing pedestrian access to retail, residential and office
uses from off-site parking areas;



         (h)   Alleyways and pathways shall be designed to
support and encourage pedestrian use;



         (i)   In order to enhance the character of the district
and promote the commercial vitality of the area, outdoor dining and gathering
spaces, as well as other amenities that will promote evening activities,
should be incorporated into developments;



         (j)   In order to encourage additional pedestrian
activity to enhance the commercial vitality of the area, small spaces such as
gardens and courtyards should be designed and incorporated into developments;



         (k)   Retail uses shall be located on the ground floor
and residential uses above the ground floor;



         (l)   Existing dwelling units throughout the district
shall be maintained; and



         (m)   Landscaping and building design elements shall be
incorporated into development adjacent residential districts to create a
transition from commercial to residential development.



      (4)   Review of development proposals. All proposals for
development in the B-3 Traditional Business District shall be reviewed
consistent with the procedures for all properties reviewed by the Building
Review Board and Historic Preservation Commission. In the event that
variances are requested, the variance shall be forwarded to the appropriate
Board or Commission prior to action by the Building Review Board or Historic
Preservation Commission.



(Prior Code, § 46-53.2)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 02-01, passed 1-7-2002;
Ord. 03-39, passed 6-19-2003; Ord. 04-02, passed 2-19-2004; Ord. 2010-24,
passed 4-7-2010)



§ 159.113  B-4 PRESERVATION BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The B-4 Preservation Business District is designed to
preserve the unique attributes of the historic retail, residential and office
core of the city. This district consists entirely of buildings that are
within the National Register District and the local historic district. Any
changes to the buildings are subject to review by the Lake Forest Historic
Preservation Commission. Little or no on-site parking is available within the
district.



      (2)   These regulations are designed to preserve the
community’s quality of life and the “village” character of the core
area. In particular, these regulations are intended to preserve the historic
buildings and the variety of building sizes, heights and architectural styles
and detailing. In addition the district is intended to ensure the continued
commercial viability of the district by maintaining the use of quality
building materials, encouraging pedestrian traffic, providing generous green
space and preserving and enhancing the social gathering spaces in the
district. At the heart of the district is Market Square, the community’s
shared front yard for special events. It conveys the social spirit and
exemplifies the historic character of the entire city. The B-4 District is
designed to accommodate a variety of uses in a mutually advantageous setting.
Multiple-family residential uses are encouraged above the first floor.



   (B)   Conditions of use. Uses allowed in the B-4 Preservation
Business District are subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   All business, servicing, processing, displays and
storage shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except for
the following: outdoor dining, produce or flower markets, the sale of new or
used automobiles, the sale of gasoline, the sale of items of a seasonal
nature including Christmas trees, bedding plants and small shrubs when
authorized by a certificate of zoning compliance;



      (2)   Outdoor storage is permitted only when it is screened
from view. The required screening may be fencing, landscaping or walls and
must be of sufficient height and density that the storage materials are
screened from view as required above, from ground level up to a point seven
feet above the ground level of the adjoining street or property. No outside
storage is permitted to rise above the screening;



      (3)   Outdoor uses, not including storage areas, must be
located wholly on private property, unless specifically authorized by permit
from the city. Outdoor uses shall not impede pedestrian or vehicle
circulation, and shall not eliminate or encroach upon required parking spaces
unless the parking spaces are designated only for employee parking. In
addition, no more than three of the required on-site parking spaces may be
used and permits for off-site parking must be purchased prior to
authorization of the outdoor use to replace the lost spaces. The Director of
Community Development may waive the requirement for purchase of permits for
off-site parking if documentation is submitted by the petitioner to
demonstrate that adequate on-site parking exists to meet the needs of the
business;



      (4)   No manufacturing or assembling shall be permitted except
as incidental to the business occupying the premises;



      (5)   A certificate of zoning compliance must be obtained
consistent with the provisions of § 159.041 prior to any change of use,
expansion of uses on a site, and prior to the issuance of a building permit;



      (6)   The uses and development shall be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan;



      (7)   Non-retail percentage rule.



         (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this division (B)(7),
the following definitions shall apply.



            AREA A. The area bounded by Deerpath on the south,
Western Avenue on the east, Westminster on the north and Forest Avenue on the
west.



            GROUND FLOOR SPACE. Any space within Area A on the
ground floor having frontage on a street, alley or outdoor pedestrian walkway.



            NON-RETAIL USE. Any use whose predominate activity
does not produce sales tax for the city, including but not limited to, banks,
brokerage offices, real estate offices and other business or professional
offices. Governmental offices are excluded from the provisions of this
section.



            VACANCY. A space not regularly occupied and open for
business a minimum of four days per week on a monthly bases. An exception to
allow for temporary business closure may be granted by the Director of
Community Development upon written request provided that office equipment and
furnishings will remain in the establishment and a date certain for the
reopening of the establishment is provided.



         (b)   Limitations on ground floor space. Non-retail uses
are permitted in Area A; however, the aggregate total ground floor space
devoted to non-retail uses shall be limited to 10% of the net rentable square
footage of ground floor space within Area A and 10% of the street frontage of
ground floor space within Area A.



         (c)   Special use permit. Such uses on the ground floor
in Area A in excess of the allowed percentages may be permitted by special
use permit.



         (d)   Non-retail use vacating a ground floor space.



            1.   a.   When a non-retail use vacates a
ground floor space in Area A, such ground floor space shall retain its
non-retail status for a period of six months, provided that written notice of
the vacation is delivered to the Director of Community Development within 30
days following the vacancy.



               b.   If written notice is received by the
city within 30 days after the vacancy, the space may be reoccupied by a
non-retail use so long as a certificate of zoning compliance is granted
within six months of the date of notification of the vacancy.



            2.   a.   A three-month extension of this
period may be granted by the Director of Community Development based on a
written request from a property owner if building permits for interior
renovations have been issued and if the work is progressing.



               b.   Any vacancy in a ground floor space
formerly occupied by a non-retail use for which the notice required in this
division (B)(7)(d) is not delivered shall lose its non-retail use status
after the expiration of the 30-day notice period.



      (8)   Farmers’ market conditions. Farmers’ markets are
only authorized as permitted uses pursuant to an annual permit issued by the
Director of Community Development. Prior to the issuance of an annual permit
for a farmers’ market, the following performance standards shall be met to
the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development.



         (a)   The farmers’ market is operated by a
not-for-profit entity.



         (b)   The dates of operation of the farmers’ market
are consistent with the following limitations:



            1.   The market may operate from Memorial Day
through the end of October; and



            2.   The market may operate no more than one day
per week for a period not to exceed six hours, between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m., not including setup and disassembly of the market.



         (c)   The farmers’ market will consist of no more than
30 vendors at any one time.



         (d)   Vendors may only sell products that are grown,
produced or made locally, which shall be determined by the Director of
Community Development, and that comply with all applicable laws and
regulations.



         (e)   1.   A plan showing the proposed location of
the farmers’ market must be submitted for review and be approved by the
Director of Community Development.



            2.   Any location plan must meet the following
conditions:



               1.   The market shall be located in a
surface parking lot, owned or controlled by the city, in the B-4 Zoning
District; and



               2.   The location shall not impede emergency
access as determined to be necessary by the Police and Fire Chiefs.



         (f)   A plan showing the general layout of the
farmers’ market including the vendor spaces, the location of barricades to
block access to portions of the parking lot and drive lanes, and the location
of signage must be submitted for review and be approved by the Director of
Community Development.



         (g)   An operational plan outlining the hours of set up,
responsible parties for setup and oversight and contact information must be
submitted for review and be approved by the Director of Community Development.



      (9)   Appearance of vacant storefront windows.



         (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division
(B)(9), the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.



            GROUND FLOOR SPACE. Any space on the ground floor
having frontage on a street, alley or outdoor pedestrian walkway.



            STOREFRONT WINDOW. One or more windows for the
display of goods or wares on the facade(s) of a ground floor space.



            VACANCY. A space not regularly occupied and open for
business a minimum of four days per week on a monthly basis. An exception to
allow for temporary business closure may be granted by the Director of
Community Development upon written request provided that office equipment and
furnishings will remain in the establishment and a date certain for reopening
of the establishment is provided.



         (b)   Temporary treatment of storefront windows during
vacancy or interior renovation.



            1.   Vacant; renovation. The storefront windows of
any ground floor space that is vacant or undergoing interior renovation shall
be treated using one of the following methods within 15 business days after
the date on which the space first becomes vacant, or for the total duration
of the interior renovation.



               a.   Storefront windows shall be painted a
solid black color or completely covered with a seamless black paper to
obscure view into the space; or



               b.   As an alternative, in order to
encourage storefront window displays that enrich the character of the
business district and enliven the streetscape, exhibits by a local
not-for-profit visual arts or historical organization in the form of
paintings, photos and sculptures may be displayed, painted or affixed on the
glass in vacant storefront windows with permission of the property owner. A
storefront window that displays an exhibit is permitted one informational
sign up to two square feet in total sign area, identifying the name and
contact information for each exhibit; and



               c.   Advertising for an existing local
business may be displayed in a vacant storefront window in a manner
consistent with the city’s sign code.



            2.   “Opening soon” announcement. No sooner
than 30 days prior to the opening of a new business, an unlighted temporary
sign announcing the name of the new business maybe displayed in one
storefront window per facade. The sign shall not exceed ten square feet in
sign area and may identify the name of the business in a graphic or text
format.



         (c)   Minimum appearance requirements.



            1.   Visible adhesive or tape may not be used to
affix any window display, decorative screening or signage to a storefront
window;



            2.   Storefronts may not use newspaper or soap to
obscure windows;



            3.   No plastic tarp of any kind may be used to
block the windows; and



            4.   No window display or covering shall contain
any matter, in writing or in a depiction, that, when considered as a whole,
predominantly appeals to prurient interests.



         (d)   Minimum maintenance requirements.



            1.   All window coverings must be kept in good
repair and shall not be torn, damaged or otherwise left in a state of
disrepair.



            2.   Building exteriors must be maintained in
accordance with the requirements of the city’s property maintenance code.



   (C)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Generally. Permitted uses in the B-4 Preservation
Business District are listed in § 159.116. If an applicant demonstrates to
the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development, that a use that is
not specifically listed in § 159.116 is consistent with the intent of the
zoning district, and is similar and compatible with the listed permitted
uses, the Director of Community Development may allow the new use. The
Director of Community Development shall document all such decisions in
writing, provide a copy of the decision to the Plan Commission for
information, and make a copy available for public review upon request.



      (2)   Restaurants; performance standards. In addition to all
other applicable provisions of the code, all types of restaurants must be
found to be in compliance with the following performance standards prior to
the issuance of a building permit.



         (a)   Applicable parking requirements of the code must
be satisfied or any necessary variances must be approved by the appropriate
Board or Commission and the City Council.



         (b)   A parking plan detailing number of employees, the
location for employee parking, estimated customers at various times, the
location of customer parking and information on valet parking if provided or
required, must be submitted for review and approval.



         (c)   1.   The review and approval process of the
Building Review Board or Historic Preservation Commission must be completed.
The approval must include all required elements including: new construction,
storefront alterations, additions, demolitions, screening of mechanical
equipment.



            2.   Approval of landscaping, awnings, lighting
and signage by the appropriate Board or Commission must occur prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit.



         (d)   1.   The City Council review and approval
process for any liquor license, if applicable, must be completed. The hours
of operation of the restaurant shall conform to any requirements of the
liquor license.



            2.   For restaurants that do not require liquor
licenses, the hours of operation shall conform to existing restaurants in the
community.



         (e)   Details of the air filtration system and an
operation and maintenance schedule for the exhaust and filter systems must be
provided in the building permit submittal application. Issuance of the
building permit shall not occur until the systems along with the operation
and maintenance schedules have been approved.



         (f)   No loud speakers or amplification of sound are
permitted outside the building.



         (g)   Schedules for deliveries and trash pickup must be
submitted and found to be acceptable to the city.



         (h)   For all restaurants egress and access to the site
and delivery areas shall be located to minimize the impact of traffic, light
and noise on the single-family homes.



   (D)   Special uses. Special uses may be allowed consistent with the
provisions of § 159.045 upon the granting of a special use permit for the
specific use in accordance with the terms of a special use permit ordinance
therefore. Special uses in the B-2 Community Business District are set forth
in § 159.116. Special use permits may also be granted to allow development
incentives as provided for in § 159.114. In addition to the standard special
use permit criteria in § 159.045, the petitioner shall show that the
following criteria are also be satisfied.



      (1)   A traffic study in a form satisfactory to the City
Public Works, Engineer and Public Safety Departments shall be submitted and
shall establish that the proposed use and development will not materially and
adversely impair traffic convenience and safety.



      (2)   For drive-through facilities of any type:



         (a)   Ingress and egress points are located in a manner
that does not create safety hazards for pedestrians or other vehicles;



         (b)   Pedestrian pathways are provided in areas that are
separated from the drive-through facility and separated from the ingress and
egress points to the drive-through facility;



         (c)   Pedestrian access to automatic banking facilities
is provided to encourage pedestrian activity in the area; and



         (d)   The drive-through facility is sited, configured
and screened in a manner that is consistent with the character of the area
through landscaping, grade change, fences, walls or structures so as to
minimize the visual impacts on the streetscape.



      (3)   It has been demonstrated that the building can be
adapted to different additive uses in the future.



      (4)   For new buildings, the development provides pedestrian
links between the development and nearby retail uses.



      (5)   For new buildings and buildings over 5,000 square feet,
additive uses, as identified in § 159.116 are incorporated into the
development.



      (6)   If a determination is made by the Plan Commission that
the proposed development is a meritorious project that materially advances
the stated purposes of the B-2 District and provides specific and
identifiable long term benefits to the community, a special use permit may be
granted even if divisions (D)(4) and (D)(5) are not fully satisfied.



   (E)   Lot size and coverage. No specific requirements.



   (F)   Yard requirements.



      (1)   Front yard and corner side yard. A setback of five feet
from the front and corner side yard property lines shall be required for all
newly constructed and replacement buildings.



      (2)   Setbacks. There are no other setback requirements in
this district.



   (G)   Height requirements. The maximum height of all principal
buildings and structures shall not exceed 35 feet, or three stories, and the
maximum height of all accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 25
feet.



   (H)   Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio for the B-4
District is 1.25. A higher floor area ratio may be considered through the
Central Business District Planned Development procedures in § 159.114.



   (I)   Site plan and design review. The unique character of the B-4
District is reflected not only in the orientation of buildings and
improvements as reflected on a traditional site plan, but also in the
vertical orientation of buildings and the inter-relationship of buildings,
landscaping, the streetscape and other features. In order to ensure the
orderly development of properties within the B-4 District in a manner
consistent with the overall character of the district, all proposed
development within the B-4 District shall be subject to the site plan and
design review requirements of this division (I).



      (1)   Application requirements. All proposed developments
within the B-4 Preservation District shall be subject to the site plan and
design review standards listed below. In addition to the application
requirements for the Historic Preservation Commission, the following
information shall be provided as part of the application.



         (a)   Lot area;



         (b)   A site plan showing building foot prints,
landscaped areas, open space, locations of outdoor uses, parking areas and
walkways;



         (c)   A floor plan delineating the existing and proposed
floor area;



         (d)   Existing and proposed floor area ratio;



         (e)   Existing and proposed number of dwelling units;



         (f)   Parking calculations showing the number of spaces
required and the number of existing and proposed spaces. If parking
requirements are to be met through a variance or special use permit, this
request must accompany the development application;



         (g)   A narrative that explains how the proposed
development meets the district site plan and design standards;



         (h)   A traffic study shall be submitted including, but
not limited to, the following information: the volume of traffic that will be
generated by the proposed uses, the traffic circulation patterns, a study of
how ingress and egress to parking lots and drive through facilities will
enhance or impair pedestrian activity, and how existing streets will be
impacted;



         (i)   A description of the proposed uses of the building
and information on any covenants or restrictions that will be placed on the
development to ensure specific uses in the future;



         (j)   A plan illustrating how the building and overall
site can be adaptively reused in the future by an alternative use; and



         (k)   Such additional information as the Director of
Community Development deems necessary to properly review the application.



      (2)   Site plan and design review standards; Historic
Preservation Commission. In addition to the standards in the Historic
Preservation Ordinance, as codified in Chapter 155, development proposals
shall be designed to preserve and enhance the character and value of the
district through use of the following standards.



         (a)   1.   Bank Lane is the pedestrian spine of the
Central Business District.



            2.   Developments along Bank Lane should
complement the pedestrian elements of Bank Lane, both north and south of
Market Square, by incorporating the various elements listed below.



         (b)   Landscape and streetscape treatments shall
include, but not be limited to, burying utilities, screening all mechanical
equipment, planting street trees, foundation plantings, street furniture,
variety in building setbacks, pedestrian connections and open spaces.



         (c)   Bank Lane shall be maintained and enhanced as an
important pedestrian spine linking various elements of the Central Business
District and providing pedestrian access to retail, residential and office
uses from off-site parking areas.



         (d)   Alleyways and pathways shall be designed to
support and encourage pedestrian use.



         (e)   In order to enhance the character of the district
and promote the commercial vitality of the area, outdoor dining and gathering
spaces, as well as other amenities that will promote evening activities,
should be incorporated into developments.



         (f)   In order to encourage additional pedestrian
activity to enhance the commercial vitality of the area, small spaces such as
gardens and courtyards should be designed and incorporated into developments.



         (g)   Retail uses shall be located on the ground floor
with residential uses above the ground floor.



      (3)   Review of development proposals.



         (a)   Proposals for development in the B-4 Preservation
Business District shall be reviewed consistent with the procedures for all
properties reviewed by the Historic Preservation Commission.



         (b)   In the event that variances are requested, the
variance shall be forwarded to the appropriate board or commission prior to
action by the Historic Preservation Commission.



(Prior Code, § 46-53.3)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 02-01, passed 1-7-2002;
Ord. 03-39, passed 6-19-2003; Ord. 04-02, passed 2-19-2004; Ord. 2010-24,
passed 4-7-2010; Ord. 2013-20, passed 5-6-2013)



§ 159.114  CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the CBD Planned Development provisions
is to allow flexibility to achieve the goals of maintaining a vital business
district, preserving the village character and historic significance and
ensuring that the development is consistent with the available
infrastructure. This provision provides a process for the Plan Commission and
City Council to consider development incentives that vary from the standards
in the B-2, B-3 and B-4 zoning district through the special use permit
process established in § 159.045.



   (B)   Permissible zones. A planned development shall be permitted
only pursuant to special use permit in the B-2, B-3 and B-4 Districts.



   (C)   Site standards. A planned development shall not require a
minimum lot area.



   (D)   Development incentives. The CBD Planned Development process
provides the opportunity for development incentives in the zoning district as
described below.



      (1)   The maximum floor area ratios in each zoning district
may be increased up to the limits listed below if the development criteria
are met, the standard criteria for a special use permit and the other
standards of the zoning district are satisfied, and the variance incentive is
found to further development that is consistent with the purpose of §
159.110.



 

B-2 Community Commercial, floor area ratio cap
 

1.0



B-3 Traditional Business, floor area ratio cap
 

1.25



B-4 Preservation Business, floor area ratio cap
 

2.0




 



      (2)   The required parking spaces may be modified through
payment in lieu of parking if one or more of the development criteria are
met, the standard criteria for a special use permit and the other standards
of the zoning district are satisfied, and the incentive is found to further
development that is consistent with the purpose of this chapter.



   (E)   Development criteria.



      (1)   In addition to the standard criteria for a special use
permit, the criteria in the applicable zoning district, and the other
standards of the zoning district, the following criteria shall be satisfied
to achieve the bonuses offered by the planned development provisions.



         (a)   In the B-2 District, above the first floor, the
project shall be entirely residential, or at least 50% of the first floor is
occupied by retail uses.



         (b)   In the B-3 District, at least 50% of the floor
area shall be committed to residential use or at least 60% of the first floor
is occupied by retail uses.



         (c)   In the B-4 District, residential uses above the
first floor are provided unless the applicant demonstrates that such uses
will not further the overall purpose of the district at the proposed site.



         (d)   If a drive-through is proposed in any district as
part of the development, it is located off site, located within a building or
is constructed to avoid the construction of additional curb cuts.



         (e)   The building and landscape concepts have received
conceptual approval from the Historic Preservation Commission or the Building
Review Board.



      (2)   In addition to the above criteria, one or more of the
following criteria shall be satisfied.



         (a)   At least 50% of the required parking spaces are
located underground or all of the parking spaces are located in parking deck
one level of which is constructed below grade.



         (b)   At least 25% of the site is retained as open
space, exclusive of parking islands.



         (c)   An increased setback of at least five feet is
provided along the streetscape side of the building or a “pocket park” is
created with a visual and pedestrian link to the public street.



   (F)   Application materials. Any applicant for a CBD Planned
Development shall file the following information along with the information
required under the special use permit procedures with the Director of
Community Development:



      (1)   A statement describing the proposed uses, overall
character of the development and a detailed narrative outlining how the
development satisfies the criteria in this section, the special use permit
criteria and the intent of this section to preserve the character of the
Central Business District;



      (2)   Calculations and an annotated floor plan of the floor
area ratio;



      (3)   A site plan showing building locations, parking areas,
open space, landscape areas, pedestrian walkways, loading docks, location of
mechanical equipment and any other pertinent features of the plan to the
overall character of the site;



      (4)   A copy of the proposed protective covenants whereby the
owner proposes to regulate land use and ensure specific uses in the future;



      (5)   A draft of proposed incorporation agreement and a draft
of bylaws or easement declaration concerning maintenance of open space and
other common facilities if needed for the proposed development;



      (6)   Architectural elevations and perspective drawings of all
proposed structures and improvements;



      (7)   A traffic study shall be submitted including, but not
limited to, the following information: the volume of traffic that will be
generated by the proposed uses, the traffic circulation patterns, a study of
how ingress and egress to parking lots and drive through facilities will
enhance or impair pedestrian activity, and how existing streets will be
impacted;



      (8)   A plan illustrating how the building and overall site
can be adaptively reused in the future by an alternative use;



      (9)   A comprehensive landscape plan for the site;



      (10)   Preliminary engineering plans;



      (11)   A development schedule indicating:



         (a)   The approximate date when construction of the
project will begin;



         (b)   The construction phases, if any, in which the
project will be built, and the approximate dates when construction of each
stage will begin and end; and



         (c)   The anticipated completion date of the entire
project, including landscaping.



      (12)   A statement of proposed financing and financial
assurances acceptable to the Plan Commission and City Council guaranteeing
that once any stage of a development is started it will be completed;



      (13)   Such additional information as the Director of
Community Development deems necessary to properly review the application; and



      (14)   A study of the financial impacts of the proposed
development on the city and other affected taxing bodies.



(Prior Code, § 46-53.4)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 02-01, passed 1-7-2002;
Ord. 03-39, passed 6-19-2003)



§ 159.115  TD TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The TD District is designed to accommodate high quality
developments in limited land areas located in close proximity to the Illinois
tollway having significant natural features (including without limitation,
forested areas, bodies of water, wetlands or special habitats) requiring
special treatment or preservation, and lying between existing land uses of
distinctly different character. Although the TD District allows by right
large tract residential uses and other uses permitted in the R-5 District
that can provide adequate buffering and transition elements onsite, it also
offers an array of complementary special uses. The appropriateness of such
special uses will be determined by surrounding uses as well as the site plan
for and orientation of uses on the property in question.



      (2)   Appropriate developments for this District will:



         (a)   Provide, to the extent applicable, interaction
between residential, retail, office uses and other related uses;



         (b)   Preserve in a reasonable manner the natural
features on or adjacent to the development;



         (c)   Protect and enhance the range of living,
entertaining and business opportunities within the city while not adversely
impacting adjoining residential areas; and



         (d)   Provide uses that are complementary or additive to
nearby office developments.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the TD
Transitional District: all uses permitted in the R-5 Single-Family Residence
District pursuant to § 159.081(A).



   (C)   Special uses. Special uses may by allowed in the TD
Transitional District as provided in § 159.045(P).



   (D)   Minimum district size. No area consisting of fewer than 20
acres (including public and private rights-of-way) may be classified in the
TD District.



   (E)   District location and characteristics.



      (1)   No area shall be classified in the TD District unless
more than half of the acreage of the area is located within:



         (a)   One thousand six hundred feet of Illinois Route
60; and



         (b)   Three thousand two hundred feet of a tollway
operated by and under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Toll Highway
Authorities, or its successor agencies.



      (2)   In addition, no area shall be classified within the TD
District unless:



         (a)   It is located between existing development of
distinctly different character for which careful transitional uses and
development is necessary and appropriate; and



         (b)   There exist on or adjacent to the area significant
natural features or resources that can be managed most efficiently through
the approval and implementation of a detailed site plan.



      (3)   For purposes of division (E)(2)(b) above, adjacent
vacant properties should be disregarded for determining the nature of nearby
development.



   (F)   Regulations for permitted uses.



      (1)   Lot size requirements. All permitted uses in the TD
District shall be subject to the lot size requirements applicable to the R-5
District as set forth in § 159.081(C).



      (2)   Yards. All permitted uses in the TD District shall be
subject to the yard requirements applicable to the R-5 District as set forth
in § 159.081(D).



      (3)   Height. All permitted uses in the TD District shall be
subject to the height requirements applicable to the R-5 District as set
forth in § 159.081(E).



      (4)   Signs. All permitted uses in the TD District shall be
subject to the sign requirements applicable to the R-5 District as set forth
in § 159.080(G).



      (5)   Parking. All permitted uses in the TD District shall be
subject to the parking requirements applicable to the R-5 District as set
forth in § 159.080(H).



      (6)   Loading. All permitted uses in the TD District shall be
subject to the loading requirements applicable to the R-5 District as set
forth in § 159.080(I).



   (G)   Regulations for special uses. Although each development within
a TD District shall be evaluated in its overall context, it is intended that
the bulk, height, lot and yard requirements for special uses in the TD
District will generally conform to the requirements of the adjoining district
from which the proposed use serves as a transition (e.g., residential uses in
the TD District will conform to an adjoining residential district).



      (1)   Lot size, coverage and open space. All special uses in
the TD District shall be subject to the lot size, coverage and open space
requirements set forth in the ordinance approving the special use permit.



      (2)   Floor area ratio. All special uses in the TD District
shall be subject to the maximum floor area ratio set forth in the ordinance
approving the special use permit, but a particular use shall not exceed the
floor area ratio limitations generally applicable for the same use on a
zoning lot abutting the use in question, except upon a finding in the
ordinance approving the special use permit that a greater floor area ratio is
warranted based on the standards for granting variations under the city’s
codes.



      (3)   Yard requirements. All special uses in the TD District
shall be subject to the yard requirements set forth in the ordinance
approving the special use permit. Unless expressly provided in the ordinance
approving the special use permit, a 150-foot transition yard shall be
maintained between a nonresidential use within the TD District and an
abutting zoning lot zoned within a residential district.



      (4)   Height requirements. All special uses in the TD District
shall be subject to the height requirements set forth in the ordinance
approving the special use permit.



      (5)   Number of buildings on a zoning lot. Multiple principal
buildings are allowed on a zoning lot, subject to the limitations set forth
in the ordinance approving the special use permit.



      (6)   Parking and loading. All special uses in the TD District
shall be subject to the following parking and loading regulations.



         (a)   Residential uses. Unless otherwise provided in the
ordinance approving the special use permit, all residential uses approved as
part of a special use permit shall comply with the parking and loading
requirements applicable to the R-5 District as set forth in § 159.080(H) and
(I).



         (b)   Nonresidential uses. Unless otherwise provided in
the ordinance approving the special use permit, all nonresidential uses
approved as part of a special use permit shall comply with the parking and
loading requirements contained in §§ 159.136 through 159.139 as may be
applicable to the respective use or uses. Where appropriate, to preserve open
space or protect natural features on the property, shared parking should be
utilized.



      (7)   Signs. Signs located on properties subject to a special
use permit shall comply with the following sign regulations.



         (a)   Residential uses. Unless otherwise provided in the
ordinance approving the special use permit, all residential uses approved as
part of a special use permit shall comply with the sign requirements
applicable to the R-5 District as set forth in § 159.080(G).



         (b)   Nonresidential uses. Unless otherwise provided in
the ordinance approving the special use permit, all nonresidential uses
approved as part of a special use permit shall comply with the sign
requirements contained in Chapter 153 of this code that are applicable to the
respective use.



      (8)   Variations; customary approvals. Nothing in this section
shall preclude the owner of any property within the TD District from seeking
any authorized variations or exceptions from the generally applicable
regulations prescribed herein. In addition, unless expressly provided in a
special use permit, all customary reviews, approvals and permits shall be
required in connection with the development of any special use in the TD
District.



   (H)   Procedure.



      (1)   Application. The owner shall submit to the city a
written application for approval of a tentative development plan on forms
supplied by the city. The application shall be accompanied by payment of
requisite filing fees and a development plan, as described in division (H)(3)
below.



      (2)   Tentative development plan. The tentative development
plan shall be prepared by a licensed architect, land surveyor, civil engineer
or planning consultant and shall include the following:



         (a)   A survey showing existing features of the
property, including contours, buildings, structures, conditions and species
of trees over four inches in trunk diameter, streets, utility easements,
right-of-way, land use and other data required by the city’s subdivision
regulations for tentative plat approval, the tree preservation and landscape
ordinance (as codified in Chapter 99) and other applicable city codes,
ordinances and regulations;



         (b)   A site plan showing proposed building location and
land use areas on the property in question. The site plan shall identify all
bulk, space and yard information relating to the property in question;



         (c)   An area map identifying uses and showing the
buildings, natural features, roadways, pedestrian ways and other significant
characteristics of the land lying adjacent to and within at least 500 feet of
the property in question. In addition, the area map shall identify the
nearest adjacent zoning districts to the various areas of the property in
question;



         (d)   Traffic circulation, parking areas, sidewalks and
pedestrian walks;



         (e)   Landscaping plans, including site grading, tree
preservation and landscaping design;



         (f)   Preliminary drawings for buildings to be
constructed in each phase, including floor plans, exterior elevations and
sections, and an artist’s renderings thereof, all of which shall have been
submitted to the Building Review Board for its report and recommendation
prior to the consideration of the development plan pursuant to § 159.114(F),
unless otherwise approved in ordinance approving the special use. A copy of
the report and recommendation of the Building Review Board shall be submitted
with the final development plan; and



         (g)   Preliminary engineering plans, including street,
yard and open space lighting, street improvements, drainage system, sewer
system and public utility extensions, shall be prepared. Such preliminary
engineering plans shall demonstrate compliance, or the ability to comply
with, the requirements of the subdivision regulations, the watershed
development ordinance and all other applicable regulations, and shall
address, inter alia, top of foundation heights, base flood elevations,
off-site stormwater impacts, wetland and other buffering requirements and
tree removal and tree preservation activities.



      (3)   Review of tentative development plan; hearing. The Plan
Commission shall hold a public meeting on an application for approval of a
tentative development plan for the TD District. In the course of its review,
the Plan Commission may require the owner to supplement the information
provided, including without limitation the preparation and delivery of
engineering or other feasibility studies on the handling of anticipated
problems arising out of or in connection with the development. The Plan
Commission, following its review of a tentative development plan, shall
recommend to the City Council approval, approval with modifications or
disapproval of the tentative development plan. Any approval may be with
conditions, but it shall be recommended only upon findings that:



         (a)   The proposed uses will not be detrimental to
present and potential surrounding areas;



         (b)   The bulk space and yard standards reflected in the
tentative development plan are consistent with those in adjoining zoning
districts, subject to the need for transitioning among the adjacent uses,
consistent with division (G)(2) above. For this purpose, adjacent vacant
properties should be disregarded for determining the nature of nearby uses of
property. Any departures from those standards must be warranted by the design
of and amenities in the proposed development;



         (c)   The proposed development is consistent with the
general intent of the Comprehensive Plan, with consideration to the natural
features on, development adjacent to and the ingress to and egress from, the
property;



         (d)   Existing and proposed streets are suitable and
adequate to carry anticipated traffic within the proposed development and in
the vicinity of the proposed development, as well as to avoid conflicts in
the character and patterns of traffic. To the extent private streets are
included in the tentative development plan, adequate provisions must be made
for the long-term maintenance of such streets to ensure that they do not
become a financial burden on the city. Provision in deed restrictions
acceptable to the city requiring that such maintenance be performed and paid
for by a mandatory owners association is deemed adequate provision;



         (e)   Existing and proposed utility services are
adequate for the proposed development;



         (f)   The proposed development, or each phase of the
proposed development if construction will be in stages, will contain the
required parking spaces, landscape and utility areas necessary for creating
and sustaining a desirable and suitable environment;



         (g)   Construction, installation or performance of all
mass grading, stormwater facilities, all underground utility mains and
appurtenances, private roads or public streets (through first lift) and
sidewalks and major landscaping elements (such as perimeter berms, detention
ponds and the like) is capable of completion within two years; and



         (h)   The tentative development plan complies with all
other criteria and the stated purposes set forth in this subchapter.



      (4)   Consideration of tentative development plan. The City
Council shall, within 60 days after receipt of the recommendation from the
Plan Commission on the tentative development plan, approve, approve with
modifications or disapprove the tentative development plan; any approval may
be with conditions. If the Council fails to act within such 60-day period,
the tentative development plan shall be deemed disapproved; provided that, if
the applicant requests an extension to such period, then the period will be
so extended until the Council takes action on the tentative development plan.



      (5)   Ordinance approving tentative development plan. Upon
approval of a tentative development plan in the TD District, the City Council
shall pass an ordinance approving the tentative development plan. No
ordinance approving a tentative development plan shall be effective unless
all of its terms and conditions are accepted and agreed to by the owner
within ten days after its passage by the City Council. Such ordinance
approving the tentative development plan shall constitute tentative plat
approval. The city may grant the tentative development plan approval
contemporaneously with the special use permit ordinance.



      (6)   Final development plan; special use permit approval.



         (a)   The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on
an application for approval of a final development plan. Notice shall be
given in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code relating to
special uses. The owner shall submit a final development plan in accordance
with the ordinance approving the tentative development plan and the final
platting requirements in the city’s subdivision regulations. The final
development plan shall be processed contemporaneously with, and in accordance
with, the procedures for a final plat and for a special use permit, and shall
include at least the following information:



            1.   a.   All submittal requirements for:



                  i.   A final plat under the
subdivision regulations;



                  ii.   The watershed development
ordinance; and



                  iii.   Other applicable city codes,
ordinances and regulations (including the ordinance approving the development
plan).



               b.   i.   The information required for
all of the foregoing, and demonstration of compliance, shall be fully
presented, including without limitation provision for construction of
underground electrical and telephone service.



                  ii.   Final engineering plans,
including street, yard and open space lighting, street improvements, drainage
system, sewer system and public utility extensions, shall be prepared.
Location of garbage and refuse collection points and of mail pickup points
shall also be specified.



            2.   Any required declarations of covenants shall
be presented for review and approval by the City Attorney.



            3.   Construction sequence and time schedule for
completion of improvements, infrastructure, buildings, parking spaces and
landscaped areas within the TD District development shall be set forth as
part of the final development plan.



            4.   Any information required pursuant to the
ordinance approving the tentative development plan.



         (b)   Following the public hearing, the Plan Commission
shall recommend the terms of approval of the special use permit for the final
development plan. Thereafter, such Plan Commission recommendation shall be
forwarded to the City Council for consideration of the approval of the final
development plan pursuant to a special use permit ordinance, which shall also
serve as the final plat approval for the property. Until a final development
plan designating the land subdivided into conventional lots, if any, as well
as the division of other lands not so subdivided into common areas and
building sites is recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds, no development
activity on the property in question shall be permitted unless expressly
authorized in the ordinance approving the tentative development plan. The
recording of the special use permit ordinance and final development plan
(including the final plat) shall inform all who deal with the TD District
development of the restrictions placed upon the land and act as a zoning
control device. The final development plan for the TD District development
shall contain appropriate legends or notations on its face reflecting the
special use permit ordinance and all of the covenants, restrictions,
dedications, regulations and requirements of and for the plan and pertaining
to the development, and shall be certified by the Plan Commission as being in
compliance with this subchapter prior to its being recorded. No building
permit shall be issued for any structure until the certification and
recording of the final development plan has been completed.



      (7)   Contemporaneous approvals. Nothing in this section shall
prevent an owner from seeking and obtaining contemporaneous approvals,
provided that all elements of a development plan and other matters requiring
approval are in a form acceptable to the city. To the extent feasible,
contemporaneous reviews and approvals of development plans and other matters
should be encouraged, and the fact that proceedings affecting various
elements of a development plan have occurred prior to the designation of an
area into the TD District shall not affect the validity of such proceedings
nor require their repetition provided that all required notices and
procedures were satisfied as part of such proceedings.



      (8)   Modifications to the final development plan.



         (a)   Minor modifications. The City Engineer, in his or
her discretion and with the consent of the Director of Community Development,
may authorize in writing minor modifications to a particular final
development plan if such adjustments are necessary in light of technical or
engineering considerations first discovered during actual development and do
not materially affect the nature or character of the approved final
development plans. Other changes necessitated by engineering considerations
that may affect the nature or character of the final development plans may
also be so approved by the City Engineer, within the Engineer’s sole
discretion, pursuant to this division (H)(8); provided, however, that such
minor modifications shall be limited to the following:



         (a)   Altering the location or dimensions of any
structure, group of structures or vehicular drive by not more than five feet;



         (b)   Altering the location of any open space by not
more than five feet; and



         (c)   Altering the final grade by not more than 5% of
the originally planned grade.



         (b)   Major modifications. Any modification to a
particular final development plan not specifically authorized in division
(H)(8)(a) above shall be considered to be a major modification and shall be
granted only upon application to, and approval by the City Council, by
resolution duly adopted. The City Council may, but shall have no obligation
to, require that the application for a major modification be considered at a
public hearing before the City Council or such other board or commission as
the City Council shall require.



(Ord. 2005-41, passed 10-3-2005)



§ 159.116  USE MATRIX; BUSINESS DISTRICTS.



 


Use Matrix Business Districts




B-1 Neighborhood; B-2 Community; B-3 Traditional; B-4 Preservation





P = Permitted


S = Special use permit


S/P = If located on the ground floor, a special use permit is required, if
located above the first floor, the use is permitted


X = Not permitted


Additive uses are shown shaded and in bold type



Uses

 

B-1 Nbrhd.

 

B-2 CC

 

B-3 Trad.

 

B-4 Pres.



Accessory uses, incidental to and on the same zoning lot as a principal use
including off street parking and loading as permitted or required by this
chapter
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics, but only when operated completely
within a building
 

S

 

P

 

X

 

X



Antique shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Art and school supply stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Art galleries and studios, but not including auction rooms
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Auto laundries/car wash and detailing
 

S

 

S

 

X

 

X



Automobile sales (new cars only), service and accessories, but not including
the sales and service of used automobiles except in conjunction with new car
sales
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

X



Automobile service stations and repair garages
 

S

 

S

 

X

 

X



Banks, savings and loan, credit unions, retail brokerage offices and other
financial institutions without drive-up facilities
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Bakeries
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Barber and beauty shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Bicycle sales, rental and service shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Book, stationery or office supply stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Business machine sales and service stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Business, professional and government offices and non-sales tax uses in
excess of % limit
 

NA

 

NA

 

S

 

S



Camera and photographic supply stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Candy, ice cream and confectionery stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Catalog sales office for mail order companies
 

S/P

 

S/P

 

P

 

P



Catering establishments
 

S/P

 

P

 

X

 

X



China and glassware stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Cigar, cigarette and tobacco stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Clothing and costume rental stores, but not including cleaning
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Contractor’s offices and shops
 

S/P

 

S/P

 

X

 

X



Currency exchanges
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Custom dressmaking, millinery or tailoring shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Dairy product stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Department stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Drive-up facilities
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Drug stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Dry cleaning, laundry and pressing establishments
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Dry cleaning and laundromats—self service
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Dry goods stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Dwelling units
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Electrical appliance and supply stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Employment agencies
 

S/P

 

S/P

 

S/P

 

P



Fabric and yard goods stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Farmers’ markets
 



 



 



 

P



Floor covering stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Florists and greenhouses
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Food stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Funeral homes and mortuaries
 

S

 

S

 

X

 

X



Furniture stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and conditioning of furs
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Garden supply and seed stores
 

S

 

S

 

X

 

X



Gift and novelty shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Governmental structures and facilities, except offices
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Hardware stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Hobby shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Household appliance stores, including radio and television sales and service
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Locksmiths
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Leather goods stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Jewelry and watch repair shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Interior decorating shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Medical and dental laboratories or clinics
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Motels, hotels, motor hotels and bed and breakfasts
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Musical instruments stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Multiple-family dwellings
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Offices, business, professional and governmental
 

S/P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Optical goods stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Package liquor stores
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Paint and wallpaper stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Parking lots and structures when located on a separate lot
 

S

 

S

 

X

 

X



Parks, playgrounds and community buildings operated by municipal agencies
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Pet shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Photography studios, including the development of film when carried on as a
part of the retail business on the premises
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Physical culture and related services
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Picture framing, when conducted for retail trade on the premises
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Planned business developments in accordance with § 159.047
 

X

 

S

 

X

 

X



Plumbing, printing, heating, air conditioning, electrical, furniture,
upholstering, paint and other similar businesses where the primary use is
non-retail
 

S/P

 

S/P

 

X

 

X



Public utilities, service and equipment facilities
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Radio and television broadcasting studios
 

S/P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Reading rooms
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Real estate offices
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Restaurants, standard
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Restaurants, standard within 150 ft. of residential zoning districts
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Restaurants, including live performances or dancing
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Restaurants, other–no table service
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Restaurants, with drive-through
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Schools: music, dance, business, commercial or trade
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Second-hand stores and rummage shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Self storage facilities
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Shoe stores, including repair shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Sporting goods stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Taverns
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Theaters, indoor
 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Toy stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Variety stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P





 



(Prior Code, Ch. 46)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 02-01, passed 1-7-2002;
Ord. 03-39, passed 6-19-2003; Ord. 03-40, passed 6-19-2003; Ord. 2013-20,
passed 5-6-2013)



OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



§ 159.130  SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided by
the owner or owners, or lessee acting with the written consent of the owner,
for all buildings and structures existing or erected, and all uses existing
or established after the effective date of this chapter, as required by the
regulations contained herein. However, where a building permit has been
issued prior to the effective date of this chapter or any amendment hereto
and provided that construction is begun within six months after such
effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, parking and loading
facilities required at the time of the issuance of such building permit may
be provided in lieu of those required by this chapter, except that such
building shall thereafter be subject to the provisions of § 159.131(H).



   (B)   Whenever the intensity of use of any existing building,
structure or premises is increased through a structural addition, the
conversion of one or more dwelling units to office space, an increase in
usable floor area, an increase in seating capacity or other units or
measurements specified herein for required parking or loading facilities,
parking and loading facilities as required herein shall be provided by the
owner or owners or lessee acting for the owner for the portion of the
building affected by any such new addition, conversion, increase in floor
area or intensity of use.



   (C)   Whenever the existing use of a building, structure or premises
shall hereafter be changed to a new use of a different parking or loading
class, parking or loading facilities shall be provided by the owner or owners
or lessee acting for the owner as required for such new use.



(Prior Code, § 46-54)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 02-16, passed 4-18-2002)



§ 159.131  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Utilization. Required off-street parking spaces shall be
solely for the parking of vehicles used for the transportation of occupants,
patrons or employees. Each required space shall be kept available at all
times for parking of such vehicles. No required parking space shall be
rented, leased or used for any purpose other than that for which such space
is required. No sales or repair work, except of an emergency nature, shall be
permitted in required parking spaces.



   (B)   Customer and employee parking areas. Off-street facilities
provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may be located in
customer and employee parking areas as defined in § 159.002; however, in no
case shall more than 50% of such required off-street parking be located in an
employee parking area.



   (C)   Collective provisions. Off-street parking facilities for
separate uses may be provided collectively if the total number of spaces so
provided is not less than the sum of the spaces required for each use served.
If a collective parking facility serves uses which do not generate automobile
parking at the same times, upon request by the owners of such use, the City
Council may authorize a reduction in the total number of parking spaces to
the minimum required by those uses which generate automobile parking a the
same time.



   (D)   Control of off-site parking facilities. In cases where parking
facilities are permitted on a lot other than the zoning lot on which the
building or use served is located, the party in possession of such lot shall
be the same as the party in possession of the zoning lot occupied by the
building or use to which the off-site parking facilities are accessory.
Possession of the off-site parking facilities may be either by deed or lease,
the term of such deed or lease to be approved by the City Council and such
deed or lease shall be filed in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the
county. The deed or lease shall require such possessor and his, her or its
successors, heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of parking
facilities on the off-site lot for the duration of the use served or of the
deed or lease, whichever shall terminate sooner.



   (E)   Existing parking facilities. Accessory off-street parking
facilities in existence on the effective date of this chapter (January 15,
1972) or any amendment hereto and located on the same lot as the building or
use served shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if already less than,
shall not be further reduced below, the requirements of this chapter for such
building or use; provided, however, such off-street parking facilities may be
relocated or otherwise provided in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Such existing off-street facilities that do not conform to all the
requirements of § 159.132 may, however, be included as required off-street
parking, provided that the items of nonconformance do not prevent or unduly
hamper the required usage, have not been detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare and have not caused undue traffic congestion on the public
street.



   (F)   Permissive parking and loading facilities. Nothing in this
chapter shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street
parking or loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings,
provided that all regulations herein governing the location, design,
construction and operation of such facilities shall apply.



   (G)   Damage or destruction. For any conforming or nonconforming
building or use which is in existence on the effective date of this chapter
or any amendment hereto, which subsequently thereto is damaged or destroyed
by fire, collapse, explosion or other cause, and which is reconstructed,
reestablished or repaired within two years of damage or destruction,
off-street parking or loading facilities equivalent to those maintained at
the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored or continued in
operation. Any conforming or nonconforming building or use reconstructed,
reestablished or repaired after two years of such damage or destruction shall
provide off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter. However, in no case shall it be necessary to
restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required
by this chapter for equivalent new uses or construction.



   (H)   Submission of plan. Any application for a building permit, or
for any occupancy certificate where no building permit is required, shall
include therewith a plan, drawn to scale and full dimensions, showing any
off-street parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with
this chapter.



   (I)   Computation. When determination of the number of off-street
parking spaces required by this chapter results in a requirement of a
fractional space, any fraction of less than one-half may be disregarded,
while a fraction of one-half or more shall be counted as one parking space.



   (J)   Payment in lieu of providing off-street parking.



      (1)   (a)   When, in the O-1 Office and B-2 Commercial
Business Districts, additional off-street parking is required to be provided,
either because of the erection of a new building or addition or an increase
of usable floor area for retail and/or office previously used for storage,
utility or similar use or change in use necessitating the provision of
additional parking, off-street parking required herein may be provided by way
of a payment of a fee only if authorized by a special use permit.



         (b)   A payment in lieu of parking shall be considered
recognizing that the city has limited opportunities to provide additional
spaces in the B-2 and O-1 Districts. In addition to the standards required to
be met in § 159.045(E), such special use permit may be granted to allow for
payment in lieu of parking only upon a showing that the proposed use is
needed and desired as a component of the district, beneficial to the overall
community and appropriate at the proposed location. In addition, it shall be
demonstrated by the parties seeking the special use permit that providing
parking on-site, in conformance with required ratios, will have a negative
impact on the character of the immediate area and the district as a whole.



         (c)   The Plan Commission recommendation on a request
for a special use permit shall be forwarded to the City Council for action
consistent with standard special use permit procedures. A fee for parking
shall be established by the City Council based on the cost of constructing
parking spaces and other related factors and the fees shall be updated
periodically along with other fees and charges established by the City
Council.



      (2)   All fees collected and all interest earned thereon under
the provisions of this division (J) shall be placed in the Parking Facilities
Fund established by the City Council and shall be used only for the
acquisition of land, improvement or maintenance of municipally owned or
leased off-street parking facilities for the benefit of those buildings,
structures and uses in the O-1 and B-2 Districts and the general community.



(Prior Code, § 46-55)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 99-8, passed 2-1-1999; Ord. 00-24, passed 6-22-2000)



§ 159.132  LOCATION, DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   (1)   All parking spaces required to serve buildings and
structures erected or uses established after the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment hereto shall be located on the same zoning lot as
the building, structure or use served, except that parking spaces to serve
business buildings or uses may be located in a business zoned area of the
zoning lot on which the building structure or use served is located by
special use permit.



      (2)   Buildings, structures or uses existing on the effective
date of this chapter or any amendment hereto which are subsequently altered
or enlarged so as to require the provision of parking spaces under this
chapter may be so served by parking facilities located on land other than the
zoning lot on which the building or use served is located, but such parking
facilities shall be allowed only by special use permit. Owners of property,
nonconforming as to parking, who elect to provide parking and become
conforming, may locate such parking on land other than the zoning lot on
which the building or use is located, as allowed in this subchapter.



      (3)   Off-street parking spaces, open to the sky, may be
located in any yard, except the required front yards in a residence, general
residence and office district. Enclosed buildings and carports containing
off-street parking shall be subject to applicable yard requirements.



   (B)   Design and construction: all off-street parking spaces
required by this chapter except those required for one-and two-family
dwellings, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Standard
Specifications for Design and Construction of Parking Lots of the city, on
file in the office of the city Surveyor and Engineer.



      (1)   Screening and landscaping. All open off-street parking
areas containing more than three parking spaces shall be screened by fencing,
landscaping or a combination of both on all sides in a general residence,
business or office district, pursuant to the provisions of the trees,
preservation and landscape ordinance (as codified in Chapter 99) and the
fencing provisions in § 159.010.



      (2)   Lighting and speaker systems. Any lighting used to
illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from residence or
general residence district zoned property and public streets in such a way as
not to create a nuisance. However, in no case shall such lighting exceed
three foot-candles measured at the lot line. Loudspeaker systems are not
permitted.



      (3)   Identification and marking. Required off-street areas
for three or more automobiles shall have individual spaces marked, and shall
be designed, maintained and regulated so that no parking or maneuvering
incidental to parking shall be on any public street or walk.



(Prior Code, § 46-56)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 00-24, passed 6-22-2000)



§ 159.133  CLEANING AND MAINTENANCE.



   No cleaning or maintenance of parking lots utilizing motorized
equipment may be performed between 11:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. each day, except
snow plowing.



(Prior Code, § 46-57)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.134  SHELTER BUILDING.



   No parking lot for accessory off-street parking shall have more than
one attendant shelter building and such building shall conform to all setback
requirements for structures in the district.



(Prior Code, § 46-58)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.135  SIGNS.



   Accessory signs shall be permitted on parking areas in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 153 of the city code.



(Prior Code, § 46-59)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.136  OFF-STREET PARKING TABLE.



   (A)   Off-street parking space shall be provided for the specific
parking classes set forth in the off-street parking table. Parking spaces for
accessory uses not specifically enumerated within a parking class shall be
assumed to be included in the principal (permitted or special) use
requirement.



   (B)   If, for any reason, the classification of any use, for the
purpose of determining the number of off-street parking spaces is not readily
determinable hereunder, the parking class of such use shall be fixed by the
Administrative Officer.



   (C)   Where floor area is specified as the basis for determining the
number of off-street parking spaces, e.g., “1/1,000 sq. ft. of floor
area,” the floor area used shall be in accordance with the definition of
floor area contained in § 159.002.



   (D)   When students or employees, or both, are specified as the
basis for determining the number of off-street parking spaces, e.g., “1 per
each employee plus 1 per 6 students,” the number of students or employees,
or both, shall be determined on the basis of the design capacity of the
facility during a regular operating day.



   (E)   If the design capacity of a facility is not readily
determinable because of the absence of design standards for a particular use,
the average number of students or employees, or both, occupying the facility
during a regular operating day shall be used as the basis for determining the
number of off-street parking spaces. If the design capacity of a facility is
not readily determinable because of the absence of design standards for a
particular use, the average daily number of students or employees, or both,
occupying the premises during a regular operating day during the year
preceding the adoption of this chapter shall be used as the basis for
determining the number of off-street parking spaces.



 


Off-Street Parking Table



Parking Class
 
Uses: Permitted or Special
 

Required Spaces





Class #1
 
Dwellings, detached single-family
 

2/dwelling unit



Class #2
 
Hotels
 

1/dwelling unit or habitable living unit



Motels


Motor hotels


Class #3*
 
Dwellings, two-family
 

1.5/dwelling unit




 
Dwelling, all other dwelling units:
 





   1 or 2 bedrooms
 

1.83/dwelling unit



   3 or more bedrooms
 

2.33/dwelling unit



   Visitor parking
 

Included in the above is the requirement of 0.33 parking spaces per unit
which shall be for visitor parking and shall be open at all times for such
purposes



Class #4
 
Nursing homes
 

1/1,000 sq. ft. of floor



Parsonages, rectories or parish area houses


Class #5
 
Aquariums
 

2/1000 sq. ft. of floor area



Historic sites


Hospitals


Libraries, museums or art galleries, public


Nursery schools or child care centers


Philanthropic and charitable institutions


Class #6
 
Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics
 

4/1,000 sq. ft. of floor area



Art galleries and studios


Banks and savings and loan associations


Business machine sales and service stores


Catering services


Clubs or lodges, private


Dressmaking, seamstress shops


Interior decorating shops


Laboratories, medical, dental or optical


Locksmiths


Medical and dental offices or clinics


Office equipment stores


Physical culture and health services


Post offices


Recreational and community center buildings


Schools: music or dance


Tailor shops


Telegraph offices


Telephone exchange and equipment buildings


Travel bureau and transportation ticket offices


Class #7
 
Offices, business, professional, and governmental area
 

4/1,000 sq. ft. of floor



Class #8
 
Corporate headquarters
 

2.5/1,000 sq. ft. of floor area



Medical laboratories


Offices: business, professional, governmental in the OR and area OR-2 zoning
districts


Retail businesses associated with a hotel or motel


Class #9
 
Antique stores
 

5/1,000 sq. ft. of floor area, except 4/1,000 sq. ft. of floor area in the
B-2 District



Art and school supply stores


Auto accessory stores


Bakeries, retail


Barber shops


Bicycle stores


Book, stationery or office supply stores


Camera and photographic supply stores


Candy, ice cream and confectionery stores


Catalog sales stores


China and glassware stores


Cigar, cigarette and tobacco stores


Clothing stores


Currency exchanges


Dairy products stores


Delicatessens


Department stores


Dormitories


Dry cleaning and laundromats; self-service


Dry cleaning and laundry pickup stations


Dry cleaning and pressing establishments


Drug stores


Dry goods stores


Electrical appliance and supply stores


Employment agencies


Class #9 (Cont.)
 
Floor covering stores
 





Florists


Fraternity houses


Furniture stores


Furrier shops


Garden supply and seed stores


Gift and novelty stores


Groceries, meat, fish and fruit stores


Hardware stores


Hearing aid stores


Hobby shops


Household appliance stores


Jewelry and watch repair stores


Leather goods and luggage stores


Lodging houses


Millinery shops


Musical instruments sales and services


Newspaper distribution


Optical goods shops


Package liquor stores


Paint and wallpaper stores


Pet shops


Phonograph record and sheet music stores


Photography studios


Picture framing stores


Reading rooms


Repair, rental and servicing of any item, the retail sate of which is
permitted in the B-1 and B-2 District


Rooming houses


Second-hand stores and rummage shops


Class #9 (Cont.)
 
Shoe and hat stores
 





Sorority houses


Sporting goods stores


Variety stores


Class #10
 
Auto service stations
 

10/1,000 sq. ft. of floor area, except 4/1,000 sq. ft. of floor area in the
B-2 District



Funeral homes and mortuaries


Standard restaurants


Taverns


Class #11
 
Drive-in type restaurants
 

30/1,000 sq. ft. of floor area



Fast-food restaurants


Class #12
 
Elementary and junior high schools, public or private
 

1/each employee



Radio and television stations


Warehouses


Class #13
 
Greenhouses and nurseries, retail
 

1/1,000 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 1/2,000 sq. ft. of land area



Class #14
 
Golf courses, public and private
 

100/9 holes (regular golf)



Class #15
 
Zoos or zoological gardens
 

1/2,000 sq. ft. of land area



Class #16
 
Athletic fields
 

1/5,000 sq. ft. of land area, or 1/75 sq. ft. of water area, when a public
swimming pool is an isolated use



Botanical gardens


Forest preserves


Polo fields


Public parks and playgrounds


Public swimming pools


Recreation clubs, noncommercial


Class #17
 
Auto laundries
 

1/each 2 employees, plus 1/manager-owner, plus parking spaces equal to 5
times the maximum capacity of auto washing unit



Class #18
 
Schools: business, commercial
 

1/each 2 students or trade



Class #19
 
Senior high schools
 

1/each employee plus 1/each 6 students



Class #20
 
Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues
 

1/each 4 seats in auditorium



Class #21
 
Colleges, junior colleges
 

1/each 4 students



Class #22
 
Bakeries
 

2/each 3 employees



Electric substations


Gas regulator stations


Laundry and dry cleaning plants


Microwave relay towers


Radar installations and towers


Radio and television towers


Sanitary landfills


Sewage treatment plants


Water works reservoirs, pumping stations and filtration plants


Class #23
 
Building material yards, sales and storage
 

2/each employee



Contractor’s offices and shops


Motor vehicle sales, service, repair and storage, including body repair,
painting and engine rebuilding


Plumbing, printing, electrical, heating, air conditioning, furniture,
upholstering, paint, paper hanging, decorating and other similar shops and
services


Class #24
 
Cemeteries, columbariums, crematories and mausoleums
 

Spaces as required by the Administrative Officer, after review by the Plan
Commission



Greenhouses and nurseries, wholesale


Class #25
 
Drive-in banking facilities
 

Reservoir space sufficient to accommodate a number of automobiles equal to 5
times the number of teller windows



*   In developments where private streets are built to standards which do
not allow on-street parking, additional off-street parking may be required to
compensate for the lack of on-street parking available




 



(Prior Code, § 46-60)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991;
Ord. 00-24, passed 6-22-2000)



§ 159.137  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; OFF-STREET LOADING.



   (A)   Location. All required loading berths shall be located on the
same zoning lots as the use served. All motor vehicle loading berths which
abut a residence or general residence district or an intervening alley
separating a residence or general residence district from a business district
shall be completely screened therefrom by building walls, or a uniformly
painted solid fence, wall or door, or any combination thereof, not less than
eight feet in height. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located
within 30 feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets. No
loading berth shall be located in required front or side yard and any loading
berth located in a required rear yard shall be open to the sky.



   (B)   Design and construction. All off-street loading spaces
required by this chapter shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the Standard Specifications of Design and Construction of Off-Street Loading
Facilities of the city on file in the office of the City Surveyor and
Engineer.



   (C)   Repair and service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of
any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities.



   (D)   Utilization. Space allocated to any off-street loading shall
not be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking
facilities or portions thereof.



   (E)   Central loading. Central loading facilities may be substituted
for loading berths on the individual zoning lots provided the following
conditions are fulfilled.



      (1)   Each zoning lot served shall have direct access to the
central loading area without crossing streets or alleys at grade.



      (2)   Total berths provided shall meeting the requirements
based on the sum of the several types of uses served. (Area of types of uses
may be totaled before computing number of loading berths.)



      (3)   No zoning lot served shall be more than 500 feet removed
from the central loading area.



      (4)   The tunnel or ramp connecting the central loading area
with the zoning lot served shall be not less than seven feet in width and
have a clearance of not less than seven feet.



   (F)   Minimum facilities. Uses for which off-street loading
facilities are required herein but which are located in buildings of less
floor area than the minimum prescribed for such required facilities shall be
provided with adequate receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicle off
any adjacent alley, service drive or open space on the same zoning drive.



(Prior Code, § 46-61)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.138  RESIDENCE AND GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.



   Off-street loading facilities accessory to uses allowed in the several
residence and general residence districts shall be provided in accordance
with the following minimum requirements.



   (A)   For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be
provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross
floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional 100,000
square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. Each such loading berth
for buildings in excess of 20,000 square feet in gross floor area shall be
not less than 12 feet in width by 55 feet in length: health and medical
institutions.



   (B)   For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be
provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 200,000 square feet of gross
floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional 200,000
square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.



      (1)   Educational and cultural institutions;



      (2)   Philanthropic and charitable institutions; and



      (3)   Religious institutions.



   (C)   Planned developments. Loading berths shall be provided on the
basis of the required berths for each individual use.



   (D)   Recreational and social clubs. For buildings containing 10,000
to 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, one loading berth shall be
provided and for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area up
to 500,000 square feet, one additional loading berth shall be provided plus
one additional loading berth for each additional 500,000 square feet of gross
floor area or fraction thereof in excess of 500,000 square feet.



   (E)   For all other nonresidential uses, loading facilities shall be
provided in accordance with the following requirements.



      (1)   For buildings containing less than 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area, there shall be provided on the same zoning lot adequate
receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicle, off any adjacent alley,
service drive or open space.



      (2)   For buildings containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet
of gross floor area, one off-street loading berth shall be provided.



      (3)   For buildings containing over 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area, there shall be provided one loading berth for each 100,000
square feet or gross floor area or fraction thereof.



   (F)   Multiple-family dwellings and rooming houses. For buildings
containing 20,000 to 200,000 square feet of gross floor area, one additional
loading berth for each additional 200,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof.



(Prior Code, § 46-62)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



§ 159.139  BUSINESS AND OFFICE DISTRICTS.



   Off-street loading spaces accessory to uses allowed in the several
business or office districts shall be provided in accordance with the
following minimum requirements.



   (A)   Any use listed in a residence or general residence district
that is also permitted in any of the several business or office districts
shall provide loading spaces as established for that use in the preceding
section for residence or general residence districts.



   (B)   Business or office establishments containing less than 7,000
square feet of floor area shall be provided with adequate facilities,
accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent alley, service drive or open
space on the same zoning lot.



   (C)   For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be
provided for buildings containing 7,000 to 40,000 square feet of floor area.
For buildings containing 40,000 to 100,000 square feet of floor area two
loading berths shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each
additional 100,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. Each such
loading berth for buildings in excess of 10,000 square feet of floor area
shall be not less than 12 feet in width by 55 feet in length:



      (1)   Mail order houses; and



      (2)   Warehousing, storage and wholesale establishments.



   (D)   For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be
provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of floor
area; for each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area up to 500,000
square feet, one additional loading berth for each additional 500,000 square
feet of floor area or fraction thereof in excess of 500,000 square feet:



      (1)   Banks and financial institutions;



      (2)   Medical and dental clinics; and



      (3)   Offices, business and professional.



   (E)   For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be
provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 150,000 square feet of floor
area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional 150,000 square
feet of floor area or fraction thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings
in excess of 20,000 square feet of floor area shall be not less than 12 feet
in width by 55 feet in length:



      (1)   Clubs and lodges (nonprofit), containing retail shops,
convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls or business or professional
offices (other than accessory);



      (2)   Radio and television broadcasting studios; and



      (3)   Hotels and motels, containing retail shops, convention
halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls or business or professional offices.



   (F)   For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be
provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 200,000 square feet of gross
floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional 200,000
square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof:



      (1)   Clubs and lodges (nonprofit), containing no retail
shops, convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition hall or business or
professional offices;



      (2)   Hotels and motels, containing no retail shops,
convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls or business or professional
offices;



      (3)   Meeting halls;



      (4)   Schools; music, dance, business, commercial and trade;
and



      (5)   Theaters, indoor.



   (G)   Undertaking establishments, funeral homes and mortuaries. For
buildings containing 7,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, one
loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each
additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.



   (H)   (1)   For all other uses, loading facilities shall be
provided in accordance with the following schedule:



 

Gross Floor Area of Establishments in Square Feet
 
Required Number and Size of Berths


7,000 to 20,000
 
1 - (12 ft. x 30 ft.)


20,001 to 35,000
 
2 - (12ft. x 30 ft. each)


35,001 to 60,000
 
2 - (12 ft. x 55 ft. each)


60,001 to 100,00
 
3 - (12 ft. x 55 ft. each)



 



      (2)   For each additional 200,000 square feet of gross floor
area or fraction thereof over 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, one
additional loading berth shall be provided; such additional berth to be at
least 12 feet in width by 55 feet in length.



   (I)   For all OR-2 District uses. The provisions of this division
(I) will apply to loading berths in the OR-2 Office Research District,
notwithstanding any provision in this section or § 159.137 to the contrary.
In the OR-2 District, buildings with more than 250,000 square feet of gross
floor area shall have two required loading berths, buildings with 50,000 to
250,000 square feet of gross floor area shall have one required loading berth
and no loading berths shall be required in buildings with fewer than 50,000
square feet of gross floor area. In addition, no loading berth shall be
required to exceed 12 feet in width or 50 feet in length.



(Prior Code, § 46-63)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991)



PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES



§ 159.150  PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide specific
regulations for the placement, construction and modification of personal
wireless service facilities. The provisions of this subchapter are not
intended to and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or to have the effect of
prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, nor shall the
provisions of this subchapter be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably
discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless
services. To the extent that any provision or provisions of this subchapter
are inconsistent with or in conflict with any other provision of the city
code or any section of the city, the provisions of this subchapter shall be
deemed to control.



   (B)   In the course of reviewing any request for any approval
required under this subchapter made by an applicant to provide personal
wireless services or to install personal wireless service facilities, the
Zoning Board of Appeals, Plan Commission or the City Council, as the case may
be, shall act within a reasonable period of time after the request is duly
filed with the city, taking into account the nature and scope of the request.
Any decision to deny such a request shall be in writing and supported by
substantial evidence contained in a written record.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.151  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANTENNA. Any exterior apparatus or apparatuses at a fixed location
designed for telephonic, radio, data, internet or other communications
through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, including
equipment attached to a tower or building for the purpose of providing
personal wireless services, including, for example, cellular, paging, low
power mobile radio and personal communications services telecommunications
services, and their attendant base stations.



   ANTENNA HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the base of the
antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure even
if said highest point is an antenna. Measurement of tower height shall
include antennas, base pad and other appurtenances and shall be measured from
the finished grade of the site. If the support structure is on a sloped
grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used
in calculating the antenna height.



   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod or
other structure which supports a device used in the transmitting or receiving
of radio frequency signals.



   CELL SITE. A tract or parcel of land that contains the personal
wireless service facilities including any antenna, its support structure,
accessory buildings and parking, and may include other uses associated with
and ancillary to personal wireless services.



   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.



   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.



   GOVERNING AUTHORITY. The governing authority of the city, namely the
City Council.



   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES and PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES.
Shall be defined in the same manner as in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C), as they
may be amended now or in the future.



   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term encompasses personal wireless
service facilities, radio transmission towers, microwave towers,
common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers or personal communications
services towers, alternative tower structures and the like.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.152  POLICY STATEMENT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish
general guidelines for the siting and size of towers and antennas.



   (B)   Goals. The goals of this subchapter are to:



      (1)   Minimize the total number of towers throughout the city;



      (2)   Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing
tower sites;



      (3)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them,
to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on residential
areas of the city is minimal;



      (4)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them
in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas;
and



      (5)   Enhance the ability of the providers of personal
wireless services to provide such services throughout the city quickly,
effectively and efficiently.



   (C)   Necessity. Accordingly, the City Council finds that the
promulgation of this subchapter is warranted and necessary:



      (1)   To direct the location of towers in the city;



      (2)   To protect residential areas and land uses from
potential adverse impacts of towers through proper engineering and siting of
antennas and their support structures;



      (3)   To minimize adverse visual impacts of towers through
careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging
techniques;



      (4)   To accommodate the growing need for towers; and



      (5)   To promote and encourage shared use/co-location of
existing and new towers as a primary option rather than construction of
additional single-use towers, and to reduce the number of such structures
needed in the future.



   (D)   New uses. All new towers and antennas shall comply with this
subchapter after the date of passage.



   (E)   Existing uses.



      (1)   All towers and antennas existing on the date of passage
of this subchapter shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently
exist.



      (2)   Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such existing
towers and antennas.



      (3)   New construction other than routine maintenance on
existing towers and antennas shall comply with the requirements of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.153  SITE SELECTION CRITERIA.



   (A)   (1)   In recognition of the need to designate appropriate
areas for the siting of personal wireless service facilities, a zoning
overlay district known as the Personal Wireless Service Facilities Overlay
District is hereby created.



      (2)   All new antennas and/or support structures shall be
located in areas designated on the overlay district map.



      (3)   Should a personal wireless services provider find that
facilities are required in an area not designated as part of the overlay
district, the provider may petition the City Council to have the proposed
site added to the overlay district.



   (B)   (1)   Given the visual impact of towers on their
surrounding environment, no antenna support structures may be constructed on
a speculative basis.



      (2)   Applications for permits will only be processed when the
applicant is either an FCC licensed personal wireless services provider (if
so required to be licensed by the FCC), or has in place agreements with an
FCC licensed personal wireless services provider (if so required to be
licensed by the FCC) for use or lease of the support structure, proof of
which must be offered by the applicant.



   (C)   (1)   Personal wireless service facilities should be
located and designed to minimize any adverse effect they may have on
residential property values and to minimize the impact of the site on the
surrounding neighborhood.



      (2)   Sites should be placed in locations where the existing
topography, vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest
amount of screening.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.154  PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Wireless telecommunications facilities that meet the
definition of personal wireless service facilities, as referenced in §
159.151, shall be considered a permitted use in the Personal Wireless Service
Facilities Overlay District, provided that the proposed facilities meet the
requirements of this subchapter, as well as the requirements of the
individual district in which the facility is proposed to be located.



   (B)   New personal wireless service facilities will not be permitted
in any area other than those areas contained within the overlay district,
which are as follows:



 



Overlay District A
 
Portions of OR-2 as highlighted on Attachment A-1


Portions of B-1 as highlighted on Attachment A-2


Portions of R-4 as highlighted on Attachment A-3


Portions of OA as highlighted on Attachment A-4


Overlay District B
 
Portions of R-4 as highlighted on Attachment B


Overlay District C
 
Portions of R-4 as highlighted on Attachment C


Overlay District D
 
Portions of R-1 and GR-3 as highlighted on Attachment D-1


Portions of R-4 as highlighted on Attachment D-2


Portions of R-5 as highlighted on Attachment D-3


Overlay District E
 
Portions of R-4 as highlighted on Attachment E


Overlay District F
 
Portions of R-1, R-2, and B-2 as highlighted on Attachment F


Overlay District G
 
A portion of B-2 as highlighted on Attachment G




 



   Attachment A-1







   Attachment A-2







   Attachment A-3







   Attachment A-4







   Attachment B







   Attachment C







   Attachment D-1







   Attachment D-2







   Attachment D-3







   Attachment E







   Attachment F







   Attachment G







(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.155  OVERLAY DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.



   The installation of personal wireless service facilities, as defined in
§ 159.151, are permitted by right in the Personal Wireless Service
Facilities Overlay District, subject to the provisions enumerated below.



   (A)   The personal wireless service facility is located in one of
the districts referenced in § 159.154, Districts (A) through (F);



   (B)   The personal wireless service facility conforms to all
standards of this subchapter, and also conforms to all applicable federal
laws and regulations concerning use and operation;



   (C)   The personal wireless service facility is affixed to the walls
or roof of an existing structure pursuant to the requirements of § 159.158,
and the height of the antennas do not exceed ten feet above the parapet of
the roof of the existing structure; or, if a freestanding antenna support
structure, the support structure is designed to accommodate additional users
and the height above grade of the antennas and support structure does not
exceed the height limit noted below for each district:



 

District A
 
Height limit of 160 feet


District B
 
Height limit of 120 feet


District C
 
Height limit of 90 feet


District D
 
No freestanding antenna support structure shall be permitted


District E
 
Height limit of 110 feet


District F
 
No freestanding antenna support structure shall be permitted


District G
 
Replacement or extension of roof top antennas that existed as of February 1,
1999 shall be permitted. A maximum height of 50 feet above the primary roof
surface shall be permitted



 



   (D)   If the proposed personal wireless service facility meets the
requirements of divisions (A) through (C) above, then the facility is
permitted by right, and no special use permit hearing is required.



   (E)   If the proposed personal wireless service facility meets the
requirements of divisions (A) and (B) above, but is either not designed to
accommodate additional users or is proposed for a height in excess of the
limit established in division (C) above, then the facility may be permitted
only by special use permit.



   (F)   (1)   In Overlay Districts A and B, proposed antennas may
co-locate on to existing towers; provided such co-location is accomplished in
a manner consistent with the provisions contained in this subchapter, then
such co-locations are permitted by right and new or additional special use
approval is not required. To provide further incentive for co-location as a
primary option, towers in Districts A and B that are in existence as of the
date of passage of this subchapter may be modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the co-location of additional antennas, provided the additional
antennas shall be of the same type as that on the existing tower.



      (2)   This is permitted by right, subject to the following
criteria being met.



         (a)   Height. An existing tower may be modified or
rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed 20 feet over the tower’s existing
height, to accommodate the co-location of additional antennas. The height
increase permitted under this provision allows the total height to exceed the
height limit of the overlay district.



         (b)   On-site location. A tower which is being rebuilt
to accommodate the co-location of additional antennas may be moved on-site
within 50 feet of its existing location so long as it remains within the same
zone and complies with the other provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.156  CO-LOCATION.



   In order to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the
proliferation of towers, co-location of antennas by more than one provider on
existing or new towers shall take precedence over the construction of new
single-use towers. The city may deny an application to construct a new tower
if the applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the antennas on an
existing structure, if a new tower structure is necessary, then it should be
designed to accommodate antennas for more than one user. The site plan shall
delineate an area near the base of the tower to be used for the placement of
additional equipment and buildings for other users. If the tower structure is
not designed to accommodate antennas for more than one user, the tower may be
permitted only by special use permit. As part of the special use process, the
applicant should demonstrate, based on economic, technical or physical
reasons, why designing the tower structure to accommodate antennas for more
than one user is not feasible.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.157  DESIGN CRITERIA FOR NEW SUPPORT STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Compatibility. Personal wireless service facilities should be
architecturally compatible with the surrounding buildings and land uses in
the zoning district or otherwise integrated, through location and design, to
blend in with the existing characteristics of the site to the extent
practical. Site location and development shall preserve the pre-existing
character of the site as much as possible. Existing vegetation should be
preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography of the site
should be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual
impact of the site on the surrounding area. The effectiveness of visual
mitigation techniques should be evaluated, taking into consideration the site
as built.



   (B)   Setback provisions.



      (1)   Minimum setbacks. Tower setbacks shall be measured from
the base of the tower to the property line of the parcel on which it is
located. Towers shall comply with the minimum setback requirements of the
area in which they are located in all zoning districts.



      (2)   Exceptions from setback requirements. These setback
provisions are intentionally designed to be flexible to take into account
individual site characteristics and the nature of surrounding properties.
Standardized setback provisions could harm one of the primary intents of this
subchapter, which is to minimize the aesthetic impact of tower structures.
The goal of minimizing the aesthetic impact of the tower structure may be
best accomplished by an individual site review, with the petitioner bearing
the burden of proving that their chosen tower location on the subject parcel
is the least aesthetically intrusive. The city, in its reasonable discretion
and upon finding that the intent of this subchapter would be furthered, may
approve placement of an antenna support structure within the required setback
areas based on one or more of the following criteria:



         (a)   The location and nature of the principal
structure, if any, on the parcel;



         (b)   The location, size and nature of any structure on
the subject parcel which would lend itself to partial concealment of the
tower structure;



         (c)   The location, height, density and nature of any
trees on the subject parcel;



         (d)   The relative location of the subject parcel to
adjacent streets, alleys, roads or thoroughfares;



         (e)   The near field and far field visual impact of the
tower location on the subject parcel;



         (f)   Adjacent property structures, uses and layouts; and



         (g)   The Comprehensive Land Use Plan.



   (C)   Color. Support structures and antennas shall have a
non-contrasting blue, gray or black finish, or a similar color that minimizes
their visibility, unless a different color is required by the FCC or FAA.



   (D)   Lights, signals and signs. No signals, lights or signs shall
be permitted on towers unless required by the FCC or the FAA.



   (E)   Equipment structures.



      (1)   Ground level equipment and buildings and the tower base
shall be screened from public streets and residentially zoned properties.



      (2)   The standards for the equipment buildings are as follows:



         (a)   The maximum floor area is 300 square feet and the
maximum height is 12 feet; and



         (b)   Ground level buildings shall be screened from all
adjacent properties by landscape plantings, fencing or other appropriate
means, as provided for in § 159.159.



   (F)   Federal requirements. All towers and antennas must meet or
exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other
agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and
antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of
the towers and antennas governed by this subchapter shall bring such towers
and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations
within three months of the effective date of such standards and regulations,
unless a more stringent or lenient compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute
grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense.



   (G)   Structural design. Towers shall be constructed to the
Electronic Industries Association (“EIA”) Standards, which may be amended
from time to time, and all applicable construction/building codes. Further,
any improvements and/or additions to existing towers shall require submission
of site plans sealed and verified by a professional engineer which
demonstrate compliance with the EIA Standards and all other good industry
practices in effect at the time of said improvement or addition. Said plans
shall be submitted and reviewed at the time building permits are requested.



   (H)   Building codes: safety standards. To ensure the continuing
structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is
maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable city building
codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the EIA
and FCC, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection made at the
discretion of the city, the city concludes that a tower fails to comply with
such codes or standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then
upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 60
days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards and codes. If
the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said 60 days, the
city may remove such tower at the owner’s expense.



   (I)   Fencing/screening. Support structures and equipment shelters
shall be fenced to prohibit unauthorized access. Access to the support
structure and equipment shelters shall be through a locked gate. Fencing
shall be generally consistent with previously approved installations. The
city may permit any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls,
decorative fences or other features if they achieve the goal of minimizing
the visual impact of the site.



   (J)   Antenna height. The applicant shall demonstrate that the
antennas are the minimum height required to function satisfactorily.



   (K)   Antenna support structure safety. The applicant shall
demonstrate that the proposed antennas and support structure are safe and the
surrounding areas will not be negatively affected by support structure
failure, falling ice or other debris. All support structures shall be fitted
with anti-climbing devices, as approved by the manufacturers.



   (L)   Required parking. Adequate parking shall be required for
maintenance workers.



   (M)   Signal interference. No antenna shall cause localized
interference with the reception or transmission of any other communications
signals including, but not limited to television and radio broadcast signals.



   (N)   Location. No antenna, tower or other facility for personal
wireless services shall be located upon any lot or parcel except as provided
in this subchapter.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.158  DESIGN CRITERIA FOR INSTALLATION OF ANTENNAS ON EXISTING
STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Mounted on walls or roof. Antennas may be mounted to the walls
or roof of an existing structure, as outlined in this section.



   (B)   Existing structure. If antennas are to be mounted on an
existing structure, the determination of whether a wall mount or roof mount
shall be permitted, shall be based on which option is typically less visually
obtrusive.



      (1)   Wall mounted antennas. Antennas may be mounted on the
walls of an existing structure, subject to the following criteria.



         (a)   The antennas must be architecturally compatible
with the building or wall on which they are mounted, and designed and located
so as to minimize any adverse aesthetic impact.



         (b)   The antennas shall be mounted in a configuration
as flush to the wall as technically possible and shall not project above the
wall on which they are mounted unless for technical reasons the antennas need
to project above the roof line. If required to project above the roof line,
the antennas may not project above the parapet of the roof by more than ten
feet.



         (c)   The antennas shall be constructed, painted and
fully screened to match as closely as possible the color and texture of the
building and wall on which they are mounted.



         (d)   No such antennas, antenna array or support
structure shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than the
minimum setback for the zone in which it is located.



         (e)   No guy or other support wires shall be used in
connection with such antenna, antenna array or its support structure, except
when used to anchor the antenna, antenna array or support structure to an
existing building to which such antenna, antenna array or support structure
is attached.



         (f)   If an accessory equipment shelter is present, it
must blend with the surrounding buildings in architectural character,
materials and color. The structure must be architecturally and visually
(color, size, bulk) compatible with surrounding existing buildings,
structures and uses, or those likely to exist under the terms of the
underlying zoning. Such facilities will be considered architecturally and
visually compatible if they are camouflaged to disguise the facility. The use
of colors and facility designs should be compatible with surrounding
buildings and/or uses in the area or those likely to exist in the area and
should prevent, to the extent possible, the facility from dominating the
surrounding area.



      (2)   Roof mounted antennas. Antennas may be mounted on the
roof of an existing structure, subject to the following criteria.



         (a)   The city finds that it is not technically possible
or aesthetically desirable to mount the antennas on a wall.



         (b)   No portion of the antennas may exceed ten feet
above the parapet of the roof.



         (c)   Roof mounted antennas and related base stations
are to be completely screened from ground level view, which shall be defined
as a point 250 feet in any direction from the facility, by materials that are
consistent and compatible with the design, color, and materials of the
building.



         (d)   If the equipment shelter is to be constructed on
the ground adjacent to the structure on which the antennas are mounted, the
shelter shall comply with the provisions of § 159.157(E).



         (e)   Equipment mounted on a roof shall have a finish
similar to the exterior building walls. Equipment for roof mounted antennas
may also be located within the building on which the antennas are mounted.



   (C)   Other conditions.



      (1)   No antenna owner or lessee or officer or employee
thereof shall act to exclude or attempt to exclude any other competitor from
using the same building for the location of other antennas.



      (2)   No antenna owner or lessee or officer or employee
thereof shall fail to cooperate in good faith to accommodate other
competitors in their attempts to use the same building for other antennas. If
a dispute arises about the feasibility of accommodating another competitor,
the City Manager may require a third party technical study, at the expense of
either or both parties, to resolve the dispute.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.159  LANDSCAPING; SCREENING.



   Landscaping shall be required to screen, to the greatest extent
possible, the support structure, the fence surrounding the support structure
and any other ground level features (such as a building), and in general
soften the appearance of the personal wireless service facilities. The city
may permit any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls,
decorative fences or other features instead of landscaping, if they achieve
the same degree of screening. If the antennas are mounted flush on an
existing building, and other equipment is housed inside an existing
structure, landscaping shall not be required.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.160  NON-USE; ABANDONMENT.



   (A)   In the event the use of any tower has been discontinued for a
period of 60 consecutive days, the tower may be deemed to be abandoned.
Determination of the date of abandonment will be made by the Director of
Community Development, who shall have the right to request documentation
and/or affidavits from the tower owner/operator regarding the issue of tower
usage.



   (B)   Upon such abandonment, the owner/operator of the tower shall
have an additional 60 days within which to:



      (1)   Reactivate the use of the tower or transfer the tower to
another owner/operator who makes actual use of the tower; or



      (2)   Dismantle and remove the tower. If such tower is not
removed within said 60 days, the city may remove such tower at the owner’s
expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this
provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower.



   (C)   The applicant shall agree to deposit with the city a cash bond
or irrevocable letter of credit in an amount as set by Council, in a form
acceptable to the city. The letter of credit shall contain a provision by
which the provider of the letter of credit shall be responsible for giving a
75-day notice of expiration of the letter of credit in writing, by certified
mail, to the City Manager, City Attorney, City Clerk and Director of
Community Development. In no event shall the letter of credit or the
obligations contained within expire except upon the aforementioned written
notice, it begin expressly agreed that the provider of the letter of credit
shall extend the established expiration date to comply with the notice
provision.



   (D)   At the earlier of 60 days from the date of abandonment without
reactivation or transfer or upon completion of dismantling and removal, city
approval for the tower shall automatically expire.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.161  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Applicants for permitted uses and special uses may utilize any
combination of site plans, surveys, maps, technical reports or written
narratives necessary to convey the following information.



      (1)   An applicant for a new antenna support structure shall
demonstrate that a diligent effort has been made to locate the proposed
facilities on an appropriate existing structure, and that due to valid
considerations including physical constraints, economic or technological
feasibility, no other appropriate location is available. Additionally, the
applicant must demonstrate that they have contacted other personal wireless
service providers to determine co-location opportunities for the site under
consideration;



      (2)   The applicant must demonstrate by technological evidence
that the height requested is the minimum height necessary to fulfill the
site’s function within the intended grid system. Further, the applicant
must demonstrate use of the best available technology to minimize the number
of total sites required in the community. At the time of application, the
applicant should demonstrate how the proposed site fits into its overall grid
inside the city limits and in contiguous communities;



      (3)   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location,
type, and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access,
setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower
support structure, building, fencing, buffering and all other items required
in this subchapter;



      (4)   A current map and aerial showing the location of the
proposed tower;



      (5)   Legal description of the parcel;



      (6)   A map indicating the separation distance from
residential areas, approximate distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and
unplatted residentially zoned properties;



      (7)   A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials;



      (8)   Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable,
the method of camouflage and illumination;



      (9)   A notarized letter signed by the applicant stating the
tower will comply with all EIA Standards and all applicable federal and state
laws and regulations and the city code;



      (10)   A statement by the applicant that the tower will
accommodate co-location of additional antennas for future users, unless the
applicant is petitioning for a special use permit so that the tower need not
be designed for co-location, and that requests for co-location will be
considered in good faith; and



      (11)   The telecommunications provider must demonstrate that
it is licensed by the FCC, if so required to be licensed by the FCC. The
applicant, if not the telecommunications provider, shall submit proof of
lease agreements with an FCC licensed telecommunications provider, if the
provider is so required to be licensed by the FCC.



   (B)   This section shall apply to all applications which were filed
prior to the effective date hereof and which have not been approved by the
City Council as of the effective date of this subchapter, and to all
applications filed thereafter.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.162  THIRD PARTY REVIEW.



   (A)   Personal wireless services providers use various methodologies
and analysis tools, including geographically based computer software, to
determine the specific technical parameters of personal wireless service
facilities, such as expected coverage area, antenna configuration, and
topographic constraints that affect signal paths, in certain instances there
may be a need for expert review by a third party of the technical data and
facilities proposed by the personal wireless services provider. The selection
of the third party expert may be by mutual agreement by the applicant and
city, or at the discretion of the city, with a provision for the applicant
and interested parties to comment on the proposed expert and review its
qualifications. The expert review is intended to be a site-specific review of
technical aspects of the personal wireless service facilities and not a
subjective review of the site selection. Such review shall address the
accuracy and completeness of the technical data, whether the analysis
techniques and methodologies are legitimate, and the validity of the
conclusions and any specific technical issues outlined by the City Council,
Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, city staff or other interested
parties. Based on the results of the third party review, the city may require
changes to the application for the personal wireless service facilities to
comply with the recommendations of the expert.



   (B)   The expert review of the technical submission shall address
the following:



      (1)   The accuracy and completeness of the submission;



      (2)   The applicability of analysis techniques and
methodologies;



      (3)   The validity of conclusions reached; and



      (4)   Any specific technical issues designated by the city.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.163  SEVERABILITY.



   Should any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this
subchapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court or agency of
competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not
affect any of the remaining sections, divisions, sentences, clauses, phrases
or words of this subchapter, all of which will remain in full force and
effect.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.164  PROVISIONS FOR AMENDING THE OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   Should the application of this subchapter have the effect of
prohibiting a person or entity from providing personal wireless services to
all or a portion of the city, such provider may petition the City Council for
an amendment to this subchapter. The City Council, upon receipt of such a
petition, shall promptly undertake review of the petition and shall make a
determination on the petition within a reasonable period of time, taking into
account the nature and scope of the petition, and any decision to deny such
petition shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained
in a written record. The person or entity proposing to amend the section is
required to demonstrate, using technological evidence, that the amendment to
the overlay district is necessary in order to satisfy the service requirement
of the respective grid system. The person or entity, if requesting an
amendment to the overlay district in order to install a new antenna support
structure, is required to demonstrate that it contacted the owners of
structures in excess of 45 feet in height within a one mile radius of the
site proposed, asked for permission to install the antennas on those
structures, and was denied for reasons other than economic ones. The
information submitted by the applicant shall include a map of the area to be
served by the tower and its relationship to other antenna sites in the
applicant’s grid network, and an evaluation of existing buildings taller
than 45 feet, existing personal wireless service towers and water tanks
within one mile of the proposed tower.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.165  NECESSITY.



   This subchapter is necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the city, and covers matters of local concern.
The City Council finds that an emergency exists due to the need for personal
wireless services to be provided to potential customers, who are residents
and property owners of the city.



(Ord. 97-4, passed 3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed
3-2-1999)



§ 159.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   For any and every violation of the provisions of this
chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, the owner, general agent or
contractor of a building or premises where such violation has been committed
to shall exist, and the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire
premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the
owners, general agent, contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of a building
or premises in which part such violation has been committed or shall exist,
and the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any person who
commits, takes part in or assists in such violation or who maintains any
building or premises in which any such violation shall exist, shall for each
and every violation and for each and every day or part thereof that such
violation continued, be subject to a fine of not more than $500.



      (2)   In any case that any building or structure is erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or
any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter or any
other ordinance or lawful regulation, the proper authorities of the city, in
addition to the remedies herein provided, may institute any appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use or to
impose a penalty for such violation, or to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, in order to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or
land contrary to the provisions hereof, or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about such premises.



(Prior Code, § 46-32)



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions or terms of §§ 159.150 through 159.165 upon conviction shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of $750 for each day during which
the offense continued. In addition to receiving any monetary remuneration,
the city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for any and all
violations of §§ 159.150 through 159.165 and all other remedies provided at
law or in equity.



(Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A), passed 1-7-1991; Ord. 97-4, passed
3-20-1997; Ord. 98-6, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, passed 3-2-1999)



APPENDIX A:  EXAMPLE OF LOT TYPES



 



(Prior Code, Ch. 46, App. A., Exh. 1)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A),
passed 1-7-1991)



APPENDIX B:  LOT WIDTH AND LOT DEPTH EXPLAINED



 



(Prior Code, Ch. 46, App. A., Exh. 2)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A),
passed 1-7-1991)



APPENDIX C:  REQUIRED YARDS



 



(Prior Code, Ch. 46, App. A., Exh. 3)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A),
passed 1-7-1991)



APPENDIX D:  BUILDINGS; PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY



 



(Prior Code, Ch. 46, App. A., Exh. 4)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A),
passed 1-7-1991)



APPENDIX E:  EXAMPLE OF LOT-IN-DEPTH SUBDIVISION



 



(Prior Code, Ch. 46, App. A., Exh. 5)  (Ord. eff. 1-15-1972; Ord. 91-1(A),
passed 1-7-1991)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




